                                                102160

                  DOCUMENT OF

                 THE WORLD BANK

              FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY




INDIA: Swachh Bharat Mission Support Operation
            (Program-for-Results)


 Fiduciary Systems Assessment
                      Final
                 November 5, 2015




                    Prepared by
      South Asia Sustainable Development Unit
                  The World Bank
                                                    Table of Contents
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ....................................................................................................... 1
  Summary and Background ..................................................................................................... 1
  Swachh Bharat Mission Support Operation ........................................................................... 1
  Procurement Systems ............................................................................................................. 2
  Financial Management Systems ............................................................................................. 4
  Governance and Accountability ............................................................................................. 5
INTEGRATED FIDUCIARY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT ........................................................ 7
  A. Introduction ..................................................................................................................... 7
  B. Program Description ....................................................................................................... 7
  C. Program Cost and Financing ......................................................................................... 10
  D. Program Fiduciary Performance ................................................................................... 10
  E. Fraud & Corruption....................................................................................................... 18
STATE WISE SUMMARY OF FIDUCIARY ASSESSMENT PROCUREMENT ............. 26
STATE WISE SUMMARY OF FIDUCIARY ASSESSMENT FINANCIAL
MANAGEMENT ..................................................................................................................... 42




                                                                   ii
                        ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
  ACB    Anti-Corruption Bureau
   AE    Assistant Engineer
   AIP   Annual Implementation Plan
 C&AG    Comptroller and Auditor General of India
  CEO    Chief Executive Officer
 DFPR    Delegation of Finance Power Rules
  DLIs   Disbursement-Linked Indicators
  E&Y    Ernst & Young Ltd
   EM    Earnest Money
  F&C    Fraud & Corruption
  FSA    Fiduciary Systems Assessment
   GoI   Government of India
   GP    Gram Panchayat
 GSDA    Groundwater Surveys and Development Agency
  IDA    International Development Association
 IHHL    Individual Household Latrine
  INT    Institutional Integrity
   JE    Junior Engineer
   JP    Janpad Panchayat
  GKN    GrameenKaryaNideshika
 M&E     Monitoring and Evaluation
  MIS    Management Information System
 MOU     Memorandum of Understanding
  NBA    Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan
  NGO    Non-Governmental Organization
NRDWP    National Rural Drinking Water Program
 OGFR    Odisha General and Financial Rules
OPWD     Odisha Public Works Department
  PAP    Program Action Plan
   PC    Production Centre
  PMU    Project Management Unit
  PwC    PricewaterhouseCoopers Private Ltd.
  PWD    Public Works Department
   RA    Running Account
  RES    Rural Engineering Service
  RSM    Rural Supply Mart
   RTI   Right to Information
 RTPP    Rajasthan Transparency in Public Procurement
 RWSS    Rural Water Supply and Sanitation
SBM-G    Swachh Bharat Mission Gramin
   SD    Security Deposit
  SOR    Schedule of Rates
SWSM     State Water and Sanitation Mission
  ToR    Terms of Reference
  TSC    Total Sanitation Campaign
   UC    Utilization Certificate
 WBCS    West Bengal Civil Service
 WSSD    Water Supply and Sanitation Department
   ZP    Zila Parishad




                                         iii
                                 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

                 INTEGRATED FIDUCIARY SYSTEM ASSESSMENT



1.     A Fiduciary Systems Assessment (FSA) was carried out to evaluate the arrangements
relevant to the Operation and to determine whether they provide reasonable assurance that the
Operation funds will be used for their intended purpose. Taking into account the
improvements required and the agreement on the actions required to strengthen the systems
(which are reflected in the PAP), the overall fiduciary framework is considered adequate to
support the Operation management and to achieve the desired results.

2.     Assessments have been carried out in five States through two consulting firms. PwC
was engaged to carry out assessments in West Bengal and Odisha, while E&Y was engaged
for assessments in Chattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan. In SBM-G, a national
programme these five states [Low income states] have been considered a representative
sample. It is noted that the institutional and governance arrangements vary from state to state.
The assessments were carried out in the period prior to the full-fledged implementation of the
new SBM-G guidelines. Many of the findings of the assessment are being addressed under
the SBM-G

3.      The Assessment of Operation fiduciary systems integrates findings in three areas:

           The procurement systems were assessed to determine the degree to which the
            planning, bidding, evaluation, contract award and contract administration
            arrangements and practices provide a reasonable assurance that the Program will
            achieve intended results through its procurement processes and procedures
           The financial management systems were assessed to determine the degree to
            which the relevant planning, budgeting, accounting, internal controls, funds flow,
            financial reporting and auditing arrangements provide a reasonable assurance on
            the appropriate use of Operation funds and safeguarding of its assets; and
           The Operation was also assessed in how its governance systems handle the risks
            of fraud and corruption, including the use of complaint mechanisms, and how
            such risks are managed and mitigated in light of the government’s commitments
            under the Guidelines on Preventing and Combating Fraud and Corruption in
            Program-for-Results Financing (Anti-Corruption Guidelines or ACGs).

4.      Major issues thus identified in these five sample States are considered in the
following paragraphs, and will be addressed through PAP, and other technical assistance, and
thru addressing staffing needs followed by capacity building measures. Keeping in view that
procurements under the project include a large number of small value cases for construction
of individual household latrines (IHHLs), specific issues related to procurement of materials
and contracts for IHHLs have been examined.



5.      The overall objective of the Operation is to accelerate efforts under SBM-G to
achieve universal sanitation coverage, enhance cleanliness and eliminate open defecation in
rural areas by leveraging Bank funds to incentivize performance of the states and, to increase
MDWS capacity to facilitate states in program implementation. Both the GoI and the states

                                               1
have demonstrated commitment to these objectives, and are updating policies and guidelines
for program implementation, allocating requisite financial resources and putting in place
systems and procedures to strengthen program implementation. The scope of the Bank
supported Operation consists of two primary categories of activities that are designed to
enhance: (i) sanitation improvement in rural areas; and (ii) institutional capacity
strengthening of MDWS in program management, advocacy, monitoring and evaluation.
Each of these activity categories are summarized in Section II-D, and described in detail
within Annex 1.

6.      The proposed Operation will support the national program over a five year period
(2015-2020); coinciding with the timeframe of the national program1. The Operation
strengthen the institutional, technical, fiduciary, social and environmental areas of rural
sanitation delivery nationally. To this effect the Operation is expected to contribute
significantly to eliminating open defecation, and achieving and sustaining ODF in rural India.
The critical elements of behavior change, and improved institutional capacities are expected
to considerably improve the levels of performance at the state and local levels, and set in
motion a self-reinforcing cycle.

7.      The projected investment of the national program is US$22 billion over the five year
period. GoI has already made an allocation of US$ 413 million for FY 2015-16 which
represents 20% of the estimated program costs in 2015-16. The Bank will finance US$ 1.5
billion, as IBRD loan over five years, accounting for about seven percent of the projected
SBM-G program costs.

8.    The development objective for the Operation (hereinafter referred to as the “Program
Development Objective or “PDO” is: to reduce open defecation in rural areas, and strengthen
MDWS capacity to manage the national SBM-G program.

9.      The GOI has developed a Swachh Bharat Mission Guidelines (Gramin) which lays
down the broad principles for construction of IHHLs, Community Sanitary Complexes
(CSCs), Solid & Liquid Waste Management and related procurements, the assessments
specifically covered procurement, operation, Rural Sanitary Marts (RSMs); Production
Centres (PCs); and role of GPs etc.



10.     With due attention to the principles of public procurement i.e. economy, efficiency
,effectiveness, equal opportunity, transparency and accountability and in accordance with the
World Bank operation policy requirement to assess if the program systems provide
reasonable assurance that financing proceeds will be used for the intended purposes, a sample
fiduciary assessment was carried out in 5 States. In addition an earlier assessment carried out
for RWSS project in 6 Low income states was also referred. The present program
procurement systems were assessed in regard to procurement planning, processes and
procedures, controls and integrity, procurement capacity and contract administration. Based
on these assessment the most critical findings and proposed actions are as below:



1
  While the National program has set targets to achieve a clean India by October 2nd, 2019, the program is expected to be
effective till the end of the financial year, i.e. March 31 st 2020.


                                                             2
             Most procurements (IHHLs under category 1) are expected to be highly
              decentralised and each of very low value. The challenge for these therefore
              will not be for complexity of procurement, but for ensuring consistency,
              efficiency and monitoring this very large number of small value contracts, where
              applicable2.
             Fiduciary assessment of a sample of States has brought out that at this lowest
              rung of the decentralised procurement there is a need to bring in clarity on how
              budget and procurement plan are required to be linked, on accountability, on
              integrity of the process, on maintenance of records; and on quality control.
             The staff availability and its capacity to carry out procurement or provide support
              at decentralized level is limited.

11.     Procurement arrangements vary widely amongst different States in respect of
applicable rules and regulations, the organisations involved in actual procurement,
governance and accountability arrangements, grievance handling and redressal systems,
disclosure of information, record keeping, procurement management information, capacity,
quality control, contract management etc. Many variations have been noted in the
procedures in construction of IHHLs like (a) procurement by individual beneficiaries from
suppliers/ shopkeepers through discussions; (b) procurement by Sarpanch and by GPs,
without quality check and without procurement records; (c) construction under the oversight
of Block/districts with GPs not having any significant role; (d) PCs acting as contractors; (e)
masons acting as material suppliers; (f) absence of contracts & long delays in completion; (g)
RSMs also acting as contractors rather than as material sources; and (h) lack of inspection of
the final construction work etc. As a result the fundamental principle of public
procurement i.e transparency, economy, efficiency and equal opportunity gets diluted.
A comparative position of various items of ‘Procurement Considerations in Fiduciary
Assessment’ in each of the five States in Table 4 gives an overview of current status of
related procurements in these States.

12.     For most states procurement systems for Works and goods are covered under PWD
manual and Store purchase manual respectively. In addition there may be relevant
government orders issued from time to time. Since, procurement is a State subject, rules and
practices differ from State to State. Improved transparency of procurement processes at the
household/village level is reported in some places owing to the follow-up in spirit of
community processes advocated under the SBM-G.

13.    Procurement under SBM (G) mostly includes civil works of small and medium size
(upgrading or new construction of water supply system and providing of sanitation facilities).
There are no large contracts valued at or above Operational Procurement Review Committee
(OPRC) thresholds (US$50 million for works; US$30 million for goods, US$20 million for
non-consulting services, and US$15 million for consultant services) under the Program. Most
procurements except for a few packages under Category 2, are expected to be highly
decentralised and low value, therefore skill development challenge will not be for complexity
of procurement, but for ensuring consistency, uniformity and monitoring this very large


2
 The SBM-G program aims at reduction in open defecation through changing behaviors and thus in spirit
advocates the construction of individual latrines by households themselves. Where such mobilization occurs
effectively, the program would pass on the incentive to the households on successful completion, precluding any
contracts by the program.


                                                      3
number of small value contracts. Specific procurement methods that would be applicable to
the Program include open competitive bidding, direct contracting and shopping.

14.     The assessment of the existing procurement systems and arrangements identified
certain areas of improvement which could directly or indirectly compromise the efficient
achievement of program objectives: rules and guidelines are spread across multiple
documents and circulars emphasizing need for comprehensive instruction for all steps of the
procurement process; lack of regulations for services; existence of entry barrier to
contractors; instances of excessive use of direct contracting or single source processes in a
non-transparent manner; non-application of Bank debarment/suspension lists which may
result in unacceptable contract awards to Bank debarred/ suspended firms or individuals;
need for alternative dispute resolution mechanism; lack of procurement planning; delays in
contract administration due to delayed allocation of budget or payments; non-availability of
standards for disclosure/transparency; absence of procurement information system, and
oversight over procurement process including procurement review and audit.

15.     FSA recognizes that given the scale, the available time, volume, capacity limitations
and decentralized nature of the program there may be areas which will be addressed but may
not get fully mitigated

16.     To address the above issues corresponding Program actions are proposed to be agreed
with the Government prior to Credit negotiations. To strengthen the Program’s procurement
implementation capacity, several crucial measures should be adopted including additional
staffing, intensive training and hiring of qualified procurement/contract management support
consultants, and robust procurement audit. The Bank will also provide assistance and support
to the program implementation and will closely monitor the program procurement
performance.



17.     Financial management for the program is characterized by the dispersed nature of the
implementation arrangements, with added challenges of disparateness of the arrangements at
the state level. A common feature across the states is that a significant part [75-80 percent] of
the program funds are utilized by way of payments for individual household latrines (IHHLs),
some of which are routed through GPs, NGOs, RSMs, contractors etc.

18.     The financial management systems at the national and state level are operational
albeit with several identified inefficiencies; These include an established budgetary
framework that ensures that adequate resources are allocated to departments and
implementing agencies. While there are some concerns noted in the findings of the
assessment over the timeliness of state share fund releases, there appears to be sufficient
predictability in the availability of resources for the implementation of the program. Basic
books of accounts are maintained at all levels, though significant internal control weaknesses
are noted from field observations (also confirmed in various state and program level
Comptroller & Auditor General audit reports).

19.     Under the SBM-G guidelines, formats have been prescribed for Utilization certificates
and annual statement of accounts. Variations were noted in the accounting and book-keeping
practices followed at the State level, particularly with reference to the treatment of fund
releases from state to districts, districts to blocks, blocks to GPs and other institutions.
Downstream financial management aspects such as fund utilization, financial reporting and

                                               4
audit assurance receive insufficient management attention. This accounting practice, coupled
with the risk of lapse of budgetary outlay, has created an in-built incentive for ministries to
`spend’ the budget at all levels.

20.     Consequently, consolidation of the program level expends at the state and national
level poses several challenges. Monthly financial, and physical, performance reports are
uploaded at the block level in the central database maintained by MDWS; efforts to
triangulate the reported expend with the audited financial statements and the underlying
books of accounts indicate that the financial information available on website may not be
reliable or accurate. There are also concerns over the oversight and auditing arrangements,
partly on account of the dispersed nature of the institutional arrangements. These factors
considerably increase the financial management risk of the program for all levels of
stakeholders including the beneficiaries.

21.     In defining the program content with respect to the strengthening of the financial
management systems for the program, key focus will be to (a) development of detailed
financial management guidelines as required, manuals and procedures, including establishing
benchmarks for internal controls and auditing arrangements at national and state level; (b)
enhancing the staffing for financial management and oversight function at national and state
level; (c) implementation of PFMS (Program Financial Management System) developed by
Controller General of Accounts under Ministry of Finance as agreed by the States, to monitor
and track the usage of central plan funds.



22.     Institutional arrangements and governance structures for the Program are assessed as
adequate in all participating states. The new policy framework emphasizing sustained
behavior change and ODF communities is sound and aligned with international best
practices. The capacity of institutions and incentives of actors at all levels however needs to
be aligned with this new policy shift The institutional architecture for delivery is highly
decentralized, with defined roles and responsibilities at centre, state, district, block and GP
levels. Unlike previous sanitation programs, the SBM-G allows states the flexibility to design
their delivery mechanisms to fit the local context. However, as is the case with other
centrally-funded programs in India, the district remains the main delivery unit – working
through block support teams and GP functionaries.

23.     At the national level the main tool for accountability is the monitoring system
developed by the Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation, including physical and financial
progress through Periodical Progress Reports, Performance Review Committee meetings,
Area Officer’s Scheme, District Level Monitoring and Vigilance and Monitoring Committees
at the State/District Level. However, this system will have to be strengthened to ensure that
the information provided is reliable, timely and verifiable.

24.     Although implementation of the governance and accountability arrangements on the
ground varies from state to state, overall these systems provide good underpinnings for
improving transparency and accountability of the Program but they require to be further
strengthened.

25.    Vigilance systems. In general, the vigilance function of line departments is fulfilled
by a chief vigilance officer, and Vigilance Committees are also established at the Block, ZP
and GP levels with various degrees of effectiveness. This will need to be strengthened.

                                              5
26.     Grievance redressal mechanisms are present in every state. However, in practice,
these systems would need to be strengthened so they are more accessible and complaints
properly registered, and managed. Electronic grievance redressal systems and 24x7 helplines
exist in some states (“Sanjog Helpline” in Odisha, “Sampark” portal in Rajasthan, “CM
Helpline” in Madhya Pradesh) that allow for the identification and tracking of SBM-G related
complaints.

27.     Transparency and social accountability. The identification of beneficiaries is
conducted by the GPs and the Block level coordinator is responsible for reporting of progress
and the verification of utilization certificates. In some states, such as Madhya Pradesh,
physical and financial progress is uploaded to an online system, but in most states such
information is not published or disclosed to beneficiaries/communities. Social audits are to be
conducted for SBM-G, but the detailed procedures have been developed only in some States,
e.g. Karnataka. The Right to Information Act (2005) is another accountability mechanism
available to citizens and in some states, such Odisha, the Department has established an RTI
cell which answers all SBM related enquiries. Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh have enacted
their own Right to Information legislation.




                                              6
1.     The proposed PforR financing of the SBM (Gramin) by the World Bank requires an
assessment of the program fiduciary arrangements in accordance with the World Bank OP/BP
9.0 to determine the suitability of the application of the approach to this Program and to
mitigate the fiduciary risks of the proposed Program. This document contains the findings to
the integrated Fiduciary System Assessment (FSA) of the fiduciary framework of the
proposed Program.

2.      Given that this is a PforR lending, the program will exclude activities that, involve
procurement of (i) works, estimated to cost US$50 million equivalent or more per contract,
(ii) goods, estimated to cost US$30 million equivalent or more per contract, (iii) non-
consulting services, estimated to cost US$20million equivalent or more per contract, and (iv)
consultant services, estimated to cost US$15million equivalent or more per contract.

3.      FSA has evaluated capacity of relevant institutions to implement the proposed
program while providing adequate fiduciary assurance on the use of program funds. The
assessment highlighted several issues for which agreement on short term and medium term
solutions shall be reached with GoI.

4.     FSA recognizes that given the scale, volume, capacity limitations and decentralized
nature of the program there may be areas which will be addressed but may not get fully
mitigated.

5.     The fiduciary risk rating is considered to be high.



6.      The proposed Operation provides support to the Swachh Bharat Mission – Gramin
(SBM-G) national program, the renewed rural sanitation program launched on October 2,
2014. The Program Development Objective is to reduce open defecation in rural areas, and
strengthen MDWS capacity to manage the national SBM-G program. The Operation is
designed to accelerate and sustain behavior change in rural households and villages –
stopping open defecation, using safe technologies and adopting hygienic behaviors - for more
than 60 percent of India’s rural population, thereby benefiting more than 550 million persons
by reducing open defecation by households, and benefitting a proportion thereof with the
collective gain of achieving and sustaining village-wide open defecation free status, and
increasing populations with solid and liquid wastes management. The Operation will be
implemented over a five year period, during 2016-2020.

7.       The Program will use a set of DLIs to incentivize performance across institutional
tiers on sustained service delivery as well as create incentives for investments to attain and
retain the ODF status at the GP level. The Program will be coordinated and monitored by
MDWS at the national level, although implementation responsibilities will be with the state
governments. Each state will develop their implementation plans with appropriate
institutional arrangements to achieve the agreed results. All states have completed their first
year’s (FY 2015-16) Annual Implementation Plan (AIP) prioritizing an initial set of targets
and investments.


                                               7
Scope of the Program

8.       The overall objective of SBM-G is to accelerate efforts to achieve universal sanitation
coverage, enhance cleanliness and eliminate ODF in rural areas. Both GoI and States have
demonstrated commitment to these objectives, and are updating policies and guidelines for
program implementation, allocating requisite financial resources and putting in place systems
and procedures to strengthen program implementation. The scope of the Bank supported
Operation consists of two categories of activities: (i) performance incentives for sanitation
improvement in rural areas; and (ii) strengthening institutional capacities on program
management, advocacy, monitoring and evaluation by MDWS. The indicative list of
activities to be supported under this category is summarized below:

Category 1: Performance incentives for sanitation improvements in rural areas (PforR):

9.      The Program will finance SBM-G program activities and operationalize the
performance based incentive grants to states based on the state reduction in the population
practicing open defecation, populations residing in villages that sustain ODF status, and the
rural population with SLWM. A set of DLIs for measuring reduction in open defecation
prevalence, sustainability of ODF status, and increased populations with SLWM are provided
in Section G and is detailed in Annex 3. The indicative list of activities to be supported under
this category are summarized below:

         (a)    Construction and use of safe and functional individual household latrines
         (b)    Construction and use of functional community sanitary complexes
         (c)    Use and maintenance of school, anganwadi and public sanitation
         (d)    Construction of liquid waste management3 facilities and systems
         (e)    Establishment of solid waste management facilities and services
         (f)    Behavior change communication activities

10.      The end use of the performance grant will be for any activity for sanitation
improvements under SBM-G. Approved activities will be detailed in the MDWS guidelines
for the Performance Incentive Grants Scheme to be issued to states. Illustrative items include
construction of improved household sanitation, community sanitation and public sanitation
facilities with water storage, rehabilitation of defunct toilets, construction and management of
solid and liquid waste collection and treatment systems, operation and maintenance (O&M)
of sanitation facilities, and any item listed in the annual implementation plan of the districts
and states. The availability of these performance grants is expected to become an attractive
incentive for the states and their implementing tiers at the district, block and GP levels.

Category 2: Strengthening institutional and implementing capacities on program
management, advocacy, monitoring and evaluation by MDWS. (IPF)

11.     Program management capacity and coordination at the national level will be
strengthened by hiring key human resources in the PMU with the strategic purpose of
accelerating the pace of implementation. The indicative list of Category 2 activities to be
supported are:
3
 While fecal wastes are to be safely disposed of as a part of sanitation investments, liquid waste management shall mainly
comprise investments in systems for safe disposal of grey (non-fecal) wastewater, including sullage, storm-water, etc.


                                                            8
       (a) Strengthening of the PMU, engaging a Program Management Consultant (PMC)
           within the PMU of MDWS
       (b) Strengthening program M&E system at the national level
       (c) National third party annual sanitation surveys to cover all states and union
           territories
       (d) Establishment of a robust and credible verification mechanism for program results
       (e) Capacity building and trainings on thematic areas
       (f) Strengthening program governance and accountability systems
       (g) National level advocacy and behavior change communication activities
       (h) Learning and knowledge transfer

Institutional Arrangements

12.    The Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation (MDWS) is primarily responsible for
meeting the SBM-G goals. The Swachh Bharat Mission is set up at the MDWS with the
Secretary, MDWS as the Mission Director of SBM-G. The Joint Secretary in charge of the
SBM-G, is virtually the focal point for the national program in the Ministry.

13.     In the five sample states the nodal institution is the Department of Panchayati Raj and
Rural Development (PRRD). Most States have established a State Water and Sanitation
Mission (SWSM), Communication and Capacity Development Unit (CCDU), and District
Water and Sanitation Missions (DWSM). An exception is West Bengal where the sanitation
program is being turned into a Mission Bharat Bengal. Policy guidelines are developed at the
State level whilst detailed planning and monitoring is being undertaken at the District and
Block level.

14.      The proposed Operation shall be implemented by the existing institutional structures
at the national, state, district, block and GP levels for SBM-G. The MDWS shall carry out
program management nationally, and the nodal departments in the states shall be responsible
for implementation of the Program with districts as the base implementation unit with the
goal of creating ODF GPs. Key implementation responsibilities are outlined below and
reflect the national program guidelines.

15.     National Level: The National SBM-G in the MDWS, headed by the Secretary as the
Mission Director, is the nodal agency for implementing the Program. The National Mission
shall comprise of specialized structures for strong program management including those for
Program coordination, steering, developing and issuing relevant guidelines and regulations,
planning, monitoring and evaluation, technical support, communications and knowledge
sharing. The National Mission is responsible for coordinating with other national Ministries,
especially the Ministry of Human Resources Development (MHRD), and Ministry of Women
and Child Development (MWCD), for implementation of SBM components for sanitation in
schools and anganwadis. The National Mission shall be responsible for carrying out
independent verification assessments as spelt out in the Program. The National Mission will
engage an Independent Verification Agency (IVA) that would include procurement process
verification with demonstrated capacity and independence in undertaking the verification role
executed in a timely and efficient manner. MDWS will prepare the consolidated results
reports and request for disbursement.

16.     State Level: The primary responsibility for Program delivery lies with the state
governments. The State Swachh Bharat Missions – Gramin (SSBM-G), as registered society
in the nodal department, shall be responsible for implementing the Program in their States.

                                              9
The Principal Secretary of the nodal Department will be the State Mission Director and
Member Secretary. Overall, the implementation mechanism of the Program at the state level
will consist of (i) SSBM-G, (ii) District Swachh Bharat Mission – Gramin (DSBM-G), (iii)
Block Program Management Unit, and (iv) Gram Panchayat. In each of these states an Apex
Committee is expected to be set up, headed by the Chief Secretary to aid and advise the State
Mission.

17.      The State Mission shall supervise the implementation of the Program in the districts
in the states, facilitate convergence among other departments, ensure preparation of the
Annual Implementation Plan (AIP) for each district according to a standard framework
incorporating elements of bottom-up planning (at the GP levels), and consolidate these plans
into the State AIP for presentation to and concurrence by the National SBM on an annual
basis. The State Plans shall have district wide plans consolidated for all GPs. Coordination
among various actors at the state level is particularly important to achieve the Program
results.

18.      District Level: In each district, a DSBM-G will be formed. Although the nodal
department in the states will play a catalytic role in implementation of the Program, the role
of the District Collector / CEO of the District administration will be pivotal. District will be
the base implementation unit. District wide sanitation plans (district level AIPs) will be
formulated by consolidating the GP level ODF plans. Districts will be the implementation
unit for deployment of social mobilization, rolling out of behavior change interventions,
facilitating the marketing of products, trainings and capacity building. Monitoring of the
district level performance will be a crucial role of the District Mission.

19.    Block Level: Blocks in the districts will set up Block Program Management Units
which will be a bridge between the districts and the Gram Panchayats. The Block Program
Management Unit will coordinate all activities for social mobilization, awareness generation,
motivation, facilitating supply chains and monitoring implementation status for a cluster of
GPs at the block level.

20.    Gram Panchayats: GPs are responsible for the implementation of rural sanitation
program and shall endeavour in achieving ODF status. GPs are responsible to preparation of
GP level ODF plans, sensitize and motivate communities, constantly supervise and monitor
the implementation progress and monitor household behaviors. GPs may choose to set up
Village Water and Sanitation Committee and any other monitoring committee to supervise
the implementation at the village and ward level.



21.     The projected investment of the national program is US$22 billion over the five year
period. GoI has already made an allocation of US$ 413 million for FY 2015-16 which
represents 20% of the estimated program costs in 2015-16. The Bank will finance US$ 1.5
billion, as IBRD loan over five years, accounting for about seven percent of the projected
SBM-G program costs.



Financial Management



                                              10
22.     Notwithstanding the disparateness of the implementation arrangements noted across
the states, the financial management systems for the program have several common features
across the states. These include (a) annual planning processes based on baseline data; (b)
budgetary provisions at national and state level based on consolidated state annual plans; (c)
fund release protocols; (d) accounting systems at implementing agency level/s; and (e) annual
statutory audit at the implementing agency level.

23.    As part of Program preparation and in accordance with OP/BP 9.00 Guidelines, a
Fiduciary Systems Assessment [FSA] for the Program has been conducted at national level
and in the States of Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Odisha and West Bengal to
determine whether the fiduciary systems provide reasonable assurance that Program
expenditures will be used for the intended purposes. The assessment findings are not likely to
be very different in other states and therefore, this assessment may be considered as a fair
representation of the fiduciary systems on the overall. The findings of the assessment are
summarized as follows:

24.     Planning and Budgeting: Annual planning processes are by and large in place;
annual plans are typically based on baseline data and assessed demand for IHHLs prepared at
the district level and consolidated for the state – block or village level plans were however
not seen in any of the states. The consolidated state annual plans form the basis for annual
budgets at the state and national levels. Medium terms strategic plans [for five years as per
SBM guidelines] are absent for some States. Evidence shows State program objectives are
consistent with the national development strategy.

25.     The funds allocated for the program [erstwhile Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan (NBA)] at the
national level are reflected in the Union Budget in Demand for Grants Number 30, pertaining
to Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation. The routing of the program funds through the
State budget started from 2014-15 budgets. Starting from FY14-15, the State budget reflects
both central and State share of the program and include donor funded expenditures, where
applicable. Beneficiary share of the program costs [IHHLs etc.] are not captured in the
national or state budget. The preparation of budget and its approval in the Parliament [and
Legislative Assembly for the states], provisions for which are enshrined in the Constitution of
India, goes through legislative scrutiny and the Parliament exercises full control over the
annual budgetary system through this mechanism. The process of preparing the budget,
discussing it in Parliament, and its subsequent approval is considered as an effective
instrument of financial control of government activities.

26.     Treasury and Fund flows: Fund releases are processed through Treasury into
separate bank accounts of State Water Missions [registered as societies] or directly into bank
accounts of District Missions [or Zilla Parishads, as the case may be] in instalments. SBM
guidelines require that the state releases the central and the corresponding state share into
bank accounts of State Mission within 15 days of the receipt of central share [delays invite
penal interest] and therein to the districts, block and village level implementing agencies.
Delays in transfer of funds at all levels and disconnects between fund releases and annual
implementation plans has however been a common problem across all states; this
significantly impacts the ability of the implementing agencies to plan and deliver against the
committed annual action plans. Under the SBM-G, the States have been provided the
flexibility to disburse funds to districts based on performance.

27.    Transparency: Ministry/Departments budget allocations, budget execution reports,
year-end financial statements and audit reports are available at both national and state levels

                                              11
on Government websites and are accessible to the public. Budget and financial statements are
voluminous and not in user friendly formats. Budget execution reports at national and state
levels report fund transfers and releases and do not necessarily reflect the complete program
expenditures in any meaningful form. SBM-G [earlier NBA] website provides financial
information on releases and expend at national and state levels. However, this data may be
incomplete as there are gaps in the reconciliation of expenditures reported in Utilization
Certificates [UCs] and/or annual audited financial statements of the various levels of
implementing agencies.

28.     Accounting and Financial Reporting: The aggregate monthly accounts prepared by
the Controller General of Accounts (CGA) for GoI and Comptroller & Auditor General
Office [C&AG] for States, compiled from the departmental accounts, provide monthly
accounts of budget implementation. The monthly accounts of the central government are
important in-year budget reports that are accessible to the general public through the website
of the CGA/State Finance departments. However, as stated earlier the quality of actual
expend reported at national and state levels are based on fund releases [for SBM-G] and
therefore, do not facilitate meaningful assessment of financial performance.

29.      The budget classification system in India which takes into account the COFOG
functional classification system is consistent with the GFS manual of 1986 based on the cash
accounting system. The budget classification system as determined by C&AG office is
uniformly applied across all Indian states. The budget classification system in India has
improved over the years to establish a uniform classification for the budget accounts and
plan, clear presentation of objectives and purposes of government expenditure in terms of
functions, programs and activities, bringing together all expenditures under appropriate
functional (major), program (minor), and activity (subhead) irrespective of the organization
administering it, and generating timely data for monitoring expenditure on programs and
activities.

30.     The accounting standards prescribed by the Government (President of India) on the
advice of the CAG, IGAS, are not fully aligned with the Cash IPSAS prescribed by the IFAC.
There are differences between Government Accounting system in India and cash basis IPSAS
relating to the structure, disclosures and basis of accounting. SBM-G guidelines provide only
for standard financial reports such as audit of SBM-G account, submission of Utilization
certification and Annual Statement of Accounts, to be followed at the state levels. None of
the states covered in the assessment have developed accounting and financial management
guidelines or manuals. Consequently, existing accounting systems of the implementing
agencies are used as a default position, Observations from field visits reveal that variable
accounting standards are applied, including treatment of fund releases and advances as
expend, multiplicity of bank accounts etc.

31.     As per scheme guidelines, the Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation has
developed an online monitoring system for TSC/ NBA. The TSC/ NBA project district is
required to submit physical and financial progress reports through this on line software
(IMIS) for which user-id and password have been generated and communicated by DDWS-
NIC cell. Efforts to triangulate the financial progress entered through the on line software
with Utilization Certificates [UCs] and audited financial statements submitted by the States
confirm that there are significant disconnects in the financial expend reported. Field visits
reveal large unspent balances at all levels which are not reflected in the financial statements
and in some States not considered as these have been reported earlier as expend.


                                              12
32.     In line with the Government Financial Rules [State and Center] monitoring of
financial progress, including processing of fund releases is typically centered around
submission of Utilization Certificates on an annual basis. Utilization certificates are
submitted by the GP to the blocks and collated up to the district and State. GP level UCs are
required to be verified by Block level officials but due to manpower issues [1 block officer to
verify UCs of approximately 60 GPs] there is delay in processing of UCs, which adversely
affect the fund flows.

33.     Annual financial statements are prepared at the level of the implementing agencies
[SWSMs, DWSMs, ZP, Block agencies and GPs]; there is albeit with significant delays.
SBM guidelines also require the States [SWSM] to prepare and submit annual program
audited financial statements incorporating receipts and expenditures of the districts and the
underlying implementing agencies. There is no record to show that systems are in place for
the implementing agencies below the district level to prepare and submit periodic financial
reports to the district.

34.     A multi-year perspective in expenditure planning and budgeting has been lacking in
India. While the States have enacted the FRBM Act stipulating the requirement of Medium Term
Fiscal Policy (MTFP) detailed medium term expenditure framework for various sectors are not
worked out. The budgeting thus remains strictly annual without a multi-year perspective relating
to expenditure commitments of various sectors. In an effort to avoid lapsing of annual budgets
[applicable to departments, ZP etc. which use the Treasury systems] monies are drawn towards
the close of the financial year and parked in personal ledger accounts of the District officials
for use in the next financial year. For agencies [SWSM, DWSM, GPs etc.] that operate
outside the Treasury systems, the unspent balances in bank accounts roll over into the next
financial year.

35.     Internal Controls, including Internal Audits: The internal control framework at
national and state levels are embodied in the Budget Manual, Financial Rules and Treasury
Code read with the Store purchase manual & Works Manual and other related employee
rules. These rules contain principles covering budgeting, revenue and expenditure, delegation
of authority, accounting, procurement, pay, allowances and pensions, stores, works etc. The
control systems are applied consistently for expend processed through the Treasury systems
but get substantively diluted when the funds are transferred outside of the State systems [for
off-Treasury operations]. The off budget expend are not subject to Treasury controls nor are
the audited by C&AG.

36.      Field visits reveal that some level of internal audits are carried out as part of the
institutional systems at ZP, PS and GP levels [MP, Chhattisgarh], albeit with significant
delays. Internal audits where undertaken, typically focuses on transactions and is constrained
by significant staff vacancies. Payroll controls are fairly robust for payments through
Treasury systems; these controls however, do not extend to program staff engaged on
contractual basis. SBM-G finances minimal levels of capital assets, limited to office
furniture, computers etc. at SWSM, DWSM, ZPs, PS and GP levels, which are typically
subject to asset management systems at the level of the individual agencies. There is no
evidence of planning for cash flows; review meetings are however conducted routinely to
assess the progress, reasons for non-performance, and delays in submission of UCs etc. These
meetings are held at State level with all the CEOs of the districts present and also at the
district level with all the BDO of the blocks.



                                              13
37.     Program Audit: Auditing arrangements are typically fragmented across the various
implementing institutions and vary across the states. Agencies operating outside of the State
Treasury systems are audited by CA firms [empaneled by C&AG], ZPs, PS and GPs are
audited annually by CA firms and/or Local Fund Auditors [LFA] operating under the State
Finance Departments. Some of the common findings across districts include (i) the books of
account have not been properly prepared by the accountant; (ii) Bank statement is not
maintained for different schemes; (iii) advances are disbursed to staff through cash/bearer
cheque and the expenditure being incurred by staff in cash and advances may be unadjusted
since long period of time; and (iv) compliance of previous year audit objection has not been
produced for verification.

38.     C&AG conducts performance audits for select states at periodic intervals. The
performance audit of TSC/NBA covering period 2009-14 was carried out in selected districts,
Gram Panchayats and Villages. Implementation of TSC/NBA revealed serious irregularities
viz., deficiency in planning, improper fund management, inadequate awareness campaigning
through Information Education Communication (IEC) activities, lack of monitoring,
supervision and social audit. Besides, instances of idling of expenditure, fraudulent drawl,
bogus construction and suspected misappropriation of funds were also noticed.

39.    Strengthening Financial Management Systems: In defining the program content
with respect to the strengthening of the financial management systems for the program, key
focus will be to (a) development of detailed financial management guidelines, manuals and
procedures, including establishing benchmarks for internal controls and auditing
arrangements at national and state level; (b) enhancing the staffing for financial management
and oversight function at national and state level; (c) implementation of PFMS (Program
Financial Management System) developed by Controller General of Accounts under Ministry
of Finance as agreed by States, to monitor and track the usage of central plan funds.

Procurement & Contract Management

       (a) Procurement profile: At the State level major procurement activities shall
           comprise of works and related material inputs at the Block level or village level
           by the GP’s or individual beneficiaries. Some of works like CSC or SLWM and
           related procurement may be procured at the State and District levels,
            Major activities at central level would be those required for institutional
            strengthening of MDWS. This includes (i) procurement of certain key
            consultancies, as required; (ii) capacity building, staffing and training; (iii)
            strengthening MDWS’s capacity to provide program management and technical
            support to states; (iii) strengthening program M&E system at the national level,
            and program oversight, governance and accountability systems; (iv) setting up
            of evaluation unit in MDWS; etc..

       (b) Table G ‘Procurement Considerations in Fiduciary Assessment’ in the five States
           presents the existing procurement arrangements in five sample states and
           establishes the following main gaps:

         (i)     Procurement planning & linkage to budget – Departments prepare
                 budget estimates but there is no practice of preparation of procurement
                 plans with details of timeline, estimates and quantities. Moreover, the State
                 AIP is prepared based on AIPs of the districts but without block level AIPs.


                                             14
                    Proposed Mitigation: MDWS issues guidance to all States to direct
                    Districts to prepare their procurement plan in consultation with the
                    concerned GP’s. Procurement plans must be prepared based on the
                    availability of project funding. Procurement packaging shall be done based
                    on technical nature and implementation sequence to ensure economy,
                    efficiency and equal opportunity for prospective bidders. MDWS shall
                    prepare a consolidated procurement plan covering individual packages to
                    be procured at the Central level and procurements under broad categories
                    which are to be carried out at the decentralized levels. The procurement
                    plan will be updated at least annually or earlier, if required.

           (ii)     Applicable procurement rules and procedures–rules, guidelines and
                    procedures vary from State to State, and in many cases the procedures are
                    not available at one place for ready reference. No guidelines/standardised
                    documents are in place for procurement of services.

           (iii)    Village level procurement4 being of low value does not always follow a
                    formal system and makes it susceptible to unacceptable practices, lack of
                    transparency and discretionary decision making. Thereby curtailing
                    participation of any new prospective bidders. The procurement procedure
                    followed at this level varies very widely amongst the States. In some places
                    RSMs and PCs are used; RSMs also act as contractors rather than as
                    material sources; work is allotted to RSMs on informal basis through mutual
                    agreement; RSMs also get empanelled through self-application process;
                    RSMs have become dysfunctional at some places; procurements are being
                    made from open market in parallel with RSMs even where RSMs are
                    operational.

           (iv)     Variations have been noted in the procedures used like (a) procurements by
                    individual beneficiaries and procurement of materials from suppliers/
                    shopkeepers through discussions, with no quotations and with no contracts
                    (b) procurement is by Sarpanch or GP; standard formats for quotations are
                    not used, there are no contracts for supply of materials; there is no quality
                    check for delivered goods; sub-engineer inspects the final construction
                    work; (c) procurement is by GPs; there is no contract with GP; there is no
                    check on quality of goods delivered; and procurement registers are not
                    maintained; (d) in some places construction of IHHLs is being done under
                    the oversight of Block/districts and GPs do not have significant role; (e)
                    PCs are acting as contractors taking up construction of IHHLs; and (f) in
                    some places masons are acting as material suppliers; and (g) there are cases
                    of absence of contracts & long delays in completion etc.

                    Proposed Mitigation: To ensure transparency, economy, efficiency and
                    equal opportunity (a) Mandate open competitive bidding as the default
                    procurement method and provide procedure for open competitive bidding;

4
 The SBM-G program aims at reduction in open defecation through changing behaviors and thus in spirit
advocates the construction of individual latrines by households themselves. Where such mobilization occurs
effectively, the program would pass on the incentive to the households on successful completion, precluding any
contracts by the program for IHHL.


                                                      15
         (b) Guidelines for Procurement will help formalise procurement process for
         SBM and provide guidance on maintenance of records; (c) put in place
         framework for procurement monitoring and oversight thru Independent
         Verification Agency (IVA); (d) make available guidance on generating MIS
         for overall management control; and (e)provide sanctions against
         unacceptable practices including fraud and corruption. These will be
         included in the Guidelines and will help in streamlining the processes and
         quality of procurement.

(v)      Dispute resolution and Grievance Redressal–grievance redressal is
         understandably handled differently in various States, but it is noted that in
         some States it is not a robust monitoring and redressal system and in one
         case it is largely informal. No alternative dispute resolution procedure or
         written process for complaint handling mechanism exists besides
         Jurisdiction Avenue during bidding process. The assessment did not come
         across any complaint documentation.

         Mitigation: Implement a robust grievance monitoring and redressal system
         for complaints handling and for combating Fraud and Corruption and set
         up a mechanism so that lists of firms and individuals debarred/ temporarily
         suspended by the Bank are made available to procuring entities,

(vi)     Bidding documents including e-procurement– presently there are no
         standard documents being used by the States .it is noted that eProcurement
         platform developed and deployed by National Informatics Centre is being
         used by some States while others have their own service provider. It is
         assumed that all IA will have the required infrastructure and associated
         action (such as training and capacity building of procurement staff to
         undertake e-procurement.

         Proposed Mitigation: States issue guidance as required, as outlined in the
         Guidelines for use of Model bidding documents including forms and
         templates of contract and bid evaluation for use by procurement officials.
         The contracts shall have key conditions and terms such as performance
         security, insurance, advance payment and progressive payments,
         completion dates, liquidated damages, provision for contract variation,
         dispute resolution, warranty obligations, etc.
(vii)    Registration of contractor -is a prerequisite condition to be fulfilled for
         participation in bidding process, which may act as barrier and restrict many
         bidders from participating. Similarly criteria for selection of sanitary marts
         in some places is non-transparent and discretionary which will be an
         impediments to transparency and equal opportunity.

         Proposed Mitigation: Registration to be continuously open to all
         prospective bidders/suppliers, as outlined in the Guidelines, and is linked
         only to capacity and capability.

(viii)   Staffing and capacity - At district/GP level as large number of works
         contracts are to be handled. However, e significant capacity constraints
         for efficient and transparent procurement and oversight are noted. It is


                                      16
       crucial to strengthen the capacity of key staff in dealing with procurement,
       contract management, oversight, training & record keeping

       Proposed Mitigation: States to prepare and implement strategy for
       adequate staffing followed by strengthening capacity of key staff on
       procurement, contract management, record keeping, oversight, training,
       quality control, transparency thru regular trainings and other support
       systems.

(ix)   Internal/External controls – in the highly decentralized system of
       procurement envisaged under the project, effective controls both internal
       and external are of paramount importance. Aspects that contribute to these
       controls include (a) internal audit; (b) clear schedule of powers; (c) clearly
       defined accountability; (d) quality control; and (e) availability of complete
       procurement records. These issues are handled differently in various states
       and it is noted that in some States systems related to these aspects are not
       robust. For example it is seen from the assessments in 5 States that at some
       places there is no internal audit; there is no audit at GP level; there is no
       clear schedule of powers; accountability is not clearly defined; there is
       limited quality control; records are not maintained etc. A separation of
       functions for independently assessing and ensuring integrity of the process
       and system is required to be put in place. Further, there is need to strengthen
       the verification of procurement to determine adherence to agreed guidelines,
       procurement processes and procedures.

       Proposed Mitigation: Introduce relevant provisions in the Guidelines as
       required, for Procurement laying down procedures, schedule of powers,
       responsibilities and implementing independent procurement verification,
       and proper record keeping.

(x)    Dispute resolution system –disputes do arise. It is noted from the
       assessments in 5 States that in the contracts for RSMs and NGOs and
       presumably in the large number of decentralised procurements there are no
       formal dispute resolution mechanisms in place.

       Proposed Mitigation: It would be necessary to lay down in the Guidelines
       for Procurement that if beneficiaries, NGOs, RSMs etc. have any issues,
       how these will be reported to State/ District/ Block and resolved in a
       transparent and unbiased manner, and their implementation monitored
       through the MIS and post reviews

(xi)   Contract Management – management of contracts is essential for
       satisfactory construction activity even if the contracts are of small value, as
       otherwise it can easily lead for example to non-functioning IHHLs and
       creeping in of unacceptable non-transparent practices. It is noted from the
       assessments in the 5 States that at some places work order terms and
       conditions are flouted, there are time overruns, there is shortage of sub-
       engineers to supervise and lack of procurement staff at block and district
       levels. Terms and conditions in work orders issued to RSMs and NGOs are
       not enforced. It has also been noted in some cases that there is not even a
       signed contractual agreement, which could at least be sought to be enforced.

                                    17
                  Proposed Mitigation: Introduce suitable provisions regarding
                  accountability and responsibility in the Guidelines for Procurement, and
                  provision of adequate technical and procurement staff as required.

         (xii)    Procurement Management Information System (PMIS)–absence of
                  procurement management information has been noted in almost all States
                  studied. Information related to the procurement plan, procurement process
                  followed, information in regard to responsive supplier/bidder, and
                  performance monitoring of contractor/supplier is not organized or
                  consolidated at the district or state level to help make appropriate
                  management decisions. Procurement related information such as
                  procurement/ financial progress, bidders’ participation, price comparison,
                  and contractor’s performance etc. is not captured for management review
                  and decision making. E-procurement system wherever cleared and
                  implemented would have provision for such MIS reports and tender-wise
                  information for various departments to monitor procurement at the central
                  level.

                  Proposed Mitigation: Introduce a functioning PMIS for planning and
                  monitoring such a highly decentralised program, as per provisions in the
                  Guidelines. The utility of such a PMIS could be assessed through pilots in
                  some States/Districts.

         (xiii)   Disclosure of information – the assessment has brought out that the extent
                  of public disclosure of information on the outcome of the procurement
                  process, varies from State to State. There is a need for guidelines that
                  promote consistent practices across board for disclosure of contract award
                  information. The states would needs to formulate and implement a
                  disclosure policy for procurement, such as contract award, achievement of
                  targets and expenditures, at various levels to maintain transparency in the
                  system.

                  Proposed Mitigation: The Guidelines for Procurement shall provide
                  information on method, content and timing of such disclosure.



40.     The main mitigation tools to mitigate the Fraud & Corruption risk under SBM is a
robust monitoring systems that provides reliable, timely and verifiable information about
financial and physical progress, and social audits that validate such information on the
ground.

41.    Monitoring and Accountability systems: At the national level, the Ministry of
Drinking Water and Sanitation has developed a comprehensive system of monitoring the
implementation and impact of the Program including utilization of funds, through Periodical
Progress Reports, Performance Review Committee meetings, Area Officer’s Scheme, District
Level Monitoring and Vigilance and Monitoring Committees at the State/District Level.
Physical and financial progress is being uploaded on monthly bases on the MDWS
monitoring system under NBA. Periodic review meetings are to be conducted to review the
physical and financial progress in the implementation of schemes in the states. Besides
review meeting, video conferencing is also to be organized to review progress of NBA/SBM-

                                             18
G and suggest corrective measures where required to achieve physical and financial
objectives. Field visits are also to be made by the officers of the Ministry to review the
implementation of sanitation programs.

42.     M&E Framework proposed under SBM-G: The monitoring framework proposed
under SBM-G will involve Annual Monitoring Survey. This needs to be done through a
process initiated at the national level, focusing on a 3rd Party independent monitoring of the
sanitation status in rural areas across the countryThe MDWS initiated a third party annual
survey through the services of the national Sample Survey Organisation (NSSO) in 2015. The
MDWS is currently preparing for annual third-party national surveys of key program
indicators in the remaining years.

43.     Concurrent monitoring: Concurrent monitoring of the implementation of the Program
has also been proposed, ideally using community level participation. This should ideally use
Information and Communications Technology (ICT), to feed data into the SBM-G –MIS. The
data of such monitoring is to serve as the main source of information for the Mission
Directorates and the RALU at various levels.

44.     Monitoring and Evaluation Cell under SBM-G: SBM-G envisages the setting up of a
Monitoring and Evaluation Cell which shall be responsible for carrying out relevant and
suitable annual or biannual Monitoring exercises of the implementation of the SBM-G in
States, in consultation with other agencies like NSSO and Registrar General of India. The
Cell shall be responsible for coordination with States and Districts on Monitoring. The Cell
shall also monitor the reports and publications being brought out by various agencies and
organizations regarding the changing sanitation situation in the country. The Cell will also
have the responsibility of monitoring the activities of all other Ministries of Government of
India and individual States / UTs with respect to the Swachh Bharat Mission. Guidance is this
respect is already framed as part of SBM-G guidelines. The Cell will work towards
developing and strengthening of the SBM-G-MIS of the Ministry in coordination with the
NIC.

45.     Independent Agencies for concurrent monitoring: SBM-(G) guidelines permit the use
of independent agencies/CSOs/NGOs for the concurrent monitoring of the program. The
Central and State Missions are allowed the liberty to engage such agencies with experience in
monitoring activities and having presence in the respective States, for this purpose.
Independent 3rd party evaluations of the program including procurement function could also
be carried out at Central and State levels.

46.    Social Monitoring: Social audits are to be conducted for SBM-G, but the procedures
have been developed only by a few States, e.g. Karnataka.

47.    Vigilance function: At the national level, there is a Central Vigilance Commission
(CVC) which is the apex governmental body to address governmental corruption. It is an
autonomous body, free of control from any executive authority and plays a key role in
advising various authorities in central Government organizations in planning, executing,
reviewing and reforming their vigilance work.

48.    Other vigilance and anti-corruption mechanism at the program level include the Anti-
Corruption Bureau and its state level constituent bodies; which enforces the Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1988, financial and performance audits by the Comptroller and Auditor


                                             19
General (C&AG) of India, Right to Information Act, 2005 and the various state and
departmental level vigilance and grievance redressal systems.

Odisha

49.     At the state level, there is a State Level Vigilance structure which investigates and
advices on corruption related to government servants. The nodal agency for checking
corruption in Odisha is Odisha State Vigilance Directorate. It deals with complaints of
corrupt practices against officers. It is headed by Director General of Police, Vigilance and
assisted by three Inspector Generals of Police. The State vigilance department is divided into
six divisions. All six divisions are headed by a Superintendent of Police (SP). In RDD, a
representative of Odisha Vigilance Directorate is nominated, who looks after corruption
issues in the department. There is also an RTI Cell set up within the department, which
answers all RTI related enquiries.

50.     In addition, Government of Odisha has launched online grievance redressal
mechanism “e-Abhiyoga/ Centralized Public Grievances Redress and Monitoring System
(CPGRAMS)” developed by National Informatics Centre. Through this portal, Citizens are
encouraged to lodge their complaints. Once a complaint is lodged, it is either submitted to
Office of the Chief Minister, Government of Odisha, or to respective departments for
appropriate action. All offices till Tehsil are connected through this portal. The citizen can
also view action status of the complaint made through this portal. In order to make the portal
more users friendly, it also provides user manuals for different kinds of users, bifurcated into
department users and district users. There is also a 24 hour helpline to register complaints.

51.     Grievance Redressal system - An electronic Integrated Grievance Redressal System
namely Sanjog Helpline has been implemented in the Rural Development Department. It is
an IT solution to handle public grievances. It informs about the grievance of people to the
right authority in real time through SMS, e-mail and fax. A dedicated toll-free telephone i.e.
1800-345-6770/155335 has been installed. Through this telephone, any person can register
his complain on water supply & sanitation and PMGSY works undertaken by this
department. A consolidated report is sent via email and fax to the concern department at the
end of the day for the reference.

West Bengal

52.     The state Government has set up a Vigilance Commission headed by the Vigilance
Commissioner. There is a Vigilance Cell within the Personnel and Administrative Reforms
(P&AR) Department that is entrusted with the practices and procedures of disciplinary rules
in relation to the Government servants, belonging to the administrative and disciplinary
control of this department. As Cadre Controlling Authority of I.A.S., W.B.C.S. & West
Bengal General Service Officers the P & A.R. Department ensures, through Vigilance Cell,
the duties and obligations of its officers in pursuance of prescribed Service Conduct Rules,
and initiates disciplinary actions for violation of such prescribed conduct by the officers
concerned.

53.     At Department level, there is a designated vigilance officer who looks into matters
related to the department in consultation with the State Vigilance Commission. There is an
RTI Cell within each department which receives and disposes off RTI applications.



                                              20
54.      At district level, a District Council has been set up in each district, which is headed by
the leader of the largest opposition party in the ZillaParishad, for ensuring that rules and
regulations are followed in the functioning of all the three tiers of Panchayat system of local
government and schemes are properly implemented. The District Council is supposed to meet
regularly to scrutinize accounts, financial transactions and annual reports of PRIs in the
districts and inspect works taken up by the panchayats. It plays the role of a scrutinizing
body, akin to the Public Accounts Committee (PAC) of the Legislative Assembly. There is a
Vigilance & Monitoring committee in each district for looking into the complaints related to
implementation of various rural development programs. In West Bengal, Chairperson of the
ZP heads this committee.

Rajasthan

55.     Anti-Corruption Bureau: The Anti-Corruption Bureau [ACB] has jurisdiction over
all employees of the State Government. However, the ACB has only an investigative mandate
and conducts inquiries only into cases referred by government departments as well as
complaints filed by citizens on bribery, corruption, criminal misconduct, embezzlement of
government money and other corrupt practices by public officials. Each line department is
required to conduct preliminary enquiries on misconduct by its employees. Only a few
departments in Rajasthan [which includes the Panchayati Raj Department, have assigned the
fiduciary responsibility to a Vigilance Officer, However establishment of clear processes,
clear mandate and designated responsibility for handling any allegation of fraud and
corruption, supported by an established cell should be mandated.

56.     Other governance and accountability mechanisms include audits by the LFAD,
State AG and C&AG audits [financial and/or performance review], of which the scope
includes both the prevention and detection of fraud and corruption; (b) disclosure of
information and responding to requests for information in line with the RTI Act of 2005; and
(c) grievance redress system (Rajasthan Sampark portal)

57.     Public Grievance Redressal Department: The Public Grievance Redressal
Department of GoR manages the complaints and public grievances centrally in the State of
Government. The Department was constituted under Government notifications of
1971.Rajasthan Sampark: ‘Sugam Samadhan’ - portal for online lodging of complaints and
their redressal - was launched in May 2011. This portal has been subsequently updated to
‘RajasthanSampark’ portal in 2013. It is aimed at as a step to ensure improved service
delivery to the citizens in the State through resolution of their grievances and complaints

58.     Decentralized Vigilance function for Panchayati Raj Department of GoR: The
PRD of GoR has an established vigilance system wherein the CEO of a ZP can trigger police
investigation (by filing a First Information Report in the local police stations against the
underlying offices and contractors for fraud, embezzlement and corruption. Such an
investigation can also be triggered by the local administration.

Chhattisgarh

59.    Janadarshan: It is the name given to the Chief Minister (CM) Grievances Redressal
Program started in 2008. In Jandarshan program on every Thursday Honorable CM meets the
public and personally receives their grievances. Collector Jandarshan program is also
organized in the districts from time to time for public. The whole process of Jandarshan is
computerized for effective monitoring and redressal of these grievances.

                                                21
60.     Gram Suraj Abhiyan [GSA]: The GSA is a week-long programme organized by
Government of Chhattisgarh every year. Different teams of officers visit different villages
and record complaints and demands of rural mass. These files are then uploaded on the Gram
Suraj website. Applicants can see the status of their complaints at any time on the portal or
through SMS/e-mail. Registered letters are forwarded online to district, department or officer
for necessary action. In another arrangement of public grievances redressal system citizens
can register their complaints in the Janshikayat system through web, through video
conferencing from the VC studio of district Collectorate, through post/mail. A unique number
is given to each compliant and complainants can see the status of their complaints at any time
on the portal. The complaints are forwarded to district, department or officer for necessary
action.

61.     The State enacted the Chhattisgarh Lok Aayog Adhiniyam 2002 with the objective for
setting up the Lok Aayog organization to effectively to deal with the cases of the acts
misconduct, abuse of power and corruption on the part of the public servants. Any person
aggrieved by an action of a public functionary can file a complaint. Any person can also send
a complaint to the Lok Aayog for enquiry, if he feels that any public servant is guilty of
misconduct. A complaint may be presented to the Secretary, Lok Aayog or can be sent under
registered post.

62.   The State also has an Anti-Corruption Bureau (ACB) to conduct enquiries into
complaints made by the members of the public or received from Government officials and
from Lok Aayog relating to bribery, corruption, misconduct.

63.     Right to Information Act - Under the RTI Act, 2005, any public entity is bound to
proactively disclose information of general interest (listed in section 4 of the Act) and answer
any request for information in a timely manner. Chhattisgarh State Information Commission
was constituted as per the provisions under Right to Information Act, 2005, oversees the
implementation of the RTI Act within the State. PR&RD department answers requests for
information, through 4,694 assistant public information officers, 9,498 public information
officers and 733 first appellate officers at the GP/JP/ZP and State level.

64.    Vigilance in PR&RD Department - Each line department including PR&RD is
supposed to conduct preliminary enquiries on misconduct by its employees based on
complaints received from various channels (as detailed above) in the State. PR&RD does not
have such a vigilance cell and its vigilance function is neither codified/ formalized nor
recorded/ disclosed.

65.     Decentralized Vigilance Function - The CEO of a ZP can conduct preliminary
investigation/enquiry and trigger police investigation (by filing a First Information Report at
the local police station)against officials of GPs/JPs/ZPs and contractors for fraud,
embezzlement and corruption. Suchan investigation can also be triggered by the local
administration (District Collector, Sub Judicial Magistrate) based on complaints received.

Madhya Pradesh

66.     Madhya Pradesh has multiple agencies for vigilance and public grievances. These are
as follows:

           Lokayukta
           State Vigilance Commission

                                              22
           Economic Offence Wing
           Rajya Soochna Aayukta (Right to Information Wing)
           Complaint and Vigilance Wing of Department of Rural Development and
            Panchayati Raj
           State Women Commission
           Chief Minister Helpline
67.     Nearly 200 complaints related to Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan and Swachh Bharat Mission
have been received by the Complaint and Vigilance Cell of Department of Rural
Development and Panchayati Raj since 2011. The records of complaints prior to that are not
available. Complaint and Vigilance Department is also covered under RTI and people can ask
for status of enquiry through RTI.




Cross cutting
1. Strengthen institutional capacity in terms of staffing, staff training and orientation.
2. Strengthening existing complaint and grievance redressal mechanism to handle complaints
  related to all aspects and all levels of procurement, financial management, fraud and
  corruption issues, service delivery.
Fiduciary action
1. The proposed program IPF component will ensure staffing requirements are met at the
  national level for program implementation to support achievement of program objectives,
  and extensive capacity building activities will be undertaken under the IPF as well as the
  P4R components both at the central level and state level for the stakeholders/partners at the
  State/district/block/GP levels.
2. Fiduciary guidelines to be followed for SBM-G will be issued by the MDWS to States for
  latter’s compliance, as required.
3. Prepare Financial Management Manual for SBM (G) for adoption by the States, as per
   requirement
4. Implement PFMS for accounting, fund flows and financial reporting across all States
5. Conduct independent verification through an IVA each year and share the findings with
   the Bank,
6. Implement the Guidelines on Preventing and Combating Fraud and Corruption in
   Program-for-Results Financing and set up a mechanism to make available lists of firms
   and individuals debarred/ temporarily suspended by the Bank to all procuring entities.




                                              23
                                    Fiduciary Issue                                        Link to
                                                                                           *PAP/

1. MDWS, shall roll out fiduciary management practices and ensure that annual audits
                                                                                            PAP # 2
of accounts are conducted by states in accordance with SBM-G guidelines
         (a) Roll out of Public Finance Management System (PFMS) in States during              –
              the Program period.
         (b) Annual audits to confirm that Procurement implementing agencies in the
              State have consistently followed procurement provisions of the State
              Delegation of Financial Power Rules issued by the respective State               –
              Department of Finance and or General Financial Rules (GFR) of
              Government of India and Government orders (as applicable) over the
              Program period
2. MDWS shall strengthen citizen-feedback systems in SBM-G program and facilitate
                                                                                            PAP #4
states in implementing the same.
         (a) MDWS will assess and identify areas for strengthening citizen’s feedback          –
              and roll out of the same over the Program period.
         (b) Social Audits rolled out over the program period, as agreed with the states       –
         (c) Assess and identify areas for improvement of Grievance redressal systems          –
              in first year of the Operation and roll out over the program period

Monitoring Fiduciary Performance over Program Period
While key fiduciary areas requiring specific actions for strengthening in government systems have
been listed in the Program Action Plan, it will be important to also monitor the overall fiduciary
performance during the duration of the Program. Table X identifies the specific indicators which will
be monitored (together with the relevant baseline position) to provide the framework to measure
improvements in the performance of financial management and procurement processes.




                                                  24
Indicator            Measure                                                                       Baseline
Financial Management
Annual budget        Variance between annual budget proposed by provinces and budget allocated     Budget allocated is less than 50% of budget
realism              (%)                                                                           proposed.
In-year budget       Significance of the budget adjustment/reallocation made by PPC versus         Not significant
adjustments          amount approved annually
Quality of annual    Completeness and timeliness of annual reports                                 Incomplete and untimely annual financial statements
financial statements
Effectiveness of     Regularity of bank reconciliations and clearance of advances and suspense     Reconciliation with State Treasury is done only once
reconciliations      accounts                                                                      a year
Availability of      Ready availability of Program funds for implementing units requesting         Delay in budget allocation to implementing units in
Program funds        payments for completion of Program activities                                 quarter I every year
Effectiveness of     Coverage, quality and management response to internal audit reports,          No internal audit function exists or internal audit
internal audit       frequency and distribution of audit reports                                   function is weak across the States
function
Effectiveness of     Existence and effective use of financial management and cost norms. Timely    No financial management manual
internal controls    and accurate information system for decision making
Quality of audit     Scope, nature and adherence to acceptable auditing standards. Audit Opinion   Audit standards are not fully compliant to
report               on consolidated financial statements                                          international standards.
Follow-up on audit   Evidence of timely and adequate follow-up by the Program management on        Audit recommendations are followed up by States
recommendations      audit recommendations
Procurement
system of selection  Procurement being carried out thru competitive selection                      Most of the procurements are made on open
of Bidders                                                                                         competition basis.
/Suppliers
Non availability of  Records are maintained for all procurement actions.                           Progressive improvement in maintenance of records.
records
Processing of        Average time taken for release of payment from date of validation of          Improved efficiency of contractor payments.
contractor           Measurement Book and date of bill raised by contractor.
payments.
Contract             Average time taken for completion of project from date of award of contract   Improved time efficiency in project execution.
administration/time and difference between estimated date of completion as per contract and
over-runs.           completion date.


                                                                          25
       Description                                                                        States

                                CG                      MP                           RJ                       WB                             Odisha

                                                                         Procurement Planning
      Departments prepare budget estimates but there is no practice of preparation of procurement plans with details of timeline, estimates and quantities.
1.0   Moreover, in many cases the State AIP is prepared based on AIPs of the districts but without block level AIPs. Most procurement under the program is
      decentralized at GP level for IHHLs. Material requirements are consolidated for procurement through state rate contracts or through RSM only
      occasionally.
1.1   Is procurement Procurement planning is absent. ZP/JP/GP            Procurement planning is     There is absence of procurement planning. Only State and
      planning       proceed with activities based on the approved       absent under SBM (G).       District level AIP including toilets are prepared.
      linked to      AIP.                                                State prepares an AIP
      available                                                          including toilets without
      budget                                                             any clear cross-linkages
                                                                         between budget and
                                                                         procurement

1.2   Is               No. Most                 Most procurement is      The specific information    The work is given to      The work is given to NGOs for
      procurement      procurement is           decentralised and        was not available.          RSMs for                  construction on saturation basis.
      of goods and     decentralised at GP      not consolidated at                                  construction on           Thus a certain degree of economies
                                                                                                     saturation basis. Thus    of scale are inbuilt in the process
      services         level for IHHLs. Only    State level. But GPs
                                                                                                     a certain degree of
      consolidated     toilet seats were        get advance for                                      economies of scale is
      for economy      procured against State   construction of 25                                   inbuilt in the process.
      of scale         rate contract.           toilets at a time, and
                                                therefore economy
                                                of scale can be
                                                achieved by
                                                procuring materials
                                                for them at one time.

                                                                                26
       Description                                                                       States

                                CG                       MP                         RJ                       WB                            Odisha


                                                         Procurement Processes and Procedures [Overall]
2.0   Procurement rules, guidelines and procedures vary from State to State, and in many cases the procedures are not available at one place for ready reference.
      No guidelines/ standardized documents are in place for procurement of services.

                          CG                    MP                     RJ                           WB                      Odisha

2.1   Applicable        Procurement for      Store Purchase           The Rajasthan                Procurement             Procurement guidance spread over
      procurement        goods is as per the  Rules & PWD              Transparency in Public       guidance spread over    several documents included
      rules and          Store Purchase       Manual are               Procurement Act, 2012 is     several documents       Odisha General Financial Rules
                         Rules.                                                                                             (OGFR), Odisha Treasury Code,
      procedures                              available but do not     applicable to all            including West
                                                                                                                            Odisha Service Code, Delegation of
                                              adequately and           procurements of Rs           Bengal Financial
                        Works are procured                                                                                 Finance Power Rules (DFPR), the
                         as per the Works     concisely address        10,000 & above.              Rules, West Bengal      Odisha Public Works Department
                         Manual of RES.       the processes and                                     Treasury Rules,         (OPWD) Code and the Central
                                              procedures. No           At GP level Rural Works      Delegation of           Public Works Accounts Code.
                        Procurement by the specific rules or          Guidelines or                Financial Power
                         Sarpanch at the GP procedures exist for       [GrameenKaryaNideshik        Rules, Public Works     Most GP procurement is through
                         is not as per rules, procurement of           a (GKN)] provide             Department Code and     NGOs that are formally
                         and Sarpanch acts    services.                guidelines to support and    Guidelines for          empanelled. No MOU between
                         as contractor for                             assist the RRD and PRD       Procurement of          NGOs and government agency.
                         works uptoRs 10                               for smooth execution of      services.               Work orders are issued to NGOs.
                         lakhs                                         works.
                                                                                                    Most GP procurement
                                                                                                    is through RSMs
                                                                                                    appointed without
                                                                                                    formal empanelment
                                                                                                    procedure. No MOU
                                                                                                    between RSM and
                                                                                                    government agency.
                                                                                                    Work orders are

                                                                               27
       Description                                                                     States

                               CG                     MP                          RJ                      WB                            Odisha

                                                                                                  issued to RSMs


2.2   Do               Yes advertising        Yes, the procuring      Yes, the procuring entity   Yes, it is done for     Yes, advertisements are floated in
      procurement      provisions are         entity is required to   is required to publish an   general procurements.   local and national dailies for
      arrangements     specified for          publish an invitation   invitation to bid, on the                           empanelment of NGOs.
      provide for      procurements by        to bid, on the State    State Public Procurement    No advertisements
      wide             RES, but no separate   Public Procurement      Portal and in one such      seen for procurements
      advertising of   file maintaining       Portal and in one       other manner as may be      under SBM-G.
      bidding          records of             such other manner       prescribed.
      opportunities    advertisements.        as may be
                                              prescribed.

                                              This does not apply
                                              to GP level
                                              procurement where
                                              it is mostly direct
                                              procurement.




                                                                             28
       Description                                                                      States

                                  CG                      MP                       RJ                      WB                             Odisha

2.3   Is open            Procurement by RES       Yes as per           RTPP Act stipulates that   Yes, as per              Yes as per government rules.
      competition        is through tenders       government rules.    open competitive bidding   government rules.
      the default        except for works                              shall be the most                                   Construction of IHHL is allocated
      approach,          costing less than Rs   At GP level most       preferred procurement      But at GP level          to NGOs and is not through open
      with               50,000.                common is direct       method.                    procurement is           competition
      conditions for                            procurement. GPs                                  through allocation to
      use of other       At GP level, Sarpanch procure from                                       RSMs and not
      methods            acts as the contractor vendors located in                                through open
      clearly            and he buys the        the vicinity of the                               competition
      described          required materials     village.
                         from any source so
                         long as the price is
                         lower than the
                         estimated cost.

2.4   Are the            In procurements by       Given the small      RTPP Act stipulates that   Yes, at State level as   Yes at State level as per
      qualification,     RES, the standard        value of contracts   bidding documents must     per government rules.    government rules.
      evaluation,        bidding documents        these are not        specify amongst others
      and award          include qualification,   applied.             qualification and          At GP level – there is   At GP level – NGOs may also get
      criteria clearly   evaluation and award                          evaluation criteria.       no formal                empanelled through self-application
      defined in         criteria.                                                                empanelment of           provided they meet the set threshold
      bidding                                                                                     RSMs                     criteria.
      documents,         In procurements by
      and are they       the Sarpanch, these
      relevant and       are not applied.
      non-
      discriminatory




                                                                              29
        Description                                                                          States

                                  CG                        MP                          RJ                        WB                            Odisha

3.0                                             Procurement Processes and Procedures [Specific to Procuring Entities]

       Decentralized procurement at village level being of low value does not always follow a formal system and makes it susceptible to unacceptable practices,
       lack of transparency and discretionary decision making. The procurement procedures followed at this level vary very widely amongst the States. In some
       places RSMs and CPs are used; RSMs also act as contractors rather than as material sources; work is allotted to RSMs on informal basis through mutual
       agreement; RSMs get empanelled through self-application process; RSMs have become dysfunctional at some places; procurements are being made from
       open market in parallel with RSMs even where RSMs are operational.
       Other variations noted in the procedures used include (a) procurements by individual beneficiaries and procurement of materials from suppliers/
       shopkeepers through discussions, with no quotations and with no contracts (b) procurement by Sarpanch who also acts as the contractor; (c) procurement
       by GPs; there is no check on quality of goods delivered; and procurement registers are not maintained; (d) construction of IHHLs under the oversight of
       Block/districts and GPs do not have significant role; (e) PCs acting as contractors and taking up construction of IHHLs; and (f) masons acting as material
       suppliers; and (g) absence of contracts & long delays in completion etc.
       Hand holding support at the village level is often not available from competent ZP/district/HQ staff, and extent of defunct toilets is quite high in most
       states assessed.
3.1    Does GP           At GP level               GPs get funds for        GrameenKaryaNideshika        Procurement under        Procurement under SBM-G/NBA
       procurement       procurement for           construction of 25       (GKN) provides               SBM-G/NBA                primarily relates to construction of
                         construction is carried   toilets at a time i.e.   guidelines for areas such    primarily relates to     IHHLs. This is being done at
                         out by the Sarpanch       only Rs 3 lakhs are      as cost estimate,            construction of          block/district levels and GPs do not
                         who also acts as the      available at any         financial and technical      IHHLs. This is being     play any significant role.
                         contractor.               given point of time      sanctions, technical         done at block/district
                                                                            specifications, inspection   levels and GPs do not
                                                                            and valuation of works,      play any significant
                                                                            and issuance of              role.
                                                                            completion and
                                                                            utilization certificates.

      (a) use standard   Standard formats for      GPs do not use       SBDs are made available          There are no standard formats
      format for         requests for              standardized formats on website of Finance
      request for        quotations are not        for requests for     Department, but are not

                                                                                   30
  Description                                                                       States

                            CG                       MP                        RJ                       WB                            Odisha

quotations         there for                 quotations.           consistently applied to
                   procurements by                                 procurement at GP level.
                   Sarpanch.

(b) get            Quotations for supply     GPs do not get        GPs obtain written          No quotations are called for IHHL construction
quotations in      of materials available.   quotations in         quotations from vendors/
writing            No quotations for         writing.              contractors.
                   supply of labour.

(c) maintain       Quotations taken from vendors are               There are no records        With no quotations, there is no opening of quotations.
record of          maintained, but there are no records of         available for quotation
quotation          quotation opening.                              opening. There is no
opening                                                            centralized repository of
                                                                   such records.

(d) issue a        No contracts were available                     Formal contracts            A work order is issued that mentions the terms and
contract even if                                                   between vendor and GP       conditions for construction.
very brief                                                         were not available during
                                                                   field visits to the GPs.
                                                                   However the contract
                                                                   formats are prescribed in
                                                                   the GKN and RTPP.

(e) maintain       Measurement books         Measurement books     Measurement books are       Measurement books are not maintained
measurement        are maintained by         are not maintained.   maintained by GPs.
books              sub-engineer                                    These could not be
                                                                   verified but LFAD report
                                                                   show their availability.

(f) Maintain       Procurement registers     Procurement           Procurement registers are   Register for RSM        Procurement register for NGO

                                                                          31
        Description                                                                      States

                                 CG                     MP                          RJ                       WB                             Odisha

      procurement       are not maintained,     registers are not       not maintained, but some    empanelment is not       empanelment is maintained at
      register, and     but procurement         maintained by GPs.      procurement records are     maintained. Records      District level. Records are
      keep records.     records are             Some procurement        maintained.                 are not maintained in    maintained of documents sub mitted
                        maintained.             records are retained,
                                                                                                    a systematic manner.     by RSMs for empanelment.
                                                but others like
                                                SBDs, evaluation,
                                                technical
                                                assessments etc. are
                                                not maintained.
3.2    Is GP            For works costing       RSMs and PCs were                                   GPs do not play any      GPs do not play any significant role
       procurement      less than Rs 10 lakhs   set up in the initial                               significant role in      in procurement.
       supported with   procurement is done     phases but have                                     procurement.
                        by the Sarpanch.        become
                                                dysfunctional.

       (a) SORs         Estimates are verified Budget estimates is      SORs are not maintained     Model estimate is fixed at the State level.
                        by sub-engineer from provided by RES.           at GP level.
                        RES department and
                        rate charts are
                        maintained.
       (b) ZP/GP        There are no GP specific procurement            The RTPP, GKN and           There are no GP/ZP specific procurement guidelines.
       procurement      guidelines                                      GFR include procedures
       guidelines                                                       related to goods and
                                                                        works procurement.
                                                                        However documentation
                                                                        relating to this is not
                                                                        available at GP level.
       (c) Technical    Design documents are    Technical support       Technical support for       A model estimate with technical design and budget for
       support for      available and sub-      for design is           design is provided by the   IHHL is fixed at State level.
       design,          engineers check the     provided by Rural       districts.
       budgeting        construction with       Engineering
                        reference to them.      Department.

                                                                               32
        Description                                                                      States

                                 CG                      MP                         RJ                       WB                             Odisha

      (d) Hand          RES engineer             Hand holding          Formal handholding           Support is provided by staff from District/ Block and GP.
      holding by        attached to GP/JP/ZP     support was not       support activities from
      competent staff   provides technical       observed.             ZP, District or State in
      from              assistance.                                    procurement were not
      ZP/district/HQ                                                   observed.

3.3    For ZP/ PMU/ central procurements does the entity/state have

       (a) Formal
       rules &                                                 Formal rules and regulations exist as detailed in point#2.1
       regulations

       (b) Preference Various preferences        No such preferences   Preferences are allowed      RSMs carry out           NGOs carry out construction and
       for State PSUs are applicable as per      were observed.        as per State government      construction and State   State PSUs are not involved.
       & if so what is government orders.                              orders issued from time      PSUs are not
       the preference                                                  to time. But no specific     involved.
                                                                       information available on
                                                                       preferences in respect of
                                                                       ZP/PMU/Central
                                                                       procurements

       (c) Preference   Various preferences      GPs provide           Preferences are allowed,     Yes, local RSMs are      Yes, local contractors are given
       for local        are applicable as per    preference to         but specific information     given preference.        preference. NGOs having PCs in
       contractors/     government orders.       vendors empanelled    in respect of ZP/ PMU/                                the block are given work orders for
       suppliers                                 under MNREGA.         Central procurements                                  the GPs in the respective block.
                                                                       was not available.
       (d) Exemption    Exemptions are           Exemptions are        Contracts awarded on         EM/SD are not taken      EM/SD are not taken from
       from payment     available as per         available as per      piece work system are        from empanelled          empanelled NGOs.
       of EM/SD for     government orders.       government orders.    exempt from deposition       NGOs.
       some                                                            of performance security.
       categories
       (e) Preference   It seems that there is   No new vendors are    Preferences are allowed,     No preference is given in registration of contractors/

                                                                               33
        Description                                                                         States

                                  CG                        MP                        RJ                        WB                              Odisha

       in registration   area wise registration    being registered.      but specific information    suppliers.
       of                of contractors.           Vendors registered     in respect of ZP/ PMU/
       Contractors,                                under MNREGA are       Central procurements
       suppliers                                   the preferred          was not available.
                                                   vendors.

       (f) Extent of     Almost 74% of             26.06% (14.5           7.68 lakh toilets are not   11.54 lakh defunct         4.74 lakh defunct toilets are there in
       defunct toilets   constructed toilets are   million) toilets are   functioning.                toilets are there in the   the State.
       & corrective      not functioning.          not functioning.                                   State.
       action being
       taken
4.0                                                                       Controls and Integrity
      In the highly decentralized system of procurement envisaged under the program, effective controls both internal and external are of paramount importance.
      Aspects that contribute to these controls include (a) internal audit; (b) clear schedule of powers; (c) clearly defined accountability; (d) quality control; (e)
      availability of complete procurement records; and (f) an effective grievance redressal system. These issues are handled differently in various states but it is
      noted that in some States systems related to these aspects are not robust. For example it is seen that at some places there is no internal audit; there is no
      audit at GP level; there is no clear schedule of powers; accountability is not clearly defined; there is limited quality control; quotations are not collected;
      records are not maintained; grievance redressal is largely informal etc. A separation of functions for independently assessing and ensuring integrity of the
      process is required to be put in place.
      The extent of public disclosure of information on the outcome of the procurement process varies from State to State and there is a need to promote some
      consistency in disclosure of contract award information.

4.1   Are effective internal and external controls in place

      (a) clear          RES has clearly           Powers of officers     Schedule of powers is       There is no clear schedule of powers at program level.
      schedule of        defined schedule of       are defined. Book of   given in GKN.
      powers             powers.                   Financial powers
                                                   defines the powers.




                                                                                 34
        Description                                                                       States

                                 CG                      MP                          RJ                       WB                            Odisha

      (b) clearly       Accountability is       Roles and                Schedule of powers and      Accountability under the program is not defined.
      defined           defined for decision    responsibilities of      accountability of the
      accountability    making at different     officers are provided    officers are defined in
                                                                         GKN and RTPP.
                        levels.                 in relevant laws e.g.
                                                in Panchayati Raj
                                                Act.

      (c) quality       Quality control is      Quality control is       These Rules also provide    Quality of construction of IHHL is verified by technical
      control           ensured through         the responsibility of    the quality inspections     person before release of payment.
      processes, and    supervision/approval    Rural Engineering        and control. However
                        as laid out in the      Department.              well-defined documents
                        works manual.                                    to support these are not
                                                                         available at GP/ZP levels
                                                                         due to capacity
                                                                         constraints.

4.2    Are              Authorities competent   No. Procurement is       Due processes as laid       A committee at ZP    A committee at district level has
       procurement      to take decisions are   not institutionalised.   down in the relevant        level called         been formed to undertake decisions
       decisions        laid down as per the    GP level decisions       laws and guidelines are     Janasasthya O        on empanelment of NGOs.
                                                                                                     ParibeshSthayeeSamit
       made by          schedule of powers      are primarily taken      followed while making
                                                                                                     i has been formed to
       competent        for procurements by     by the Sarpanch and      procurement decisions.      decide regarding
       authorities on   RES.                    Gram Sachiv.                                         engagement of RSM.
       the basis of                                                                                  Block level officers
       established      Not applicable to                                                            are also involved in
       processes        procurements by                                                              award of work order.
                        Sarpanch who also
                        acts as a contractor.




                                                                                35
        Description                                                                     States

                                 CG                      MP                        RJ                       WB                             Odisha

4.3    Do bidding       The rules/procedure                            RTPP Act includes           There is no formal        Empanelment of new RSMs is
       procedures       provide for                                    detailed code of            system for receiving      carried out based on their technical
       adequately       maintaining integrity                          integrity. Further          bids for IHHL             capability.
       preserve         of the process in RES                          information not yet         construction.
       integrity        procurements.                                  readily available.

      (a) custody of    Bids accepted in         Information not       Information was not         Bids are not called.      Documents are kept with the
      the bids, and     sealed envelopes and     readily available.    readily available.                                    committee at block level.
                        kept in office
                        premises.

      (b)               Confidentiality is       Information not       Information was not         Bids are not called or    Confidentiality of evaluations is
      confidentiality   maintained, though       readily available.    readily available.          evaluated.                maintained.
      of evaluations    not stated clearly in
                        the report.

4.4    Is there a       Not specific to          Yes. Complaints       Yes, the state has Public   There is no formal        A robust grievance redressal system
       functioning      procurement. These       received through      Grievance Redressal         system in place.          is in place namely Sanjog helpline
       complaint        are handled through      multiple channels     Department and others       Informally complaints     and e-Abhijoga (Chief Minister
                                                                                                                             Grievance Redressal portal)
       mechanism        the general vigilance/   are transferred to    like Anti-Corruption        can be received by
                        complaints handling      Complaint and         Bureau.                     block/ district offices
                        section.                 Vigilance Cell of
                                                 Department of Rural
                                                 Development and
                                                 Panchayati Raj for
                                                 resolution. CM
                                                 helpline also has
                                                 provision for
                                                 complaints.

                                                                              36
       Description                                                                       States

                               CG                       MP                          RJ                       WB                            Odisha

4.5   How             Usually disseminated      MP online has the       Under RTPP Act this         There is no such        These are uploaded in the website
      debarment and   through notice/           list of debarred and    will be available on        debarment and           of Government of Odisha (list of
      suspension      letters. In some          suspended vendors.      website. At present some    suspension list.        blacklisted NGOs can be accessed
                                                                                                                            at
      lists will be   departments these                                 departments like PWD
                                                                                                                            http://www.odisha.gov.in/pc/Downl
      disseminated    lists are available on                            have information on their                           oad/blacklisted_NGO.pdf)
      to the          their websites. E-                                websites.
      procurement     procurement system
      entities        allows for Centralized
                      view of all suppliers
                      registered/ blacklisted
                      for all classes.

4.6   The outcome     The procurement           Yes. Information on     Yes. Information on         No disclosure of        No such disclosure of empanelment
      of the          process outcomes are      contract award is       contract award is           empanelment of          of RSMs is being made at Mission/
      procurement     not readily disclosed     published on the        published on the            RSMs is being made      District/ Block office.
      process is      to public.                websites specified in   websites specified in the   at Mission/ District/
      disclosed to                              the NIB.                NIB.                        Block office.
      the public

4.7   Audit           There is an internal      CAG is responsible      CAG is responsible for      Annual audit is done    Annual audit is done at all levels.
      arrangements    audit department at       for audits.             audits.                     at all levels.          CAG and Local Fund Audits.
                      the ZP level
                                                                                                                            No procurement specific audit and
                                                                                                                            no concurrent audit.

      (a) audit       At ZP, audit is done      CAG is responsible      CAG audit at State &      Auditors are              Local fund audit of GPs is done by
      agency          by both Local Fund        for audits.             districts; and LFAD audit appointed in all          Finance Department
                      Audit directorate and                             at PS and GP levels.      districts.
                      empanelled CAs.
                                                                        CAG empanelled CAs do
                                                                        ZP audits that includes
                                                                               37
        Description                                                                          States

                                 CG                       MP                           RJ                         WB                             Odisha

                                                                          sample PSs and GPs.

      (b)               There is no separate procurement audit            Procurement audits, post- There is no procurement specific audit.
      procurement       conducted.                                        procurement reviews,
      audit                                                               concurrent audits and
                                                                          internal audits are not
                                                                          conducted nor planned.
5.0                                                                      Procurement Capacity
      Lack of adequate capacity has been noted at various levels across entities, and there is a need for enhanced procurement capacity, more important at
      district/GP levels as large number of works contracts are handled at this level. All institutions have capacity constraints for efficient and transparent
5.1   procurement,
      Is there       contract management
                        Staffing           & record
                                  and capacity      keeping.
                                                 Staffing and           Adequate staffing across Lack of adequate staff at mission and district offices.
      adequate          are a concern at the     capacity are a         levels and hierarchies is
      staffing          ZP/JP/GP levels.         concern at the         needed.                         No dedicated staff to look after procurement.
                                                 ZP/JP/GP levels.


      (a) numbers       There are shortages of   In institutional         Adequate staffing across       At mission office, 4      At mission office, 3 out of 10
                        sub-engineers to         arrangements in the      levels and hierarchies is      out of 10 positions are   positions are vacant. At Khordah
                        adequately supervise     report, several          needed.                        vacant. At Howrah         district 3 out of 10, and at Ganjam
                        works at the GPs         weaknesses in                                           district 7 out of 10,     district 2 out of 10 positions are
                                                 staffing have been                                      and at South 24           vacant.
                                                 brought out.                                            Parganas district 8 out
                                                                                                         of 10 positions are
                                                                                                         vacant.

      (b)               The qualification &      In institutional         Vacancies need to be           Given the vacancy there is need for immediate filling up
      qualification     experience of            arrangements in the      filled with qualified staff.   with qualified staff.
      and experience,   engineers are well       report, several
      and               defined in RES.          weaknesses in
                                                 staffing have been

                                                                                  38
       Description                                                                         States

                                 CG                       MP                          RJ                       WB                             Odisha

                                                 brought out

5.2   Implementing      From the sample          This has not been       This has not been            Past performance of RSMs is taken into account before
      agency past       reviewed at RES, it      assessed.               assessed.                    issuance of work orders
      performance       was noted that 52%
      track record      works were
                        completed within
                        allocated timeline.
                        Payments were made
                        within 30-90 days.

6.0                                                                    Contract Administration
      Management of contracts is essential for satisfactory construction activity even if the contracts are of small value, as otherwise it can easily lead for
      example to non-functioning IHHLs and creeping in of unacceptable non-transparent practices. It is noted that at some places work order terms and
      conditions are flouted, there are time overruns, there is shortage of sub-engineers to supervise, and lack of procurement support at block and district levels.
      Terms and conditions in work orders issued to RSMs and NGOs are not enforced. Sometimes there is not even a signed contractual agreement, which
      could be sought to be enforced.
      Absence of procurement management information has been noted in almost all States studied. Information related to the procurement is not organized or
      consolidated at the district or state level to help make appropriate management decisions, and needs to be organized. E-procurement system wherever
6.1   Is there          Shortage of sub-        Absence of               Contract administration/ No. Work order terms and conditions are often flouted.
      adequate          engineers to supervise standardized              post procurement             There is lack of specialised procurement staff at block &
      capacity
      cleared   forimplemented
               and               the GPs
                        works atwould    has
                                       have           for templates
                                                contract
                                            provision      such MIS is   reviews
                                                                     reports      are presently
                                                                             for various         not to
                                                                                          departments district
                                                                                                        monitorlevels.
                                                                                                                  at the central level.
      contract          been noted.             leading to non-          part of activities in State.
      administration                            uniform practices in
                                                contract
                                                administration.

6.2   Is there          From the sample          This information        There were 5-10% cases       There is no cost overrun as amount for each IHHL is fixed.
      evidence of       reviewed at RES,                                 of time overrun of works
                                                                                 39
       Description                                                                     States

                                CG                     MP                         RJ                     WB                              Odisha

      cost and time     delays in completion   was not available.     taken up by PRIs, and      Cases of time overrun have been seen.
      overruns in       were observed in 48%                          not more than 2% cases
      the               cases with cost                               of cost overrun.
      performance       overruns in about 5%
      of contracts      cases

6.3   Are there         As per works manual,   RES is responsible     RTPP Act requires          Evaluation of IHHLs      Evaluation of IHHLs construction is
      procedures to     inspections are        for monitoring         inspection & quality       construction is done     done by JE-II (100%) and Assistant
      inspect for       carried out by sub-    quality. No checks     control. GKN provides      by                       Engineer (10%)
                                                                      technical specifications   SwachhtaDoot&Nirm
      quality control   engineers, SDOs and    are conducted on
                                                                      for quality. The           anSahayak (100%)
      of goods,         executive engineers    quality of materials   Panchayati Raj             and Sub Assistant
      works, or         and quality of works   supplies, only check   Department follows         Engineer & Assistant
      services          is checked.            on toilet having       procedures laid down in    District Coordinator
      delivered                                been constructed       the GKN to support and     (10%)
                                               through                assist the RRD and PRD
                                               photographs.           for smooth execution of
                                                                      works. This provides for
                                                                      inspection and valuation
                                                                      of works.
6.4   Are payments      RES took 30 to 90      The information was    The information was not    Test checks indicate     Test checks indicate delay in
      timely and in     days for making        not available.         available.                 delay in payments        payments made to NGOs and it
      accordance        payments.                                                                made to RSMs.            takes 30 to 40 days to receive the
                                                                                                                          payment.
      with contract
      provisions.

6.5   Are efficient     The dispute resolution No formal dispute      Contractual dispute        No formal dispute        No formal dispute resolution
      contractual       mechanism is           resolution             resolution procedures      resolution mechanism     mechanism in place. If NGOs/
      dispute           provided in the        mechanisms in place    have not been separately   in place. If RSMs/       beneficiaries have any issue, they
                        contracts.                                                               beneficiaries have any   can come directly to the District/
      resolution                               for procurements at    prepared.
                                                                                                 issue, they can come     Block/ GP office and raise a
      procedures in                                                                              directly to the          complaint.
                                                                             40
      Description                                                                  States

                            CG                     MP                         RJ                     WB                           Odisha

      place                                GP level                                          District/ Block/ GP
                                                                                             office and raise a
                                                                                             complaint.
6.6   Are           There is evidence of   Specific Information   Specific Information was   There is no formally   There is no formally signed
      contractual   enforcement of         was not available.     not available.             signed contractual     contractual agreement. Terms and
      remedies      contractual remedies                                                     agreement between      conditions in the work order issued
                    by RES in specific                                                       RSM and government     to the NGOs are not enforced.
      enforced
                    sample cases.                                                            agency. Terms and
                                                                                             conditions in the
                                                                                             work order issued to
                                                                                             the RSMs are not
                                                                                             enforced.


                                       [CG-Chattisgarh; MP-Madhya Pradesh; RJ-Rajasthan; WB-West Bengal]




                                                                         41
                   Item                                                                              States
                                                 CG                        MP                       RJ                      WB                          Odisha
1.0                                                                         Planning and Budgeting
1.1   What is the relationship         Multi-year perspective in expenditure planning and budgeting has been lacking in India. It is maintained that the five year plans in
      between strategic plans, the     India provide the basis for a multi-year perspective for resource allocation. However, the economic planning and budget differ in
      budget, and medium-term          their scope and time span. While plans provide a conceptual framework by focusing on various sectors in the economy, the budget is
      financial planning?              more concerned with systems of control over the use of funds by government and pays more attention to financial aspects. Further,
                                       in the context of current budgetary practice, the link between the plan and the budget is weak. In the process of budget preparation
                                       the plan allocations are dispersed over various heads and sub-heads of expenditure.
                                        As per the SBM             Districts Water         Government of         Baseline completed –  Baseline completed in 2015 –
                                         guidelines, a 5 year        Supply and               Rajasthan has           on MDWS website           on MDWS website
                                         plan consisting of 5        Sanitation Mission       targeted              PIP not yet completed  PIP not updated to retrofit
                                         AIPs for the State is       (DWSSM) prepares         achievement of        AIP for 2015-16,           TSC to NBA program
                                         under preparation.          Project                  sanitation              uploaded on MDWS          guidelines
                                         The 5 year plan is          Implementation           coverage by             website                  AIP for 2014-15 and 2015-16
                                         based on the SBM            Plan (PIP,               October 2017, 2       AIP based on district      prepared
                                         (G) mission                 containing               years prior to the      level plans              AIPs have been prepared
                                         objectives and the          medium-term plan         National target.      Absence of block           without receiving the block/
                                         strategy for the            for next five years.  CCDU, PRD is              level AIPs in the         district level plans.
                                         program.                   DWSM also                responsible for         visited districts.       National budget based on
                                                                     prepares the             planning and          National budget            consolidated State AIPs
                                                                     Annual                   reviewing               based on consolidated
                                                                     Implementation           progress of             State AIPs
                                                                     Plan (AIP) for           sanitation
                                                                     district level. AIP is   activities at State
                                                                     not prepared on the      level under SBM
                                                                     basis of PIP.            with appropriate
                                                                                              IEC strategies.
1.2   Is the Program consistent with    Evidence shows State program objectives are consistent with the national development strategy;
      the national development          The funds allocated for the erstwhile Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan (NBA) at the national level are reflected in the Union Budget in
      strategy? Is it effectively        Demand for Grants Number 28, pertaining to Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation. The budget document also reveals that
      costed? Does it feed into the      routing of the funds through the State Plan started from 2014-15 budgets. No allocations through the state plan route were seen in
      national medium term               the earlier years, viz. 2012-13 and 2013-14. The total allocation under NBA for 2014-15 is INR 42,600 million.
      expenditure plans?
                                        A 5 year plan            The costing of           Program cost has     The PIP gives the        Odisha has not prepared any

                                                                                    42
                  Item                                                                                      States
                                                    CG                         MP                         RJ                    WB                              Odisha
                                           consisting of 5 PIPs        program is based on        been determined.     medium term                  PIP under the erstwhile NBA
                                           for the State are           the gap between            Total program        perspective though it        since it was not able to
                                           under preparation.          Open Defecation            cost is Rs.          is not yet finalised.        complete the baseline survey
                                           The overall program         Status and the             102,243.17 lacs      Ideally the yearly           within time.
                                           cost is being prepared      existing status of         for Rajasthan.       AIPs are supposed to  All district level plans and
                                           as part of this             toilet coverage as       The program costs     dove- tail with PIP          state level AIPs are costed
                                           process. Detailed           per the baseline           are monitored        for convergence            The State AIP (2014-15) for
                                           activity wise costing       survey which was           through AIPs.        between planning and         Odisha was made though
                                           is being undertaken         conducted in 2012        The program costs     implementation               some of the districts failed to
                                           for each district.          and is subsequently        are determined on    though such                  submit district level AIPs. In
                                                                       updated on ongoing         basis of the         convergences are             addition, AIPs for 2009-14
                                                                       basis. The present         requirements of      often quite weak.            were often prepared without
                                                                       percentage of              Panchayats and      All district level           obtaining Block AIPs.
                                                                       households not             Districts and        plans and state level
                                                                       having toilets in          finalised as per     AIPs are costed.
                                                                       Madhya Pradesh is          State priorities.   The districts have
                                                                       73.83%.                                         drafted the AIPs on
                                                                      Yes, the overall                                the basis of
                                                                       program cost has                                assessment of IHHLs
                                                                       been determined on                              constructed and
                                                                       the basis of number                             target mentioned in
                                                                       of toilets required to                          Baseline Survey data,
                                                                       achieve open                                    which proves
                                                                       defecation free                                 inadequacy in
                                                                       status. The total                               planning procedure.
                                                                       estimated cost of the
                                                                       project in Madhya
                                                                       Pradesh is Rs.
                                                                       1,70,288.99 Lakhs
1.3   Have the sources of Program         Under the revised SBM guidelines, the incentive amount for toilet construction has been increased to INR 12, 000
      financing (government and           MGNREGA fund has been completely delinked from the ongoing Mission
      stakeholders) been identified?      The share of Central fund will be routed through the States treasuries, which will then be routed to the bank account for SBM-G
                                           maintained by the State Mission office/s.
                                          The compulsory beneficiary contribution has been removed from SBM-G. However, flexibility is given to states to include
                                           beneficiary contribution for construction of toilets to promote ownership. It is expected that the reach of the Mission and total
                                           number of constructions would increase in near future on account of the removal.
                                          The amount provided as loan has been increased to INR 0.5 million, though the period & mode of repayment remains unchanged
                                           across Missions (i.e. in 12-18 instalments after one year from receiving of loan). In addition, the ceiling of the total available

                                                                                       43
                   Item                                                                                  States
                                                 CG                         MP                        RJ                    WB                          Odisha
                                         revolving fund available to the district has been escalated to INR 15 million.


                                        The State share for        Funding for SBM-G  The sources of              The sources of          The sources of program
                                         NBA is disbursed            will be through           program financing      program financing is     financing is divided between
                                         through the State           budgetary                 is divided             divided between          Central Government and State
                                         treasury to the             allocations of the        between Central        Central Government       government:
                                         district’s water &          central and state         Government and         and State                 (i) IEC, IHHL,
                                         sanitation accounts         governments, the          State government       government:               Administrative charges,
                                         (maintained at              Swachh Bharat             (i) IEC, IHHL,           (i) IEC, IHHL,          SLWM (75% from GOI and
                                         commercial banks)           Kosh, and                 Administrative           Administrative          25% from State)
                                         and subsequently to         multilateral              charges,                 charges, SLWM           (ii) Community Sanitary
                                         GPs. The GPs                agencies. The             SLWM(75% from            (75% from GOI and       Complexes (60% from GOI,
                                         undertake various           Swachh Bharat             GOI and 25%              25% from State)         30% from State and 10%
                                         activities under the        Kosh has been             from State)              (ii) Community          from beneficiary
                                         NBA scheme and              established to            (ii)Community            Sanitary Complexes      /HH/Community)
                                         disburse                    collect funds from        Sanitary                 (60% from GOI,          (iii) Revolving Fund (80%
                                         payments/subsides to        non-governmental          Complexes (60%           30% from State and      from GOI, 20% from State)
                                         the                         sources. Table            from GOI, 30%            10% from
                                         suppliers/contractors       below, details the        from State and           beneficiary
                                         beneficiaries through       fund sharing pattern      10% from                 /HH/Community)
                                         cheques and provide         for SBM-G between         beneficiary/HH/C         (iii) Revolving Fund
                                         utilization certificates    the central and state     ommunity)                (80% from GOI,
                                         against the work            government, as            (iii) Revolving          20% from State)
                                         undertaken.                 provided for in           Fund (80% from
                                                                     the SBM-G                 GOI, 20% from
                                                                     guidelines.               State)
1.4   Is there an effective             The budget preparation involves participation of ministries/departments when they submit their initial budget estimates followed
      relationship between the           by interactions with the Ministry of Finance, where the budget ceilings are communicated to departments. The departments
      implementing agency and the        finalize their budget estimates after taking into account the expenditure ceilings communicated by the Ministry of Finance and the
      finance ministry (or               plan allocations from the erstwhile Planning Commission, which determines the size of funding for new schemes.
      equivalent competent              The funding for the        State Water Supply  Discussions and               Discussions and        Discussions and
      authority) for negotiating the     Sate plan is based on       and Sanitation            negotiations are           Negotiations are        Negotiations are conducted
      annual budget?                     discussion by the           Mission                   held between               conducted between       between Finance
                                         Planning and Finance        (implementing             Planning                   Finance                 Department, Rural
                                         Departments. Each           agency at state           department, Finance        Department, PRD         Development Department
                                         department submits          level) consolidates       department and             Department for the      for the finance budget and
                                         its budget separately       the budget of             Department of              finance budget and      SBM allocation.
                                                                                    44
                  Item                                                                                     States
                                                    CG                         MP                        RJ                       WB                          Odisha
                                           for Plan and Non-          individual districts       Panchayati Raj for         SBM allocation.
                                           Plan expenditures.         at state level and         the finance budget
                                           The Finance and            submits the same to        and SBM allocation.
                                           Planning                   Central                   Annual budgets are
                                           Departments are the        Government.                finalised according
                                           nodal departments for      Discussions and            to State’s overall
                                           budgeting and              negotiations are           development
                                           planning. In-year          conducted between          strategy.
                                           budget adjustments         Planning                  State Budget does
                                           are through re-            department, Finance        not recognize
                                           appropriation or           department                 amount directly
                                           additionally with the      (GoMP),                    transferred by
                                           approval of the            Department of              Central Government
                                           delegated authority,       Panchayati Raj for         to districts for
                                           generally FD. All          the finance budget         central schemes /
                                           additional amounts         and SBM allocation.        shares
                                           are later on approved                                Disbursement is
                                           by the Legislature                                    recognized as
                                           through a                                             expenditure for
                                           Supplementary                                         funds through
                                           Budget.                                               treasury mechanism.
1.5   Are all Program revenues            At national level, expend financed from budget [GoI share only] and donor funded expend are budgeted;
      (e.g., user fees) and               State budget reflects national and state share of expend [national budget share included in state budgets from FY2014-15]; User or
      expenditures (e.g., donor-           beneficiary contributions not reflected in national or state or mission budgets.
      funded expenditures) captured       As per scheme guidelines, the Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation has developed an online monitoring system for TSC/
      on the budget insufficient           NBA. The TSC/ NBA project district is to submit physical and financial progress reports through this on line software (IMIS) for
      detail to provide a meaningful       which user-id and password have been generated and communicated by DDWS-NIC cell
      tool with which to monitor          Program MIS captures program expend in entirety. However, there are concerns over the quality of the financial information
      implementation?                      included in IMIS – described in detail under sections below.
                                          Yes, the budget            Budgetary                The amount              The amount               The amount allocated for
                                           provides for                allocations towards       allocated for SBM          allocated for SBM        SBM is mentioned in the
                                           capturing all revenues      Swachh Bharat             is mentioned in the        is mentioned in the      state budget along with the
                                           and expenditure in          Mission project are       state budget along         state budget along       expenditure for the
                                           sufficient detail for       listed as separate        with the expenditure       with the expenditure     previous year.
                                           monitoring                  line items in the         for the previous           for the previous       Status of expenditure (both
                                                                       state budget. The         year.                      year.                   physical and financial
                                                                       budgetary                Budget provides          Status of expenditure    progress) is being uploaded
                                                                       allocations provide       revenues and              (both physical and       on the MDWS website and
                                                                                      45
                  Item                                                                                 States
                                                CG                          MP                      RJ                        WB                         Odisha
                                                                    overall allocation to    expenditures              financial progress) is  is updated on a regular
                                                                    the project. District    envisaged for the         being uploaded on       basis.
                                                                    wise budget              Sectors, Programs         the MDWS website
                                                                    allocation is            and Plans.                and is updated on a
                                                                    provided on the                                    regular basis.
                                                                    IMIS maintained by
                                                                    Ministry of Water
                                                                    Supply and
                                                                    Sanitation.
1.6   Does the legislature             The preparation of budget and its approval in the Parliament, provisions for which are enshrined in the Constitution of India, goes
      rigorously examine and            through legislative scrutiny and the Parliament exercises full control over the annual budgetary system through this mechanism
      debate the budget law (scope,    The process of preparing the budget, discussing it in Parliament, and its subsequent approval is considered as an effective
      procedures, adequacy of           instrument of financial control of government activities
      time)?                           The budget estimates  The budget                   The program comes  Discussions on state  Discussions on state budget
                                        are approved by the         estimates are            under the purview          budget are carried      are carried out in the state
                                        State legislature at the    approved by the          of GF&AR, RTPP             out in the state        legislature and are put to
                                        start of the financial      State Legislature        Act and other laws         legislature and are     vote. Once approved by the
                                        year. There is              before the beginning     and procedures as          put to vote. Once       state legislature, the
                                        sufficient scrutiny,        of financial year.       applicable to              approved by the         executive gets the mandate
                                        debate and rigour in        The budget is            Government of              state legislature, the  to incur expenditure
                                        the legislative process     scrutinized and          Rajasthan. This            executive gets the
                                        for budget approval.        debated in the           includes discussion        mandate to incur
                                        Only on approval of         legislative process      in the State               expenditure
                                        the annual budget by        for budget approval.     Legislature for the
                                        the Legislature, FD                                  overall State
                                        releases the demand                                  Budget. The budget
                                        for grants to the                                    estimates are
                                        respective line                                      approved by the
                                        departments                                          State legislature at
                                                                                             the start of the
                                                                                             financial year.
2.0                                                                             Transparency
2.1   Is key financial information     Ministry/Departments Budget allocations, budget execution reports, year-end financial statements and audit reports are available at
      (budgets, budget execution        both national and state levels on Government websites and are accessible to the public; data on contract awards are not available
      reports, year-end financial       for public access.
      statements, audit reports,       Budget and financial statements are voluminous and not in user friendly formats.
      contract awards) about the       Budget execution reports at national and state levels report fund transfers and releases and do not necessarily reflect program
                                                                                   46
                   Item                                                                                 States
                                                   CG                       MP                        RJ                       WB                          Odisha
      Program available to the            expenditures in any meaningful form
      public in an accessible form?      SBM-G [earlier NBA] website provides financial information on releases and expend at national and state levels. However, this
                                          data may be considered incomplete and unreliable as these are not based on accounting records and in many instances, do not
                                          match with the expenditures reported in Utilization Certificates [UCs] or annual audited financial statements of the various levels
                                          of implementing agencies.
                                         The budget               Yes, key financial       The budget               PR Department’s          RD Department’s annual
                                          documents along with      information and           documents along           annual budget             budget documents,
                                          the actual expenditure    physical progress         with the actual           documents are being       including Normal Budget,
                                          are uploaded in the       information is            expenditure are           uploaded on the           Tribal Sub plan and
                                          State Finance             available online on       uploaded in the           website of Finance        Scheduled castes Sub-Plan
                                          department portal for     the IMIS portal           State Finance             Department,               are being uploaded on the
                                          the entire sector.        maintained for            department portal         Government of             website of Finance
                                          Program wise details      Swachh Bharat             for the entire sector.    Odisha.                   Department, Government
                                          at the State level were   Mission. Physical        Program wise             Status of expenditure     of Odisha.
                                          available with the        progress reports,         details at the State      (both physical and       Status of expenditure (both
                                          department but it not     Financial Progress        level are not             financial progress) is    physical and financial
                                          available in the State    reports, Release of       available in the          being uploaded on         progress) is being uploaded
                                          Government website.       funds, Monitoring         State Government          the MDWS website          on the MDWS website and
                                         The GoI website of        level reports,            website.                  and is updated on a       is updated on a regular
                                          SBM (G) has district      Panchayat reports        The GoI website of        regular basis.            basis.
                                          wise data (of both        etc. are updated on a     SBM (G) has              No independent           No independent audit
                                          Central Government        regular basis and are     district wise data (of    audit reports or          reports or financial
                                          & State Government        available on              both Central              financial statements      statements for Block or
                                          contributions) on the     http://sbm.gov.in/tsc     Government &              for Block or District     District are being made
                                          budgeted funds,           /NBA/NBAHome.a            State Government          are being made            accessible to the public.
                                          Released funds,           spx                       contributions) on         accessible to the
                                          Expenditure data and                                the budgeted funds,       public.
                                          physical progress                                   Released funds,
                                          data.                                               Expenditure data
                                                                                              and physical
                                                                                              progress data
3.0                                                                   Accounting and Financial Reporting
3.1   Are actual expenditures            While there are no provisions for presenting a mid-year budget report to the Parliament, the aggregate monthly accounts prepared
      compared to the budget with         by the Controller General of Accounts (CGA) for GoI and Comptroller & Auditor General Office [C&AG] for States, compiled
      reasonable frequency, and are       from the departmental accounts, provide monthly accounts of budget implementation. The monthly accounts of the central
      explanations required for           government are important in-year budget reports that are accessible to the general public through the website of the CGA/State
      significant variations from the     Finance departments.

                                                                                     47
                  Item                                                                                 States
                                                 CG                        MP                        RJ                      WB                           Odisha
      budget?                          However, the quality of actual expend reported at national and state levels are based on fund releases [for SBM-G] and therefore,
                                        do not facilitate meaningful assessment of financial performance.
                                       The actual                Actual expenditure      At the end of the         The budget outturn      The budget outturn
                                        expenditures are           is compared to            year, the actual          (defined as actual        (defined as actual
                                        compared to the            budgetary allocation      expenditure is            expenditure as a          expenditure as a percentage
                                        budget at various          and a report              tabled in the             percentage of             of budget estimates) under
                                        levels at different        comparing budget          legislature along         budget estimates)         NBA/ TSC for 2012-13 is
                                        frequencies. At the        allocation with           with the budget           under NBA/ TSC            69%
                                        department level           actual expenditure is     demands for the           for 2012-13 is 36%      Significant budget outturns
                                        monthly comparisons        available online on       next year as part of     Significant budget        are symptoms of weakness
                                        are made and reasons       the Swachh Bharat         the budget process.       outturns are              in public financial
                                        for deviations are         Mission website.        As the funds               symptoms of               management systems and
                                        identified. At the end  However, formal             releases till Block       weakness in public        shows lack of capacity to
                                        of the year, the actual    documentation of          level are recorded as     financial                 absorb allocation levels
                                        expenditure is tabled      budgetary                 expenditure and at        management
                                        in the legislature         monitoring through        GP level,                 systems and shows
                                        along with the budget      MIS reports is not        expenditure is            lack of capacity to
                                        demands for the next       available.                recorded according        absorb allocation
                                        year as part of the                                  to utilization by         levels
                                        budget process.                                      beneficiaries; the
                                                                                             cross-linkage
                                                                                             between State
                                                                                             expenditure and
                                                                                             panchayat
                                                                                             expenditure is not
                                                                                             established nor fully
                                                                                             established.

3.2   Does the Program use the         The budget classification system in India which takes into account the COFOG functional classification system is consistent with
      government classification         the GFS manual of 1986 based on the cash accounting system. The budget classification system as determined by C&AG office is
      system for budget preparation     uniformly applied across all Indian states.
      and reporting?                   The budget classification system in India has improved over the years responding to phenomenal growth and diversity in
3.3   Is the budget classification      government functions and outlays from an organizational structure based classification prior to 1974 to a more meaningful
      system sufficient to allow        classification of transactions for presentation and reporting of government operation in terms of functions, programs and activities
      tracking of Program              The salient features of the reforms were to establish a uniform classification for the budget accounts and plan, clear presentation of
      expenditure?                      objectives and purposes of government expenditure in terms of functions, programs and activities, bringing together all
                                        expenditures under appropriate functional (major), program (minor), and activity (subhead) irrespective of the organization
                                        administering it, and generating timely data for monitoring expenditure on programs and activities

                                                                                    48
                  Item                                                                                  States
                                                   CG                       MP                        RJ                        WB                        Odisha
                                        The program uses the      Yes, the budget          The amount                The system of          The system of budget
                                         government                 classification            allocated for SBM          budget classification   classification is in place to
                                         classification system      system has allocated      is mentioned in the        is in place to track    track the program
                                         for budget                 separate line items       state budget along         the program             expenditure.
                                         preparation and            for classification of     with the expenditure       expenditure.           The amount allocated for
                                         reporting. The             program                   for the previous          Annexure C of the       SBM is mentioned in the
                                         financial & physical       expenditure.              year as a line item.       Finance Accounts        state budget along with the
                                         progress is also           Therefore, the            Disbursements are          (Vol-I), 2012-13        expenditures for the
                                         reported as per the        budget allocation         treated as                 lists the details of    previous year as a line
                                         formats provided by        and expenditure           expenditures till          expenditure under       item.
                                         the Central                under the project         District / Block           major schemes, that  Evidence for tracking of
                                         Government.                can be tracked.           levels. At GP level        have distinct           program expenditure can
                                        The budget                                           expenditure is based       classification under    also be seen from the
                                         classification system                                on amounts                 subheads and in the     Finance Accounts prepared
                                         is sufficient to allow                               expended as per            Detailed Demands        by AG.
                                         tracking of Program                                  beneficiaries’             for Grants and
                                         expenditure.                                         utilization certified      corresponding head-
                                                                                              and reported.              wise Appropriation
                                                                                                                         Accounts and have
                                                                                                                         been booked under
                                                                                                                         “800-Other
                                                                                                                         Expenditure”.
3.4   Are accounting policies at the    The accounting standards prescribed by the Government (President of India) on the advice of the CAG, IGAS, are not fully
      Program level consistent with      aligned with the Cash IPSAS prescribed by the IFAC. There are differences between Government Accounting system in India and
      national public sector             cash basis IPSAS relating to the structure, disclosures and basis of accounting
      policies/standards?               SBM-G guidelines do not provide standard financial management procedures [including accounting, financial reporting, audit etc.]
                                         to be followed at the state levels. None of the states covered in the assessment have developed accounting and financial
                                         management guidelines or manuals.
                                        The District water &       There are no              GoR follows the         Accounts at the        It was observed that there is
                                         Sanitation Committee         separately defined        single entry cash        district and block      no documented standard for
                                         is also required to          accounting policies       basis of accounting.     level is being          Monthly Accounting
                                         maintain and prepare         for the project.          Only those               maintained on an        routine, relating to various
                                         annual accounts of           Accounting for the        transactions where       Integrated Financial    accounting outputs like
                                         the NBA/SBM (G).             project is carried out    cash has been paid       Management              monthly abstracts, monthly
                                         They maintain a cash         at the Block level        or received are          System (IFMS)           reconciliation and regular
                                         book, bill register and      and District level        recorded by the As       system.                 passbook updates etc. at
                                         cheque books to              and such accounts         the common              Accounts at the         block and district level.
                                         record transactions          are consolidated at       practice across the      Gram Panchayat          Cash books were being

                                                                                    49
                  Item                                                                                    States
                                                    CG                        MP                       RJ                      WB                         Odisha
                                           from the district          the state level.          Central and State        level are being         maintained on PAMIS till
                                           water & sanitation                                   Governments in           maintained on Gram      last year. In Balianta Block
                                           accounts. There is no                                India, the transfers     Panchayat               of Khordah district, it was
                                           particular accounting                                of funds to Deposit      Management              observed that from 2014
                                           guideline prescribed                                 heads in the Public      System (GPMS).          onwards, the manual cash
                                           by NBA/SBM (G) for                                   Account undermine                                registers are being
                                           this program.                                        the accuracy and                                 maintained but not updated
                                                                                                completeness of                                  on regular basis. .
                                                                                                accounts. GoR
                                                                                                needs to review the
                                                                                                amounts under
                                                                                                deposit heads (also
                                                                                                called personal
                                                                                                ledger accounts).
3.5   How effective are the linkages   As per scheme guidelines, the Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation has developed an online monitoring system for TSC/
      between the Program and the      NBA. The TSC/ NBA project district is to submit physical and financial progress reports through this on line software (IMIS) for
      sector, and between the sector   which user-id and password have been generated and communicated by DDWS-NIC cell. The financial progress entered through
      and the central FM reporting     this on line software should essentially tally with the financial progress shown in UC under different components of the schemes
      systems?
                                             There is no centralized FM reporting system for the program; financial and physical information on performance is uploaded on
                                              the online monitoring system on an offline basis. This data is based on the actual utilization of funds at all levels of
                                              implementation, though not based on books of accounts;
                                             Below the District level, all fund releases under the Program are accounted for as expend; the state level financial statements
                                              [consolidated for all districts] therefore do not match with the MIS;
3.6   Is there a regular and timely       MDWS finalizes the budget for the program based on the expenditure ceiling set by Ministry of Finance.
      two-way flow of information         Flow of information is being monitored through the Central Plan Scheme Monitoring System (CPSMS) which is being
      between the Program and the          implemented by the Office of Controller General of Accounts in the Ministry of Finance. The scheme has established a common
      finance ministry?
                                           transaction-based on-line fund management and payment system and MIS for the Plan Schemes of Government of India
                                          At MDWS, two way flow of information is built-in as part of the program design involving the following elements:
                                              o Approval of AIP-The Plan Approval Committee of MDWS reviews the AIP and gives its recommendation. States are
                                                   required to amend the plan as per the directions given by PAC. Once PAC approves the plan, it is forwarded to the National
                                                   Scheme Sanctioning Committee
                                              o Funds are released by MDWS to the various states in two instalments. The first instalment of 50% of the amount approved
                                                   in the Project Approval Committee is released. The second instalment is released based on utilization of 60% of the
                                                   available funds with the State(opening balance, funds released under first instalment and interest earned thereon),
                                                   submission of the audited accounts, utilization certificate for the central and state share, annual performance report and any

                                                                                         50
                  Item                                                                                     States
                                                    CG                         MP                      RJ                       WB                            Odisha
                                                  other information as may be required by MDWS
                                         The information on          IMIS maintained by  Though the                  GoI releases the          The funds from the Centre
                                          budgets, release from        the Ministry of          accounting               fund and sanction          will be routed through the
                                          treasury, fund flow          Water Supply and         information on           letter is uploaded on      state budget and it will be
                                          data is available to         Sanitation is the        actual expenditure       MDWS website.              the responsibility of the
                                          the program                  primary source of        of the GP/PS/ZP is       Funds are first            state to release both the
                                          implementing                 bottom-up                available through an     transferred to the         centre and the state’s share
                                          department from the          information transfer     on-line accounting       Finance Department         to OSWSM within a
                                          Finance department.          on progress and          portal, it is not used   of the State.              stipulated time frame. The
                                                                       fund utilization. The    by the program                                      release of central funds by
                                                                       maintenance and          department/ Finance                                 the state will be monitored
                                                                       updation of IMIS is      department for                                      by Govt of India through
                                                                       done regularly, thus     automated real time                                 CPSMS. Based on the
                                                                       providing central        monitoring of the                                   requirement, funds are
                                                                       level stakeholders       actual expenditure.                                 allocated to the districts that
                                                                       with regular and         There is high                                       are the executing agencies
                                                                       timely updates.          reliance on the                                     under the programme.
                                                                                                monthly progress
                                                                                                reports rather than
                                                                                                the accounting
                                                                                                information for
                                                                                                expenditure data.
3.7   Do budget reports provide            The funds allocated for the erstwhile Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan (NBA) at the national level are reflected in the Union Budget in
      accurate, comprehensive, and          Demand for Grants Number 28, pertaining to Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation. It can be seen from the budget
      understandable information to         documents of 2014-15, that funds are being allocated under three main streams- (i) under Rural Water Supply and Sanitation
      allow monitoring progress
                                            (Major Head 2215) and (ii)Provision for projects/Schemes for the benefit of North Eastern region and Sikkim (Major Head 2552)
      against the budget?
                                            and (iii) State and UT Plan (Major heads 3601, 3601 and 2552. The budget document also reveals that routing of the funds
                                            through the State Plan started from 2014-15 budgets. No allocations through the state plan route were seen in the earlier years viz
                                            2012-13 and 2013-14.
                                           Following the instructions issued by Ministry of Finance (Department of expenditure), MDWS has also been coming out with
                                            Outcome Budgets on regular basis since 2007-08. The outcome budget also provides projected outputs covering vulnerable
                                            sections of the society, namely Scheduled Castes (SC) and Scheduled Tribes (ST).
                                           Controller General of Accounts prepares the consolidated accounts from various Ministries/departments on monthly basis which
                                            are then reconciled with the cash figures of Reserve bank of India (banker to Govt of India/states). The estimates of the CGA
                                            give a good snapshot of progress made in the implementation of the Budget.
                                           The budget documents also give a perspective regarding the original budget allocation vis-à-vis the actual expenditure figures.

                                                                                      51
Item                                                                      States
                  CG                          MP                        RJ                      WB                            Odisha
           The budget estimates for any particular year gives apart from the budget estimates of the forthcoming year (e.g. 2015-16), the
           revised estimates of the current year (e.g. 2014-15) and the actual estimates of the previous year (2013-14). Thus comparison of
           budgetary allocations for a particular year against the actual figures gives the extent of budget outturn.
        One of the issues is in  There is a difference  GoR considers                 The expenditure,         The expenditure, unspent
         the recognition of          between the                release of funds          unspent balance,          balance, physical and
         expenditure by the          expenditure and            from treasury as          physical and              financial progress is District
         State Government.           unspent balance            expenditure. When
                                                                                          financial progress is     / State level through upload
         The State                   reported at GPs and        the funds are
         Government                  other tiers of             disbursed, these          District / State level    on MDWS website and
         considers release of        Government                 remain in the bank        through  upload   on      reviews.
         funds from treasury         because of                 accounts of the           MDWS website and  Review meetings are
         as expenditure.             recognition of             GP/PS/ZP till actual      reviews.                  conducted to assess the
         Though the funds            expenditure at GPs         disbursement to          Review meetings are       progress, reasons for non-
         have been disbursed,        is based on the            beneficiaries based       conducted to assess       performance.
         they are usually            accounting for             on certified
         parked in the bank          disbursements to           utilization               the progress, reasons  Review meetings are
         accounts of the             beneficiaries              certificates. This        for non-                  conducted on monthly basis
         GP/JP/ZP. This leads        according to the           leads to anomaly in       performance.              at district level and by
         to anomaly in the           utilization                the figures of the       At the District level,    Member Secretary, OWSM
         figures of the              certificates whereas       expenditure               monthly meetings          at least once in two months
         expenditure reported        at Block offices and       reported by the           with District
         by the State                above levels the           State Government
                                                                                          Magistrate,
         Government and the          funds disbursed are        and the actual
         actual expenditure on       treated as                 expenditure. The          Additional District
         the ground. The State       expenditure                State budget (actual      Magistrate and
         budget (actual                                         expenditure figures)      District Project
         expenditure figures)                                   does reflect the          Coordinators are
         does not provide a                                     actual expenditure        done to review the
         true picture of the                                    of the program as it
                                                                                          physical progress.
         expenditure of the                                     only shows the
         program and it only                                    release of funds by
         shows the release of                                   the State treasury.
         funds by the State                                     The monthly
         treasury. The monthly                                  progress reports of
         progress reports of                                    the GP/PS/ZP are
         the GP/JP/ZP are                                       used to track actual
         used to track actual                                   expenditure.
         expenditure.

                                                      52
                  Item                                                                                  States
                                                 CG                           MP                      RJ                     WB                         Odisha
3.8   What is the system for            Under SBM (G), financial statements are prepared based on the format prescribed (Receipt and Payment Account, Income and
      preparing annual financial         Expenditure Account, Balance Sheet and Notes forming part of Accounts) in the guidelines. Once the annual accounts are
      statements for the Program?        prepared, it is audited by the auditor and submitted to MDWS.
      Do implementing agencies
      meet their obligations in a       The Finance Accounts and Appropriation Accounts are prepared by the Controller General of Accounts (CGA) which takes into
      timely and comprehensive           account the expenditure incurred by MDWS in plan schemes like SBM-G. The consolidated year-end financial statements of the
      manner?                            Government of India are based on the detailed information for all the ministries/departments and decentralized units.
                                       The District water &       State, District,         DWSMs are             Accounts and            Accounts are being
                                        Sanitation Committee         Block and                required to maintain    Finance under           prepared at the district level
                                        is required to               Panchayat level          a separate account      ZillaParishad and       and compilation is done at
                                        maintain and prepare         accounts are audited     in respect of the       Panchayat Samiti is
                                                                                                                                              Mission office.
                                        annual accounts of           by AG/Empaneled          grants received by      guided by West
                                        the NBA/SBM (G).             CA Firms. The            them under Swachh       Bengal Panchayat       An overall financial
                                        They maintain a cash         release of funds till    Bharat Mission in a     (ZillaParishad and      statement under the
                                        book, bill register and      Block level is           nationalized bank       Panchayat Samiti)       program is prepared at
                                        cheque books to              recorded as              and any unspent         Accounts and            Mission office.
                                        record transactions          expenditure,             balance out of this     Financial Rules,       It was also noted that audit
                                        from the district            however, at GP           grant will be           2003.
                                                                                                                                              for 2013-14 was also
                                        water & sanitation           level, expenditure is    refunded by the       Accounts, Audit and
                                        accounts.                    recorded according       grantee immediately                             pending (as on the date of
                                                                                                                      Budget under Gram
                                       At the Block level the       to utilization by        after the completion                            visit) as the accounts were
                                                                                                                      Panchayat is guided
                                        accounts of the JPs          beneficiaries; the       of the project. The                             not yet finalized at the
                                                                                                                      by The West Bengal
                                        are maintained by an         cross-linkage            DWSM is required                                District level, that lead to
                                        accountant for all the       between State            to furnish UCs and      (Gram Panchayat
                                                                                                                                              an overall delay in
                                        schemes implemented          expenditure and          other relevant          Accounts, Audit and
                                                                                                                                              compilation of Accounts at
                                        & monitored by the           panchayat                documents in            Budget) Rules, 2007.
                                                                                                                                              Mission Office.
                                        block. The JPs are           expenditure is not       support of            The Annual financial
                                        also required to             fully established.       expenditure             statements under the
                                        annually prepare             The financial            incurred along with
                                                                                                                      program compiling
                                        Statements of                statements at the        the outcomes
                                        accounts of revenue          district level are       indication wise         all the districts are
                                        and expenditure of           prepared by the          utilization for the     prepared.
                                        the JPs and to be            empanelled               funds released in
                                        placed before the JP         Chartered                accordance with the
                                        Finance Committee.           Accountants. The         General Financial
                                        In line with other           district level           Rules in this regard
                                        schemes, the block           financial statements     and as per funding
                                        water & sanitation           are consolidated at      norms as per Centre
                                                                     the state level.         and State share. The
                                                                                   53
                  Item                                                                                  States
                                                CG                         MP                        RJ                        WB                           Odisha
                                       committee maintains                                    pay and Accounts
                                       a cash book, bill                                      officer, MDWS acts
                                       register and cheque                                    as drawing and
                                       books to record                                        disbursing officer
                                       transactions from the                                  for the purpose.
                                       block water &
                                       sanitation accounts
4.0                                                                Treasury Management and Fund Flow
4.1   Are adequate funds made         It was observed that funds provided during the financial year are not utilized and huge amount of funds are lying idle and
      available for Program            transferred to the subsequent year. The issue has not been the availability of funds; on the contrary most of the states have not been
      implementation?                  unable to utilize the amount that has been allocated.
4.2   Are funds available in an       As per Ministry of Finance instructions, the funds are released in two instalments. The first instalment of 50% of the amount
      orderly and predictable          approved by the Plan Approval Committee is released. The second instalment is released based on utilization of 60% of the
      manner?                          available funds with the State, (i.e. opening balance, funds released under first instalment and interest earned thereon.) In addition,
                                       states are also required to submit audited accounts, utilization certificate for the central and state share, annual performance report
                                       and any other information as may be required by MDWS for release of the second instalment.
4.3   Are the arrangements to         The Central Plan Scheme Monitoring System (CPSMS) was developed by Controller General of Accounts under Ministry of
      transfer Program funding         Finance, to monitor and track the usage of central plan funds. All agencies designated to receive funds under any program/scheme
      from the finance ministry to     are required to register on the system. This also includes registration of all the bank accounts of various agencies. Once approved,
      the implementing agency
                                       the information flows to the banks through the CPSMS-Core Banking Solution interface and funds are transferred to the bank
      satisfactory?
                                       account of the agencies.
                                      Under the NBA process, funds are released from the Centre directly to the various state missions. Since these funds are routed
                                       outside the normal treasury process, internal control mechanisms are not adeq uately austere. To mitigate these risks of “off
                                       budget” fund transfer, NBA guidelines mandate the use of CPSMS for the release and monitoring of the funds. Under the SBM -G,
                                       though the central funds are to be routed through the state budget, the release of the funds would continue to be monitored through
                                       CPSMS.
                                      There is large             Central Government Following are the key  GoI releases the                     The funds from the Centre
                                       variation in proposed        funds are received     points:                        fund and sanction          will be routed through the
                                       budget, release and          in the month of May  The funds for SBM               letter is uploaded on      state budget and it will be
                                       actual expenditure for       or June every year.      flow from GoI                MDWS. Funds are            the responsibility of the
                                       the last two years.          Unlike Central           through                      first transferred to       state to release both the
                                       Most of the                  Government funds         GoRtoZillaParishad,          the Finance                centre and the state’s share
                                       expenditure is               which are released       Panchayat Samiti             Department of the          to OSWSM within a
                                       undertaken from the          in the beginning of      and Gram                     State.                     stipulated time frame. The

                                                                                    54
Item                                                                States
                   CG                    MP                      RJ                        WB                        Odisha
         balances from          year, state              Panchayat and             The release of          release of central funds by
         previous years.        government funds         ultimately to               central funds by the   the state will be monitored
        The release of         are released on          beneficiaries. The          state will be          by Govt of India through
         funds to the           quarterly basis. The     channels consists of        monitored by Govt      CPSMS. Based on the
         Blocks/GPs is          fact that unutilized     both Treasury and           of India through       requirement, funds are
         based on demands       funds exist in the       Off-Treasury                CPSMS                  allocated to the districts
         raised and             bank accounts of         systems.                  The department          that are the executing
         utilization            Gram Panchayat          The funds are               raises a request for   agencies under the
         certificates           points towards the       received from GoI           funds to the Finance   programme.
         submitted. There       fact that adequacy       in 2 instalments.           Department. The
         is very little         of funds for project     First instalment is         budget cell of PRD
         correlation to the     implementation is        received in June-           raises an e-
         Plan. Utilization      not a challenge.         July and second             requisition to the
         certificates are      Funds are made           instalment is               Finance Department
         submitted by the       available to states      received only after         through e-bantan.
         GP to the blocks.      by the Central           60% expenditure           Once approved, it is
                                Government on the        has been                    then forwarded to
                                basis of utilization     accomplished.               Pay & Accounts
                                in previous years.      At state level, the         Office. The printout
                                Central Government       budget is submitted         is generated & bill
                                monitors the             to the Finance              is prepared.
                                utilization of funds     Department,               The cheques are
                                through online MIS       Rajasthan and               drawn and issued to
                                maintained on the        approval is taken for       WBSRDA
                                website of Ministry      the fund that is to be      including the state
                                of Water Supply          released to the             share.
                                and Sanitation.          districts. The funds      Then the funds are
                                                         are then released to       transferred to the
                                                         the districts              districts and finally
                                                         personal deposit           to the Blocks who
                                                         account through            are the implementing
                                                         treasury of the            agencies under the
                                                         Finance                    programme.
                                                         Department. Funds
                                                         are transferred to
                                                         GPs in the bank
                                                         accounts maintained
                                                         for the programs
                                                         and schemes. Funds
                                               55
                  Item                                                                               States
                                                  CG                        MP                    RJ                       WB                            Odisha
                                                                                           to beneficiaries are
                                                                                           transferred through
                                                                                           GPs’ bank accounts.
4.4   What are the arrangements for  Multi-year programs like SBM-G involve framing of perspective plans (called Project Implementation Plan or PIP) by the states.
      managing multi-year              Under SBM-G, a National Scheme Sanctioning Committee (NSSC) has been given the mandate to approve the PIPs. PIPs were
      programs? How are unused         also required to be framed under the erstwhile NBA program
      budget allocations treated?
                                     Under SBM (G), at the centre and at the state level, budget will lapse after the end of the financial year. However money parked
                                       in bank accounts outside the Pay and Accounts/ treasury system is allowed to be carried forward to the next year.
                                     Allocation of funds is                             Even as SBM is a          The unused budget        The unused budget
                                      not in line with the                                 multi-year program,       allocations is             allocations is transferred to
                                      proposed AIPs for the                                Multi-year planning       transferred to the         the next year
                                      districts. There are                                 is not done for SBM       next year                AIPs are prepared every
                                      very little linkages                                 (G). The unused          AIPs are prepared          year and PIP for the state
                                      between the fund                                     budget allocations        every year and PIP         under SBM (G) is under
                                      requirement as per                                   are transferred to        for the state under        preparation
                                      the AIP and the funds                                the next year             SBM (G) is under
                                      allocated from the                                                             preparation
                                      Centre& the State.
5.0                                                               Internal Control (including Internal Audit)
5.1   Is there an internal control      The internal control rules and procedures for the Program are based on (i) codified forms of accounting and financial rules and (ii)
      system at the Program level         administrative rules and regulations as applicable for central government
      for which management takes
                                        The General Financial Rules (GFRs), Delegation of Financial Power Rules (DFPRs), Treasury Rules, Receipt & Payment Rules
      full responsibility?
                                          Procedures provides the core of internal control procedures and systems.
                                        At the same time internal control systems in the ministries and departments is also bound by Acts of Parliament such as FRBM,
                                          directions of Parliamentary Committees, and guidelines given by Central Vigilance commission (C.V.C).
                                        In addition there is internal audit team within each Ministry working under Chief Controller of Accounts but responsible to the
                                          Secretary of the concerned Ministry.
                                        Apart from these measures, directives and circulars issued by Ministry of Finance from time to time to the ministries and
                                          departments for strengthening internal controls and expenditure management.
                                        There is an internal       The internal control  The internal control  The regulatory             The regulatory environment
                                         audit department at         system does not           system does not         environment for the     for the state is defined by a
                                         the ZP which is             sufficiently focus on     sufficiently focus on   state is defined by a   set of rules which include
                                         responsible for             monitoring                monitoring              set of rules which
                                                                                                                                               the Odisha General
                                         internal audit of all       utilization of            utilization of          include the West
                                                                                                                                               Financial Rules (OGFR),
                                                                                    56
                  Item                                                                                 States
                                                 CG                        MP                       RJ                     WB                          Odisha
                                        programs of                expenditure and link     expenditure with         Bengal Financial         Odisha Treasury Code,
                                        ZP/JP/GP. The major        it with physical         physical progress of     Rules, West Bengal       Odisha Service Code, and
                                        function of this           progress of projects     development              Treasury Rules,          Delegation of Finance.
                                        department is to           because of three         projects because of      Delegation of
                                                                                                                                              These rules are
                                        oversee the accounts       main reasons – (i)       three main reasons –     Financial Power
                                        and conduct audit at       accounting of            (i) accounting of        Rules. These rules       supplemented from time to
                                        the block & GP level.      release of funds         release of funds         are supplemented         time by departmental
                                        On an average around       upto Panchayat           upto and by              from time to time        orders/ notifications/
                                        ten audit officers are     Samiti level is          Panchayat Samiti         by departmental          guidelines as may be
                                        appointed for each         treated as               level is treated as      orders/                  required.
                                        block. Internal audit      expenditure rather       expenditure rather       notifications/
                                        reports on the GPs         than actual              than actual              guidelines as may
                                        are sent to the CEO        expenditure or           expenditure or           be required.
                                        Janpad/ZP. The             spending, (ii) cash      spending, (ii) cash
                                        accounts of GPs are        basis and single         basis and single
                                        examined & audited         entry system of          entry system of
                                        by the Department          accounting and (iii)     accounting and (iii)
                                        auditor from the           focus more on            focus more on
                                        Block level.               achievement of           achievement of
                                                                   outputs under a          outputs under a
                                                                   Programme rather         Programme rather
                                                                   than outcomes of         than outcomes of
                                                                   the expenditure /        the expenditure /
                                                                   funds.                   funds.

5.2   Are there effective cash flow    In 2006, Govt of India had come out with a system called Modified Cash Management system for a limited number of Ministries.
      planning, management, and         The focus was to (i) seek greater evenness in budget expenditure (ii) reduce the rush of expenditure during the last quarter (iii)
      monitoring arrangements?          monitor the expenditure pattern and (iv) reduce the tendency of parking of funds. The departments/Ministries are required to
                                        come up with a Monthly Expenditure Plan (MEP) based on which Quarterly Expenditure Allocation (QEA) are prepared.
                                        Ministries cannot issue cheques beyond what is allocated under QEA without taking permission from Ministry of Finance. This
                                        will help the government to estimate its cash balances and plan its borrowing requirements. Since 2012-13, the concept of MEP
                                        and QEA has been extended to cover all Demands for Grants which has helped the Govt of India to time the borrowings based on
                                        cash flow position

                                       There is an internal      Cash flow plan          Funding for the         There is no system      There is no system of cash
                                        audit department at        detailing the timing     Program is provided      of cash flow             flow planning, management
                                        the ZP which is            and quantum of           in the GoR budget        planning,                and monitoring

                                                                                   57
Item                                                                States
                CG                         MP                     RJ                      WB                         Odisha
       responsible for            cash flow during the    under social &            management and         arrangements.
       internal audit of all      course of project is    sanitation sector         monitoring            Unspent balances are lying
       programs of                not prepared. SBM       under a separate          arrangements.          with district and block level
       ZP/JP/GP. The major        guidelines however      budget line. This is     Unspent balances       authorities. Recently block
       function of this           do provide details      as per the practice       are lying with the     level authorities have been
       department is to           on how funds will       of GoR, wherein it        district and block     asked to surrender
       oversee the accounts       be distributed upto     creates separate          level authorities      unutilized money to
       and conduct audit at       the village level and   budget lines for                                 districts office.
       the block & GP level.      also provides           external funding.
       On an average around       information on          The Bank’s funding
       ten audit officers are     retention of funds at   shall flow to GoI
       appointed for each         different levels.       and then through
       block. Internal audit     The funds are           GoR Treasury and
       reports on the GPs         disbursed to            eventually -
       are sent to the CEO        districts as per the    alongside GoR’s
       Janpad/ZP. The             AIP. Districts          budgetary allocation
       accounts of GPs are        transfer the funds to   for the Program to
       examined & audited         GPs on the basis of     District and Block
       by the Department          demand and              Offices– shall be
       auditor from the           progress of work        disbursed to various
       Block level.               achieved by the         agencies
                                  GPs.                    implementing the
                                 Monitoring of funds     Program. The state
                                  is not robust at the    budget is generally
                                  GP level as the bank    approved by the
                                  accounts of GP are      State Legislature
                                  outside the purview     before
                                  of SWSSM.               commencement of
                                 Monitoring of fund      the financial year on
                                  utilization is based    April 1 of each year.
                                  on utilization
                                  certificates that are
                                  prepared at village
                                  level and reviewed
                                  at block level




                                                  58
                   Item                                                                                     States
                                                      CG                         MP                      RJ                         WB                          Odisha
5.3   Are there effective payroll           The internal control system ensures that the changes in personnel records are reflected in the payroll.
      controls at the Program level?        There exists a continuous process of reconciliation for the payroll data with the previous month’s payroll, supported by full
      Are payroll records reconciled         documentation for all changes made to personnel records each month at the level of departments and ministries.
      to human resource records             Regular update on changes in personnel details and payrolls are also reflected in the service books of the personnel
       (“the nominal roll”)? Is there       The Budget Account Section of MoF also maintains the payroll and the personnel records of staff from various line
       a strong system of payroll            Ministries/Department which forms the basis of salary expenditure. The figures are updated in August on the basis of inputs
       audit to identify control             received from various Ministries /Department which are reflected in the revised estimates.
       weaknesses and/or ghost              The Pay Research Unit of Department of Expenditure also maintains a database of government employees.
       workers?                             According to the Central Government rules, there is a need of payroll audit on an annual basis by Ministries. Internal audit section
                                             is required to carry out this exercise. However, the payroll audit is not effective and there have been instances of ghost workers as
                                             pointed out in CAG reports.
                                            Under SBM (G), the staffs are hired on a contractual basis as the nature of the job is technical. The involvement of in-house
                                             resource under the program is very limited, as such the risk relating to weak payroll control and ghost employees is minimal.
                                           Payroll Controls –          The payroll for         The payroll for           Attendance registers  Attendance registers are
                                            effective payroll            SBM (G) is               SBM (G.) is                 are being                being maintained at District
                                            controls are in place        particularly for         particularly for            maintained at            and Block level and signed
                                            at the State and the         CCDU department          CCDU department             District and Block       on daily basis by the higher
                                            District level for the       within SBM. 2% of        within SBM. 2% of           level and signed on      authority.
                                            staff hired by the           the project cost is      the project cost is         daily basis by the     There is no such payroll
                                            State Government/            related to               related to                  higher authority.        audit at District/ Block
                                            District                     administrative           administrative            There is no such          level.
                                            administration for the       expenditure which        expenditure which           payroll audit at
                                            program. The payroll         includes Salary. No      includes Salary. No         District/ Block
                                            is automated and             ghost workers were       ghost workers were          level.
                                            linked to the treasury       identified for the       identified for the
                                            for salary payments.         program                  program

5.4   Is there an adequate system of     The General Financial Rules gives the framework of asset management at Central Government level. Rule 186 to Rule 202 deals
      control over non-payroll            with various aspects of inventory and asset management which the includes the following:
      expenditure (including a            o Rule 187: Receipt of goods and materials from private suppliers
      robust asset management
                                          o Rule 188. Receipt/issue of goods and materials from internal divisions of the same organization
      system)?
                                          o Rule 189. Custody of goods and materials
                                          o Rule 190. Lists and Accounts
                                          o Rule 192.-(1) Physical verification of Fixed Assets (2) Verification of Consumables and (3) Procedure for verification
                                          o Rule 195. Transfer of charge of goods, materials etc.
                                          o Rule 196. Disposal of Goods
                                          o Rule 197. Modes of Disposal
                                                                                        59
                  Item                                                                                 States
                                                CG                          MP                       RJ                       WB                           Odisha
                                        o Rule 198. Disposal through Advertised Tender
                                        o Rule 199. Disposal through Auction
                                        o Rule 200. Disposal at scrap value or by other modes
                                      The internal audit is required to report regarding compliance of these Rules. Apart from these Rules, a Manual on Policies and
                                        Procedures for Purchase of Goods has also been framed to give more operational clarity.
                                      Non-payroll               2% of the project         2% of the project        The majority of          The majority of expenditure
                                       expenditure – the           cost is related to        cost is related to        expenditure under         under the program is
                                       non-payroll                 administrative            administrative            the program is            ‘Payment made to NGO’.
                                       expenditure relevant        expenditure which         expenditure which         ‘Payment made to         Once the construction work
                                       to the program is           includes Salary. IEC      includes Salary. IEC      RSM’.                     is completed by NGO,
                                       explained in detail in      activities are            activities are           Once the                  utilisation certificate is
                                       the procurement             separately budgeted       separately budgeted       construction work is      submitted by the NGO
                                       section of this report      in the AIPs as per        in the AIPs as per        completed by RSM,         which is then verified on
                                                                   the priorities            the priorities            utilisation certificate   sample basis and payment is
                                                                   decided at the State      decided at the State      is submitted by the       released thereafter. So there
                                                                   level by                  level by                  RSM which is then         exists a system of control
                                                                   CCDU/PRD.                 CCDU/PRD.                 verified on sample        over payment to NGOs
                                                                 These expenditures        These expenditures        basis and payment is      under the program.
                                                                   are part of AIPs and      are part of AIPs and      released thereafter.
                                                                   are monitored             are monitored             So there exists a
                                                                   through review            through review            system of control
                                                                   meetings. However         meetings. However         over payment to
                                                                   the Minutes of these      the Minutes of these      RSMs under the
                                                                   meetings are not          meetings are not          program.
                                                                   available in public       available in public
                                                                   domain nor made           domain nor made
                                                                   available                 available.
5.5   Is a robust asset management   As per Rule 190 of GFR, suitable item wise lists and accounts are to be kept on the basis of prescribed formats. The nature of the
      system in place?               formats depends upon the type of assets as mentioned below:
                                     o Fixed Assets such as plant, machinery, equipment, furniture, fixtures etc. in the Form GFR-40
                                     o Consumables such as office stationery, chemicals, maintenance spare parts etc. in the Form GFR-41.
                                     o Library books in the Form GFR 35
                                     Registers are created on the basis of these formats to create a functional asset management system.
                                      There is a high           There is minimal          There is minimal         There is minimal         There is minimal asset
                                       reliance on the UCs         asset creation under      asset creation under      asset under SBM           under SBM (G). The asset
                                       for record of toilet        SBM (G) except for        SBM (G) except for        (G). The asset            primarily consists of the
                                       construction at the         the toilets which are     the toilets which are     primarily consists of     office furniture.

                                                                                   60
                 Item                                                                                    States
                                                 CG                           MP                       RJ                       WB                            Odisha
                                        GP/JP level. The              owned by                  owned by                  office furniture.
                                        maintenance of assets         beneficiaries and         Beneficiaries and
                                        register is weak for          State has no              State has no
                                        the program. The              ownership rights on       ownership rights on
                                        details of assets             IHHLs. The                IHHLs. The
                                        records/ construction         Program                   Program
                                        records are detailed in       expenditures focus        expenditures focus
                                        the procurement               more on the               more on the
                                        section of this report        expenditure on            expenditure on
                                                                      disbursements The         disbursements The
                                                                      asset primarily           asset primarily
                                                                      consist of the office     consist of the office
                                                                      furniture which is        furniture which is
                                                                      under the purview         under the purview
                                                                      of Department of          of Department of
                                                                      Panchayati Raj,           Panchayati Raj,
                                                                      GoMP                      GoR
5.6   Are adequate monitoring and       The Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation has developed a comprehensive system of monitoring the implementation and
      evaluation arrangements in         impact of the programme. These include (i) Annual Monitoring Survey- The process for this will be initiated at national level and
      place for the Program?             focus on 3rd party monitoring (ii) Concurrent Monitoring- This involves monitoring through community level participation.
                                         NGOs/CSOs can also take part in concurrent monitoring. This apart, the program will have dedicated monitoring units at national,
                                         state and district level to monitor program implementation.
                                        Monitoring is also done through Periodical Progress Reports, Performance Review Committee meetings and through Vigilance
                                         and Monitoring Committees at the State/District Level.
                                        At national level, monitoring is done through IMIS database wherein the details regarding the status (both financial and physical
                                         progress) at all levels (GP, Block, District and State), are available. Panchayat level progress is reported (both physical and
                                         financial) by the State/ District/ Block/ GP. District level achievements of RSM/ PC/ SLWM/ IEC component are filled up by
                                         districts. Districts and State level approvals are done within the stipulated time frame and once approved the Monthly Progress
                                         Reports (MPR) are prepared and uploaded on website.
                                       There is adequate            CAG audit report        GoR has initiated        At the District level,  The frequency of review
                                        monitoring and                for the year 2011-12      measures to               monthly meetings          meetings were as follows:
                                        evaluation                    highlights non-           strengthen M&E.           with District           - Monthly review
                                        arrangements in place         compliance to             Concurrent                Magistrate,                  meetings at district level
                                        for this progress.            conduct of Social         monitoring                Additional District       - Review by Member
                                        Some of the                   Audits. Social Audit      mechanisms are also       Magistrate and               Secretary, OWSM at
                                        weaknesses in the             of construction and       been developed. In        District Project             least once in two months
                                        processes have been           development works         2012-13, Water,           Coordinators are          - Monthly meeting at
                                                                                    61
                   Item                                                                                  States
                                                  CG                         MP                        RJ                      WB                             Odisha
                                         detailed in the             was to be conducted       Sanitation &             done to review the             block level
                                         respective sections of      quarterly in each         Hygiene [WASH]           physical progress.        No third party verification
                                         this report                 financial year in the     evaluation was          At Block level,             currently being undertaken
                                                                     meeting of Gram           conducted by             monthly meetings            in Odisha.
                                                                     Sabha. Scrutiny of        UNICEF. PMUSSO           with BDO, Joint
                                                                     records of 116 GPs        is the implementing                                 No evidence of any
                                                                                                                        BDO and RSMs are
                                                                     of two districts          agency responsible       done with a focus on        periodical evaluation
                                                                     (Mandla&Sagar)            for M&E under the        monitoring and              studies that have been
                                                                     revealed that 107         institutional            resolving issues            conducted by any
                                                                     GPs (92 per cent)         arrangement              related to IHHL             institutions or
                                                                     had not conducted         designed for             construction. In            organizations.
                                                                     the Social Audit.         SBM/NBA. As              those meetings, the
                                                                                               PMUSSO is not            Karmadhakshya,
                                                                                               fully functional and     Jana Swastha-O-
                                                                                               the CCDU is              ParibeshSthayeeSam
                                                                                               performing the roles     ity and Assistant
                                                                                               of the PMUSSO            District Coordinator
                                                                                               there is a lack of       of the concerned
                                                                                               role clarity,            district are also
                                                                                               ownership and            present.
                                                                                               resource availability  The physical
                                                                                               within CCDU to           monitoring at the GP
                                                                                               carry out tasks          level is done by
                                                                                               related to M & E.        NirmanSahayaks
                                                                                                                        and
                                                                                                                        SwachhataDoots.
5.7   Is there regular review of the    The internal audit is conducted based on departmental codes and manuals issued by accounting departments. The internal audit
      internal control system in the      does not focus on systemic issues in helping the management in improving the efficiency and effectiveness of operations. In
      sector through an effective         general it focuses more on the transactional nature of the operations. An internal audit setup is present is each
      internal audit function? In
                                          Ministry/Department which works under the Chief Controller of Accounts but reports to the Secretary of the concerned ministry.
      response to audit findings?
                                          They focus mainly on the Principal Accounts Office, Pay and Accounts office and DDOs in Ministries/Department. Further, they
                                          are also involved in carrying out audit of various Schemes/programmes of various Ministries/Departments
                                        Internal audit             Internal audits are      There is no              No internal audit is     No internal audit is being
                                         coverage and                not conducted at the      provision for             conducted at State/        carried out at District and
                                         frequency is a              state level or ZP         internal audits,          District and Block         Block level as there is no
                                         concern. This is            level. Concurrent         concurrent audits,        level since there is       provision of internal audit
                                         mainly due to               audits are conducted      performance audits,       no mandate under           under the TSC/ NBA/
                                         inadequate staffing         at the block level        and procurement           the TSC                    SBM-G guidelines. Annual
                                                                                     62
                  Item                                                                                 States
                                                 CG                        MP                       RJ                        WB                           Odisha
                                        levels (including          (Janpad).                 reviews. The              /NBA/SBM-G                audit is to be conducted on
                                        vacancy in sanctioned      Concurrent audit          financial audits          guidelines.               an annual basis.
                                        posts). The follow up      reports are not           focus on 100%            Though the AG            Though the AG conducts a
                                        of audit findings is       available at ZP,          financial transaction     conducts a                transaction audit of the PRI
                                        weak and it was            therefore, we could       reviews and no risk-      transaction audit of      institutions periodically, it
                                        observed during the        not assess the            based or sampling         the PRI institutions      is often delayed and done
                                        field visits that there    nature, extent and        methods are used.         periodically, it is       multiple years at a time.
                                        was many of the audit      timing of control         M&E framework is          often delayed and         Thus, there is a need for a
                                        findings were yet to       testing conducted in      not yet framed.           done multiple years       continuous audit
                                        closed / there was         concurrent audit.        There are significant     at a time. Thus,          mechanism in the form of
                                        considerable delay in      Absence of internal       delays in financial       there is a need for a     an internal audit, especially
                                        responding to audit        audit is a leads to       audit completion          continuous audit          for SBM funds.
                                        findings.                  risks that material       and audit paras.          mechanism in the
                                                                   control deficiencies                                form of an internal
                                                                   may not be                                          audit, especially for
                                                                   identified and                                      SBM funds.
                                                                   corrected in time.
6.0                                                                             Program Audit
6.1   What are the current Program     Under SBM (G) guidelines, audit requirements of the Government of India and the CAG as decided from time to time needs to be
      audit arrangements (including      followed.
      scope, comprehensiveness,
                                       The Comptroller and Auditor General of India (CAG) is the supreme audit institution in India responsible for auditing the
      regularity, timeliness)?
                                         accounts of Central and States. It carries out financial audit, compliance audit, performance audit and IT audit. One of the main
                                         problems of these audit reports is that they are often delayed
                                       The accounts of the state mission and district missions are audited by a Chartered Accountant selected from a panel approved by
                                         the CAG, within six months of the close of the financial year in accordance with the General Financial Rules of the Government
                                         of India. The draft sample audit report is annexed in SBM (G) guideline and reporting is made in the prescribed format by the
                                         auditors.
                                       The State government  Financial audits are  Financial audits                 Annual audit is          Annual audits are done at
                                        has appointed              conducted by AG             shall be conducted       being done at all         State Mission and District
                                        Director/Commission        Office / LFAD.              by AG Office /           levels. Auditors          level, which is in
                                        er of local fund audit  There is no                   LFAD.                    have been appointed       accordance to the National
                                        (DLFA) as a primary        provision for              There is no              in all the districts to   level guideline. CAG audit
                                        auditor of accounts of     internal audits,            provision for            undertake external        is also done regularly.
                                        panchayat raj              concurrent audits,          internal audits,         audit. Apart from         Further Local Fund Audit
                                        institutions.              performance audits,         concurrent audits,       this, there exists an     of GPs is done by Finance
                                       The office of the          and procurement             performance audits,      auditor at                Department.
                                                                                   63
                  Item                                                                                   States
                                                  CG                         MP                       RJ                     WB                          Odisha
                                         Account General             reviews. The              and procurement         WBSRDA
                                         (Audit) (AG) is             financial audits          reviews. The            responsible for
                                         conducting audit of         focus on 100%             financial audits        compiling the data
                                         PRIs under Technical        financial transaction     focus on 100%           for all the districts
                                         Guidance and                reviews and no risk-      financial transaction   and express an
                                         supervision (TGS)           based or sampling         reviews and no risk-    opinion. Apart from
                                         module as notified          methods are used.         based or sampling       this there is a CAG
                                         (October 2011) by the       M&E framework is          methods are used.       audit and a Local
                                         State Government.           not yet framed.           M&E framework is        Fund Audit ( done
                                         The CAG of India          There are significant      not yet framed.         at the GP level)
                                         has the right to            delays in resolving      There are significant
                                         conduct such test           outstanding audit         delays in financial
                                         check of the accounts       paras.                    audit completion
                                         and to comment on                                     and audit paras
                                         and supplement the
                                         report of the statutory
                                         auditor, as he may
                                         deem fit under sub
                                         section (1) of section
                                         20 (1) of the CAG’s
                                         (Duties, Power and
                                         Conditions of
                                         service) Act 1971.
6.2   Has the Supreme Audit              The CAG is responsible for audit of all government departments and public and constitutional entities at the Centre and State
      Institution or other auditor           Government level. The nature of audit includes financial, compliance and performance audit of selected programmes. The
      appointed by the government            audit reports are examined by Public Accounts Committee (PAC) of the Parliament and recommendations are given which are
      recently performed any
                                             taken cognizance of by the Executive. However the PAC scrutinizes only a limited portion of the audit report. The Ministries/
      Program specific
      investigations/ audit reports?         Departments also submit an Action Taken Notes on paras not covered by PAC- but its role is largely to meet procedural
      If so, what were the key               requirements. There is no law that mandates the Ministries/Departments to submit their Action Taken Reports within a certain
      findings, and how are these            time period. As a result most of these reports are gross delayed.
      findings being followed up? Is    There has been no         Program specific          Program specific       AG audit has been       AG audit has been
      there evidence of changes in       sector (water &             investigations/audits     investigations/audits   conducted under the      conducted under the
      systems/processes at the           sanitation) /program        have not been             have not been           Department for           Department for various
      program level in response to       (NBA) specific audit        conducted.                conducted.              various schemes.
      audit findings?                                                                                                                           schemes. The latest AG
                                         in the last 3 years by      Financial audits are      Financial audits are    We have not come
                                         the CAG. However            conducted under           conducted under         across any program       audit of the program was
                                         local body audits           NBA. As SBM has           NBA. As SBM has         specific audit report.   conducted in November,

                                                                                   64
                  Item                                                                                  States
                                                 CG                         MP                       RJ                      WB                           Odisha
                                        (sample) are regularly      been launched only        been launched only                                 2014.
                                        (yearly) conducted by       in 2014-15 the first      in 2014-15 the first                              The audit findings included
                                        the CAG & DLFA              financial audit shall     financial audit shall                              observations related to
                                       There are large             be conducted after        be conducted after
                                                                                                                                                 short release of state
                                        numbers of                  the end of current        the end of current
                                        outstanding audit           financial year.           financial year.                                    matching share,
                                        objections and the        CAG audits for            CAG audits for                                     misappropriation of fund,
                                        resolution of audit         procurement and           procurement and                                    diversion of fund, non-
                                        objections is also          related expenditure       related expenditure                                adjustment of advances,
                                        very slow. During the       are done on a post-       are done on a post-                                pending UCs, discrepancy
                                        year 2012-13 around         facto basis and the       facto basis and the                                in MIS figures. The audit
                                        6,300 audit objections      responsibility for        responsibility for
                                                                                                                                                 observations are being
                                        were raised by LFA          putting up                putting up
                                        and during the same         preventive controls       preventive controls                                followed up at Mission
                                        period only 92              significantly rests       significantly rests                                office.
                                        objections were             with the State            with the State
                                        settled by the PRIs.        Government or             Government or
                                        At the end of 2012-13       respective                respective
                                        there were over 1,          departments. These        departments. These
                                        41,000 audit                reviews are part of       reviews are part of
                                        observations yet to be      financial audit and       financial audit and
                                        settled.                    not separately            not separately
                                                                    conducted.                conducted. .
6.3   Are there satisfactory           At Central level, the Public Accounts Committee (PAC) of the Parliament scrutinizes only limited portion of the audit report. The
      arrangements in place for the      PAC can summon any individual for hearing. Representatives from the ministries and departments appear before the PAC when
      legislative scrutiny of audit      matters relating to them are taken up. Generally, the examination of audit report by PAC takes more than 6 months and thereafter
      reports (timeliness, hearings
                                         the ministries take some time for submission of replies against queries. Thus the process of scrutiny of audit reports takes more
      on key findings, issuance of
      recommendations actions and        than 12 months to complete.
      implementation by the            Generally, the recommendations of the PAC are acted upon by the government.
      executive)?                      The CAG, through          Financial audits are  Financial audits are  Financial audits are  The audit of Accounts for
                                        the State Accountant        being conducted by        being conducted by       being conducted by        Odisha during 2011-12 was
                                        General (Audit),            AG Office / LFAD.         AG Office / LFAD.        AG Office. There          done on 9th March 2013
                                        conducts financial          There are delays          There are delays         are delays noticed in     which is way beyond the
                                        audits and                  noticed in conduct /      noticed in conduct /     the conduct /             guidelines as the audit
                                        performance and             completion of             completion of            completion of             needs to be done within six
                                        internal control            audits. However,          audits. However,         audits. However,          months of the close of
                                        reviews, covering all       there is no provision     there is no provision    there is no provision     financial year. It was also
                                        departments,                of concurrent audits,     of concurrent audits,    of concurrent audits,     noted that audit for 2013-
                                                                                   65
      Item                                                                      States
                        CG                         MP                         RJ                     WB                           Odisha
               government,                 internal audits, post-     internal audits, post-   internal audits and       14 was also pending as the
               autonomous bodies           procurement audits.        procurement audits.      post procurement          accounts were not yet
               and authorities, with       Social audits are          Social audits are        audits. Social audits     finalized at the District
               substantial                 being envisaged but        being envisaged but      are being envisaged       level, that lead to an overall
               government funding.         not yet conducted.         not yet conducted.       but not yet               delay in compilation of
               The reports are            The audit reports of      The audit reports of     conducted.                Accounts at Mission
               finalized and are           CAG/State AG are           CAG/State AG are                                   Office.
               tabled in the               placed to Public           placed to Public                                  Apart from this, there is no
               Legislature. The audit      Accounts                   Accounts                                           concurrent, internal and
               findings are                Committee of the           Committee of the                                   procurement audit.
               examined by a Public        State legislature for      State legislature for
               Accounts Committee          their review and           their review and
               of the Legislature that     comments.                  comments.
               issues
               recommendations and
               follows up on the
               action taken by the
               departments in
               response to the audit
               reports.
              The number of
               outstanding audit
               objection of PRIs
               included in the
               inspection reports of
               AG was 698 as of
               March 2014. It takes
               considerable amount
               of time to resolve
               audit queries, finalise
               audit comments, and
               submit comments to
               the legislature.
      Item                                                                    States
                       CG                          MP                        RJ                     WB                            Odisha
7.0                                                Planning and Budgeting



                                                            66
                   Item                                                                                   States
                                                  CG                           MP                      RJ                       WB                          Odisha
7.1   What is the relationship         Multi-year perspective in expenditure planning and budgeting has been lacking in India. It is maintained that the five year plans in
      between strategic plans, the     India provide the basis for a multi-year perspective for resource allocation. However, the economic planning and budget differ in
      budget, and medium-term          their scope and time span. While plans provide a conceptual framework by focusing on various sectors in the economy, the budget is
      financial planning?              more concerned with systems of control over the use of funds by government and pays more attention to financial aspects. Further,
                                       in the context of current budgetary practice, the link between the plan and the budget is weak. In the process of budget preparation
                                       the plan allocations are dispersed over various heads and sub-heads of expenditure.
                                        As per the SBM             Districts Water         Government of         Baseline completed –  Baseline completed in 2015 –
                                         guidelines, a 5 year        Supply and               Rajasthan has           on MDWS website           on MDWS website
                                         plan consisting of 5        Sanitation Mission       targeted              PIP not yet completed  PIP not updated to retrofit
                                         AIPs for the State is       (DWSSM) prepares         achievement of        AIP for 2015-16,           TSC to NBA program
                                         under preparation.          Project                  sanitation              uploaded on MDWS          guidelines
                                         The 5 year plan is          Implementation           coverage by             website                  AIP for 2014-15 and 2015-16
                                         based on the SBM            Plan (PIP,               October 2017, 2       AIP based on district      prepared
                                         (G) mission                 containing               years prior to the      level plans              AIPs have been prepared
                                         objectives and the          medium-term plan         National target.      Absence of block           without receiving the block/
                                         strategy for the            for next five years.  CCDU, PRD is              level AIPs in the         district level plans.
                                         program.                   DWSM also                responsible for         visited districts.       National budget based on
                                                                     prepares the             planning and          National budget            consolidated State AIPs
                                                                     Annual                   reviewing               based on consolidated
                                                                     Implementation           progress of             State AIPs
                                                                     Plan (AIP) for           sanitation
                                                                     district level. AIP is   activities at State
                                                                     not prepared on the      level under SBM
                                                                     basis of PIP.            with appropriate
                                                                                              IEC strategies.
7.2   Is the Program consistent with    Evidence shows State program objectives are consistent with the national development strategy;
      the national development          The funds allocated for the erstwhile Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan (NBA) at the national level are reflected in the Union Budget in
      strategy? Is it effectively        Demand for Grants Number 28, pertaining to Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation. The budget document also reveals that
      costed? Does it feed into the      routing of the funds through the State Plan started from 2014-15 budgets. No allocations through the state plan route were seen in
      national medium term               the earlier years, viz. 2012-13 and 2013-14. The total allocation under NBA for 2014-15 is INR 42,600 million.
      expenditure plans?
                                        A 5 year plan             The costing of          Program cost has  The PIP gives the      Odisha has not prepared any
                                         consisting of 5 PIPs       program is based on      been determined.   medium term             PIP under the erstwhile NBA
                                         for the State are          the gap between          Total program      perspective though it   since it was not able to
                                         under preparation.         Open Defecation          cost is Rs.        is not yet finalised.   complete the baseline survey
                                         The overall program        Status and the           102,243.17 lacs    Ideally the yearly      within time.
                                         cost is being prepared     existing status of       for Rajasthan.     AIPs are supposed to  All district level plans and
                                         as part of this            toilet coverage as      The program costs  dove- tail with PIP     state level AIPs are costed

                                                                                    67
Item                                                                  States
                CG                       MP                        RJ                    WB                        Odisha
       process. Detailed         per the baseline           are monitored       for convergence        The State AIP (2014-15) for
       activity wise costing     survey which was           through AIPs.       between planning and    Odisha was made though
       is being undertaken       conducted in 2012         The program costs   implementation          some of the districts failed to
       for each district.        and is subsequently        are determined on   though such             submit district level AIPs. In
                                 updated on ongoing         basis of the        convergences are        addition, AIPs for 2009-14
                                 basis. The present         requirements of     often quite weak.       were often prepared without
                                 percentage of              Panchayats and     All district level      obtaining Block AIPs.
                                 households not             Districts and       plans and state level
                                 having toilets in          finalised as per    AIPs are costed.
                                 Madhya Pradesh is          State priorities.  The districts have
                                 73.83%.                                        drafted the AIPs on
                                Yes, the overall                               the basis of
                                 program cost has                               assessment of IHHLs
                                 been determined on                             constructed and
                                 the basis of number                            target mentioned in
                                 of toilets required to                         Baseline Survey data,
                                 achieve open                                   which proves
                                 defecation free                                inadequacy in
                                 status. The total                              planning procedure.
                                 estimated cost of the
                                 project in Madhya
                                 Pradesh is Rs.
                                 1,70,288.99 Lakhs




                                                  68
