                                       102156 v5

APPENDIX 4: MoLG CAPACITY ASSESSMENT




                1
              Proposed Local Governance and Services Improvement Program (P148896)
                                              Technical Assessment
                                          MoLG Capacity Assessment
I. INTRODUCTION:

1. As part of the Technical Assessment for the proposed Local Governance and Services Improvement
   Program, a rapid capacity assessment was carried out for the Ministry of Local Government (MoLG),
   to assess MoLG current capacity for performing its mandated tasks and in particular supporting the
   VCs to deliver services. This would lead into capacity building and technical assistance activities
   needed to support the MoLG in carrying out its oversight role under the proposed LGSIP. The
   assessment was carried out to ensure that the MoLG has the capacity to provide overall support and
   guidance to LGUs targeted under the program to help them provide sustainable services to their citizens
   in accordance with predictable financing and GG principles The focus on the MoLG is necessitated by
   its mandate as confirmed in its Mission Statement “working on building the capacities of LGUs and
   enhancing their resources to enable them to achieve the welfare of their citizens/constituencies within
   the framework of the good local governance1”, and by the proposed LGSIP objectives. The assessment
   reviewed the MoLG’s implementation of its mandate, in general, but focused particularly on some of
   the directorates and units that are expected to play critical roles under the proposed LGSIP, including
   the following: (i) General Directorate of Joint Services Councils; (ii) General Directorate of Projects;
   (iii) General Directorate of Guidance and Monitoring; (iv) General Directorate of Urban Planning and
   Organization; (v) General Directorate of budgets; (vi) the Complaints Unit; and the Ministry of Finance
   Financial Controller (See Annex 1 for MoLG Organizational Structure).

II. SUMMARY:

2. For the proposed LGSIP, the following functions of MoLG are particularily critical:

        Perform a sound and transparent selection2 of VCs and JSCs that would qualify for the investment
         grant cycles, and submitting the selection for the LGSIP Program Committee’s approval through
         the Program Manager (MDLF3).

        Following the Program Committee’s approval, announcing to eligible VCs and JSCs the selection,
         eligibility criteria, financial allocations, and initial capacity building activities;

        Oversight; in terms of receiving and approving Annual Budgets from VCs and JSCs, in accordance
         with the Annual Budget Cycle which starts on November 1 of every calendar year;

        MoLG screening of minimum participatory annual capital investment planning requirements for
         VCs, and provision of capacity building to VCs in participatory annual capital investment planning;

1
  Ministry of Local Government Public Relations and Media Unit, 2013.
2
  According to the VC Annual Eligibility Assessments to be carried out on an annual basis, and the JSCs eligibility
assessment to be carried out in 2016 and in 2018 following the one already carried out in 2014 - 2015 during
Program preparation.
3
  Based on the assessment of the MoLG the MDLF confirms the final financial allocations to eligible LGUs and
submits the lists for the endorsement of the LGSIP Program Committee.

                                                          2
          MoLG support to the VCs that are eligible for implementing individual investments under
           Component I in all aspects of investment program cycle, including the review and approval of
           bidding documents, review of Operations and Maintenance (O&M) plans, providing periodic sight
           supervision, reviewing site reports, reviewing and approving contractors invoices (for the case of
           small VCs executing via JSCs), while making sure investment planning, execution, and operation
           are carried out in accordance with technical requirements/specifications (including procurement
           and financial management), in accordance with Annual Capital Investment Plans, and in
           accordance with sound environmental and social considerations.

          Preparation of indicative capacity building needs for non-eligible VCs and JSCs, and executing
           capacity building activities aiming at supporting non-eligible VCs and JSCs to to meet minimum
           eligibility requirements for investment funding under the LGSIP;

          Supporting physical planning activities for VCs, as needed;

          Supporting the improvement of VCs service delivery financial and technical capacity, through (i)
           the development and implementation of strategies, legal reform, and guidelines, including, but not
           limited to, a transparent system for the allocation of transportation tax to VCs, guidelines for
           developing VCs own source revenue, review of VCs’ and JSCs’ revenues and expenditure
           assignments to establish sustainable intergovernmental fiscal framework, guidelines for tariff
           structure of services, the application of GG Framework for joint service provision, and developing
           a revised policy directive for the consolidation of small, non-viable LGUs; and (ii) consequently,
           providing needed training to VCs and JSCs by the different MoLG departments.


3. The assessment of the MoLG confirmed overall the appropriateness in the selection of the MoLG from
   a technical soundness and a mandate4 perspective to provide guidance and support VCs, to meet LGSIP
   results. One particular strength of the MoLG is its capacity to branch out with directorates in the 11
   West Bank Governorate with 201 MoLG staff. (about 56% of total MoLG staff, with the average of 18
   staff per directorate5). The capacity assessment confirmed that in principle, the MoLG does not need to
   hire additional civil servants to support LGSIP, but may need to organize relocating some staff between
   the MoLG centrally and in the directorates, as needed, especially to make a more optimal use of more
   than 130 MoLG planners and civil engineers. It would also be essential for the MoLG to consider
   streamlining some of the responsibilities that offer a degree of overlap between the different MoLG
   Departments, including developing/reforming standards for processes that would clarify roles and
   responsibilities and speed up. The following sections of the assessment provide more details on this,
   including the following example: Contractor invoices are reviewed technically and financially two
   times, once by the District Directorate and once by the Directorate of Projects, and then reviewed
   financially two additional times, by the MoLG Finance Department, and then by the MoF Financial
   Controller, between submitting payment request to contractor and issuance of the check.

4. The MoLG may need to acquire the services of short term and long-term consultants to support LGSIP
   oversight activities and policy formulation, and to inform refinements in standards and procedures, to
   avoid any gaps. Capacity building and training would also be required focusing on certain areas where

4
    Basic Law of the Palestinian Authority and Local Authorities Law No. 1 of 1997
5
    MoLG Human Resource Development Strategy, 2014.

                                                        3
    the MoLG capacity is limited, for example, in management of consultancy and training contracts under
    Component III. The assessment also noted that coordination and sharing of experiences and knowledge
    between the MoLG Directorates and units is sub-optimal. A Program Committee is proposed to carry
    out overall program coordination tasks, which will comprise MoLG, MoF, and MDLF. To that end,
    there is a need to ensure sufficient level of technical coordination between the number of MoLG
    Directorate and units involved, to ensure LGSIP results are met.

5. The capacity assessment noted clear shortcomings that would require provision of technical assistance
   to the MoLG as part of the program, including some that could be provided under Component III of the
   proposed LGSIP. For instance, field visits to sampled directorates confirmed that key central-level GDs
   are mirrored in terms of staff and functions. This, in theory, would help decentralize and streamline the
   MoLG oversight and facilitate interaction with LGUs. In practice however, the assessment confirmed
   redundancy in the application of oversight mandated practices at the directorates as well as centrally.
   This could be streamlined under the proposed LGSIP, and the MoLG has already showed enthusiasm
   towards the proposals that would be detailed out in the Program Operations Manual in order to provide
   clear guidance to MoLG relevant staff.

6. Another key finding of the assessment confirmed that some of the MoLG GDs which traditionally
   received systematic and focused foreign technical assistance and capacity building activities are more
   advanced in terms of preparing their own strategies, as well as technical knowhow and staffing
   capacities, compared to other MoLG departments not receiving foreign aid attention. Therefore, the
   Pre-appraisal mission launched an exercise to be confirmed by Appraisal to map out on-going and
   future capacity building and technical assistance provided to the MoLG with the MoLG Human
   Resource Development Strategy and Departmental Training Plan for the years 2014 – 2017. Based on
   this exercise, it has been agreed that the MoLG would prepare a consolidated capacity building plan
   for the first year of LGSIP implementation focusing on the MoLG’s mandated program oversight tasks,
   including specifying the sources of funding under the Government Program, and funding gaps which
   need to be covered under LGSIP. As such, the first annual capacity building plan, and hereto each
   successive annual/updated capacity building plan would optimally attempt to cover on a gradual,
   prioritized manner, a range of strategies, guidelines, and training (for MoLG and for LGUs) in support
   of the MoLG’s Strategic Framework for MoLG 2015 to 2017.

7. The assessment also confirmed that capacity building would be required for higher level oversight
   institutions to enable them to carry out the independent verification of results met by the MoLG and
   the MDLF, such as the State Audit Bureau, because the MoLG’s GD of Guidance and Monitoring,
   traditionally tasked with carrying out independent technical/financial, and administrative audit on
   MoLG and LGUs affairs, is not eligible to carry out independent verification tasks under the proposed
   LGSIP, due to conflict of interest, since it is a GD within the MoLG. The State Audit would also benefit
   from capacity building support to carry out “value for money” audits in VCs and JSCs.

8. The green boxes in subsequent sections of the assessment provide more details on recommendations
   specific to MoLG assessed departments.


III. REVIEW OF MOLG, AND MOLG KEY DIRECTORATES MANDATE

                                                     4
A.         The mandate of the Ministry of Local Government:
9. The MoLG is “responsible for the local authorities is Palestine. It is in charge of developing their
    capacities and improving their resources so as to better provide for the wellbeing of citizens within the
    framework of good governance”6. The Palestinian Authority adopts a ‘Federal System for Local
    Government’, where the central government is the national body, which nevertheless delegates some
    authorities and responsibilities to the local authorities. Those responsibilities are outlined in the Local
    Government Act No. 1 of 1997.
10. The MoLG was established in May 1994 to support the statehood agenda of the, then, 1-year old
    Palestinian Authority. Primary on the PA’s agenda for the MoLG was local infrastructure expansion.
    Upon the establishment of the MoLG, the number of Local Government Units has increased between
    1994 and 1997 from 139, to 3507. The current number of LGUs (municipalities and Village Councils)
    is 377, including 241 VCs.

11. The following are the general responsibilities of the MoLG set at the establishment of the MoLG: (i)
    developing laws, regulations and instruction that support the development and improvement of public
    services; (ii) Monitoring and supervising the enforcement of laws, regulations, and instructions
    concerning local authorities; (iii) Organizing the Ministry’s policies and strategic plans and monitoring
    the implementation of these plans; (iv) providing local authorities with all the necessary information
    on their responsibilities and functions; (v) endorsing local governments’ budgets; (vi) monitoring the
    local authorities work and ensuring their abidance with the applicable laws, regulations, and
    instructions; (vii) providing guidance to local authorities in setting designs and specifications for local
    infrastructure; (viii) Assisting in providing sources of funding for vital local projects that are beyond
    the respective local budget; (ix) and investigating administrative performance of local authorities and
    guide them towards increasing their productivity and efficiency.

12. The Ministry’s first 5 year strategic plan (2010 – 2014) was developed in 2009 in which the MoLG
    specified its vision, mission, strategic values and regional strategies. As of 2010, the vision statement
    of the MoLG has been stated as follows: “Good local governance able to achieve sustainable
    development with effective community participation”. In the 2010 – 2014 Strategic Plan, the MoLG’s
    goals evolved as follows:

               a. Empowering the local government units to build up effective institutional capacities;
               b. Promoting the Ministry’s capacities in planning, guidance, and monitoring to better lead
                  the LG sector;
               c. Promoting the concept of partnership between LGUs and the private and public sectors, in
                  order to generate local development, and to enhance the fiscal autonomy of LGUs.

13. The Ministry has further devised its strategic directions for LGUs support as follows:
           a. Increasing the level of decentralization in local government;
           b. Institutionalizing community participation in LGUs;



6
    Ministry of Local Government Public Relations and Media Unit.
7
    Background Note on Villages in the West Bank, the World Bank, 2014.

                                                         5
            c. Stimulating the concept of partnerships with the private sector (PPPs) and with civil society
               organizations, to achieve sustainable development.

14. To achieve   the above, the MoLG has devised its strategic directions for its own development, as
    follows:
            a.   Promoting formulation of policies and planning in the Ministry;
            b.   Developing and adopting human resource policies in the Ministry;
            c.   Strengthening capacities of the ministry staff in local and regional planning;
            d.   Strengthening the ministry capacity in management, monitoring and evaluation of
                 functions and projects;

                     Key Recommendations – Assistant Deputy Minister for Directorates Affairs


 In addition to the Directorates/Units met, the Assistant Deputy Minister for Directorates Affairs was met and the
 following were key recommendations in which the proposed LGSIP is fully consistent with, and aims to support:

    Strong incentives are needed for joint service delivery;
    Strong support is required for reforming the Good Governance framework of joint services provision, and
     any associated training and capacity building for improved good governance;
    Reform in the Local Government fiscal transfers, including standardizing the allocation for, and predictability
     of the transportation tax transfers to LGUs, will contribute greatly to eliminating the net lending problem;
    Legal reform is required to enable the Government system to deal with amalgamation structures that have
     mixed results on the ground or where problems between the members of the amalgamation exist;
    Standardization of criteria used for approving and implementing local governments investments that are
     financed under the MoLG’s “transferable” budget line (ILS 100 m in 2014), and subject to the discretion of
     the Prime Minister.
            e. Enhancing the appropriate working conditions for its staff, to achieve effectiveness and
               better performance;
            f. Providing a suitable working environment which takes into consideration gender aspects;
            g. Development electronic and automatic operational system.

15. While the assessment is not intended to go into the details of the Ministry’s strategic directions and
    assess progress made to date in meeting those directions, the following section provides a more detailed
    review of the daily functions and capacities of some of the key MoLG Directorates and Units. It is
    worth noting however that the MoLG has already gone through a recent strategy development exercise
    which has resulted in the development of the MoLG Strategic Framework for 2015 – 2017. More details
    on the evolvement of the MoLG’s strategic directions and its priorities for the LG sector are under the
    Technical Assessment Document.

B.      Directorate for Joint Services Councils
16. This Directorate administers joint local services delivery structures, affairs, and incentives for joint
    cooperation among LGUs, and was established specifically to push for the MoLG’s amalgamation
    policy by supporting joint establishments for planning and development that would eventually evolve
    into regional service clusters or amalgamated municipalities. In essence, the Directorate aims to support
    the realization of effective joint services councils that contribute to achieving sustainable local and
    regional development. The Directorate derives its legal mandate from the Local Governments Act No.

                                                         6
    15 which gives H. E. Minister of Local Government the authority to establish JSCs for the management
    of joint local services and
    infrastructures for LGUs.          Directorate of Joint Services Councils – Main Recommendations

17. Since its establishment, the
                                        The following activities where support would be envisaged:
    Directorate       has     been
    promoting the benefits of             (i) Training for JSCs (qualified and non-qualified) on Good
    joint cooperation through                   Governance framework for joint service provision (translation of
                                                the GG framework and elements, dissemination and training);
    public awareness activities,
                                          (ii) Revising the draft JSCs Bi-law taking into consideration the GG
    and by directing donor                      framework;
    assistance investments in             (iii) Providing additional training in West Bank to LGUs on the Solid
    support of financing large                  Waste and water Tariff Structure manuals (already existing
    infrastructure projects in JSC              manuals);
    areas. The Directorate is the         (iv)  Development of standards and guidelines on tariff structure for
                                                standard jointly provided local services (other than water and
    MoLG’s body responsible
                                                solid waste);
    for screening priorities for          (v) Development of manual for solid waste landfill construction.
    investments in JSCs while             (vi) Training, in cooperation with the MoLG Budgets Department on
    the      MoLG’s         budget              the new budget template for JSCs
    Directorate       has     been
                                          It is important to note however, that the PA should be discouraged
    receiving annual budget               from endorsing the allocation of transportation tax funds to Solid
    statements      from      JSCs        Waste JSCs, as those critical funds are needed for supporting critical
    beginning with the year               services financing for small LGUs, and because solid waste
    2013. The Directorate is also         management is an income-generating activity.
    in charge of providing
    technical training to JSC staff (in house and outsourced, which has so far not been systematic, and also
    tended to be limited to certain sectors that were heavily donor-supporting, such as solid waste
    management. Currently, there are 92 JSCs of which 82 are in the West Bank 8 - 55 of these were
    deemed active JSCs.

18. On the legal aspects, the Directorate proposes elections dates for amalgamation applications and
    reviews the legal requirements and fulfillments of amalgamation applications, and provides
    recommendations to H. E. Minister of Local Government on establishment of new JSCs and dissolving
    troubled or non-performing ones. It is worth noting however that rarely has the Directorate put its
    mandate on dissolving non-performing JSCs into effect. The JSCs Assessment mentioned earlier aims
    at providing the Ministry with sufficient data to screen for and make corrective measures with non-
    performing JSCs.

19. With systematic and focused donor support, the Directorate has instilled a number of key reform
    initiatives in the past few years, including the following: (i) developed an Amalgamation Policy and an
    Amalgamation Manual (with support from MDLF); (ii) developed the National Solid Waste
    Management Strategy in 2013, which confirmed that only one JSC for solid waste management should

8
 Joint Services Councils Assessment, 2014 - 2015. Out of the 90 JSCs, the Assessment indicated that X JSCs are
currently active, and in accordance with 9 good governance indicators, the JSCs that have been found to be viable,
and would be eligible for the first LGSIP program cycle are X.

                                                        7
     exist in each of the 11 West Bank Governorates; (iii) developed the Joint Services Councils Strategy
     for 2014 – 2018, in 2013, which identified the types of JSCs as single services and multiple-service
     JSCs, and empathized the financial, technical, and legal empowerment of JSCs to provide local services
     for small LGUs. (iv) The Directorate is also currently revising the JSCs bylaw of 2006. (v) A new
     budget template has also been prepared for JSCs as a first step towards making annual budget submittal
     for JSCs mandatory, as in the case for Municipalities and Village Councils (VCs).

20. The MoLG also proposed a list of JSCs (those for solid waste management) to the Council of Ministers
    to approve an annual predictable allocation of transportation tax to those JSCs. (vi) As part of the
    preparation of the proposed LGSIP, the World Bank and BTC funded jointly an assessment of the Joint
    Services Councils (JSCs) in the West Bank and Gaza in full coordination with the Directorate. Some
    of the key outputs of the assessment were: (i) the development of an electronic database of all active
    and inactive JSCs in the West Bank and Gaza with up to date and comprehensive data on staffing,
    membership, service coverage, and contact information. Prior to this assessment, a database of all JSCs
    did not exist; (ii) development of a ranking system for active JSCs based on the principles of Good
    Governance (GG) for joint service provision; and (iii) development of GG framework to be the basis
    for formalizing agreements between LGUs for joint services, and for further adoption by existing JSCs
    as internal bylaws. The GG framework is currently being proposed for adoption by the MoLG as one
    of the disbursement triggers under the proposed LGSIP. The Directorate has 7 staff out of which 2 are
    supported on project basis.

21. Future Plans: The Directorate is currently envisaging establishing a specialized solid waste
    management training center at Al-Minya landfill site, in cooperation with the higher Joint Services
    Council for Solid Waste Management for Hebron and Bethlehem. The initiative is supported through
    Japanese funding but the JCSs Directorate will develop the training and curriculum.

C.       Directorate of Projects
22. The MoLG describes this Directorate as one of the most important Directorates, being in charge of
    providing infrastructure services to LGUs. Theoretically, the Directorate consists of the following
    Departments who seem to have a number of overlapping tasks: (i) Program Design and Coordination
    Department, in charge of maintaining a database of LGU priorities, and prepares proposals for funding
    assistance based on priorities submitted by LGUs; (ii) Bids and Contracts Department, assists LGUs in
    preparing technical specifications and bids, distributes standard bidding documents to LGUs, reviews
    bids prepared by LGUs, and participates in tender committees. This Department also has a record of
    qualitied consulting firms; (iii) The Supervision and Follow Up Department participates in developing
    standards and templates for projects and follow up, in coordination with relevant Authorities, maintains
    a record of agreements/contracts for implementation of investments in LGUs, collects and analyzed
    data related to contracts implementation from District Offices, maintains a data base of on-going and
    completed investments financed by the PA and donor-funded infrastructure investments in LGUs,
    carries out field supervision and technical oversight, reviews variation orders, recommends handover
    committees at LGUs and attends/certifies handover of completed contracts for infrastructure and goods
    to the LGUs authority; (iv) Infrastructure Department assists the LGUs to improve LGU infrastructure
    sectors, such as roads, water and waste water, electricity, and heavy machinery, through maintaining a
    database of minimum specifications for local infrastructure, and also monitors contracts progress and

                                                     8
      carries out field visits, as
      needed.      In general, the                         Directorate of Projects – Main Recommendations
      Directorate of Projects has
      been monitoring the technical
      compliance       of    capital            The staff of the Directorate of Projects is anticipated to participate in
      investments and LGUs grants               oversight under the proposed LGSIP in terms of overseeing the :
      that are financed through the                 (i)       The Ministry has 136 engineers and planners in total who
      MoF, and a number of                                    should be properly utilized to support the overall
      bilaterally financed donor                              oversight role of the Ministry under LGSIP – this is
      interventions in LGUs.                                  especially that none of VCs in the West Bank has a full
                                                              time Engineer;
                                                    (ii)      the new public procurement law would require launching
23. In practice, with only 9 staff at                         of training sessions for MoLG staff and all LGUs, based
    the Directorate in the West                               on the forms and instructions currently being prepared
    Bank (all engineers sitting at                            and to be ready by the end of August, 2015;
    the Headquarters), the average           (iii)            The Directorate has prepared a User Manual for
    number of staff per given                                 reviewing contractors’ invoices which is currently
                                                              reviewed by the Directorate of Legal Affairs. It is
    department is 2 staff. In                                 proposed to review the Manual prior to its finalization for
    addition, due to the limited                              any needed changes to support LGSIP implementation;
    number of staff at the                   (iv)             The Directorate needs to adopt minimum requirements
    Directorate, it is understood                             for Strategic and Development Planning, and for Annual
    that each staff is assigned a                             Investment Planning, to be prepared by LGSIP Appraisal
                                                              (refer to Step 1 in the below table for detail on the current
    regional area within the West
                                                              requirements);
    Bank (North, South, and                  (v)              It is recommended that the MoLG revisits its procedures
    Middle), carrying out a mix of                            for site supervision carried out by the Projects
    the responsibilities of the 5                             Department, by determining the number of minimum site
    different departments. As such,                           visits per contract with the contract amount.
    the departmental boundaries
    within this Directorate are blurred. With those staff work closely the MoLG District Directorates’
    engineers (called supervising engineers who report administratively to the Director General of a given
    District Directorate but report technically to the Director General of the Projects Directorate).
    According to the Director General of Projects Directorate, the Directorate manages implementation of
    local governments investments totaling around 27% of the developmental budget that the MoLG
    received from the MoF for the fiscal year 2014, which was ILS55 million. In addition, according to the
    MoLG, by the end of 2010 the value of donor and MoF-funded infrastructure projects supporting LGUs
    that were directly supervised through the Directorate has totaled around US$95 million, cumulatively.

The 5 Steps of Oversight:
24. The following description briefly summarizes the role of the Projects Directorate in the prioritization
    and oversight of implementation of local service delivery investments9:




9
    Key informant interviews. February, 2015.

                                                             9
       Step                         Description                                      Comments
1   Project       There are different tools that the Directorate    On the strategic plan, field visits revealed the
    Concept       uses for reviewing proposals and projects         degree of looseness in this requirement, as
    Review        concepts, including a database of LGUs            many small LGUs do not have strategic plans.
                  priorities at the Projects Directorate that is
                  updated with input from the District              In addition, the MoLG’s implementation of
                  Directorates on an annual basis. The              pilots for strategic development and
                  Directorate also is in direct coordination with   investment planning under the developed
                  the District Offices who submit on a regular      SDIP-Light has so far produced mixed results,
                  basis proposals from LGUs. Minimum                and was deemed by some LGUs as complex.
                  requirements for the selection of a proposal      As such, the MoLG’s decision to adopt the
                  are the following: (i) Strategic Plan, (ii) LGU   SDIP-Light formally is pending further
                  Council decision on the justification for the     review of the tool. In the meantime, minimum
                  proposal/project, with proof of community         requirements for strategic development
                  participation. While a plus in favor of the       planning need to be developed for LGSIP.
                  selection process would be a commitment by
                  the LGU for its own contribution towards the      On the LGU Council decision, there is
                  total cost of the project.                        looseness in the community participation
                                                                    requirement. A public meeting with minutes
                                                                    and signatories is usually considered as
                                                                    evidence of community participation in the
                                                                    prioritization.

                                                                    LGU contribution towards the total cost of the
                                                                    proposed project is usually checked against
                                                                    the LGU’s budget, to determine the LGU’s
                                                                    capacity to meet its obligation.
2   Project       Project proposal/concept initially approved by    It is understood that at this stage, requirements
    Detailed      the Projects Directorate is consulted with the    for licensing from other PA institutions are
    Review        Directorate of Urban Planning (to check           also screened for by the MoLG Projects
                  compliance of the proposal with physical          Directorate and the LGU is referred to the
                  plan), and is reviewed internally for technical   appropriate government parties for licensing,
                  soundness.                                        through a recommendation through the
                                                                    District Offices.

                                                                    It is also understood that field visits to the
                                                                    proposed site may be carried out either by the
                                                                    Directorate, or by the district office, or
                                                                    representatives from both.
3   Tendering     Bidding documents (using the templates            The District Office participates in bid opening
                  provided by “Tender Book”) and technical          and evaluation.
                  specifications/drawings, etc… are reviewed
                  once by the District Office covering the          When complexity requires, LGUs are
                  geographical District that a given LGU is part    required to prepare technical drawings and
                  of, administratively, and once at the Projects    specifications using licensed engineering
                  Department.                                       offices, irrespective of the size of the LGU.
                                                                    The Projects Directorate maintains a database
                                                                    of licensed engineering offices.
4   Oversight     Periodic field visits if needed (it was not       During      implementation      the    Projects
    of projects   possible to get an estimate of the number of      Directorate also reviews contractors’
    execution     field visits, but based on the review of two      invoices, as explained under the Financial
                  sample contracts, the Directorate Staff carry     Controller Section.
                  out 1-2 visits per infrastructure contract,
                  including one mandatory visit at contract
                  completion/handover.      It   was    further


                                                      10
                       understood that the District Directorate staff
                       may carry out more frequent site supervision
                       visits.
 5       Handover      A representative from the Projects Directorate
                       joins a representative from the District Office   During handover, the Projects Directorate
                       to oversee and certify the official handover of   also reviews contractors’ invoices, as
                       a completed works contract or delivered           explained under the Financial Controller
                       goods. It was understood that this is carried     Section.
                       out irrespective of the contract amount.


D.         Financial Controller Functions
25. The Financial controllers are appointed by the Ministry of Finance to PA Ministiers, including the
    MoLG10. It is understood that their mandate is to review and audit the financial and technical soundness
    (if relevant) of payment claims on contracts, which are submitted by contractors hired to deliver local
    government investments that are financed from funding by the MoF or through Bi-lateral funding. On
    the other hand, the Financial Controllers do not have a mandate to review payment claims for LGU
    self-generated revenues or sources of funding other than MoF. As such, in the context of the LGSIP
    and its proposed financing instrument, the mandate of the MoLG Financial controller would be
    applicable in principle for investments implemented by VCs (whether directly by the VC or indirectly
    on behalf of the VC by the JSC).

26. The Financial Controller is involved in the review of the financial soundness of an invoice once the
    invoice has been reviewed technically and financially by the Projects’ Department, and reviewed
    financially by the Finance Department, and prior to the recommendation to H. E. Ministry of Local
    Government to submit to the Minister of Finance a request for release of contract payment. The below
    diagram depicts the contractors invoice review and payment processing and the area where the financial
    controller is involved:




10
     It is understood that this refers to the MoLG government’s budget item for LGUs Developmental Budget.

                                                           11
    Diagram 1: Sample Financial Control Process for an Investment Contract financed through




                                                                                                                     Short processing time (this is less regular) Around18 work days when paperwork is complete
    MoLG budget allocation from MoF




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Long processing time (this is more regular) Up to 4 months if paper work is not complete
 Step                                                     Remarks
 Step 1: Contractor submits invoice along with                  Justified by the MoLG as a preparatory first
 supporting documents to the District Office, and                  line of communication with contractors.
 District office reviews invoice                                   Invoices and supporting documents reviewed
                                                                   from an accounting and technical standpoint;
                                                                This procedure is not entirely clear. Based on
                                                                   field visits to some VCs, the VCs receive the
                                                                   contractor’s invoice and submit to the MoLG
                                                                   District Office.
 Step 2: District Office confirms adequacy of             If invoices are not adequate or supporting documents
 documentation and submits invoice to MoLG                missing, the invoice is sent back to the contractor.
 Projects Directorate
 Step 3: Projects Directorate reviews invoice and         Invoices and supporting documents reviewed again
 technical supporting documents (assigned engineer)       from an accounting and technical standpoint. When
                                                          asked why Steps 1 and 3 are similar, it was justified as
                                                          a way to double check the soundness of the first
                                                          review. It has been highlighted that in many cases the
                                                          review at the Projects Directorate reveals issues with
                                                          the invoices.
 Step 4: If invoice passes check, Projects Directorate
 sends package MoLG Financial Department. The
 Financial Department confirms financial soundness
 of invoice and sends to Financial Controller with a
 payment claim "cover letter".
 Step 5: Financial Controller approves invoice for        This step is required by the Ministry of Finance, and
 MoLG Minister's signature                                performed by the Ministry of Finance Internal
                                                          Controller sitting at the MoLG.
 Step 6: Minister sends a cover letter (with a number
 of approved invoices) to Minister of Finance
 Step 7: MoF transfers payment to contractor upon
 Minister of Finance Signature



27. Based on the above, it is understood that each contractor invoice is reviewed for technical and financial
    soundness (for example, supply in accordance with bill of quantity, or specifications, the supplier
    provided Bank guarantee, the supplier submitted invoice as per agreed contractual provisions, etc…)
    once at the relevant MoLG District Office, once at the Directorate of projects, once at the General
    Administration of Audit and Control, by MoLG Financial staff, and once by the MoF controller.

28. Timeframe for processing of contractors invoices: The process is rather repetitive and excessive.
    According to the MoLG, an “optimal” invoice/transaction requires around 18 work days divided as
    follows: 5 work days at the MoLG District Office, 5 work days at the Directorate of Projects, 3 days
    with the Audit and Control Administration, 3 work days with the MoF controller, and 2 work days for
    Minister’s signature. However, it was further understood that: (i) the majority of invoices are below
    optimal; (ii) the bulk of the delay, especially with incomplete invoices sits with the Directorate of
    Projects due to the limited number of staff compared to the volume of invoices, because the latter is
    required to make sure each contractor invoice is complete with supporting documents before the invoice

                                                         12
     is sent to the Audit and Control Administration. On average, it is understood that invoices take between
     3 – 4 calendar months for full payment. The following are two mitigation measure that the Projects
     Directorate is considering: (i) The Directorate has already asked for a seconded accountant to facilitate
     the Projects’ Directorate financial review of the invoices. With an accountant appointed at the
     Directorate of projects, the MoLG anticipates to consolidate steps 3 and 4 in the diagram above, into
     one step; (ii) the Directorate of Projects is in the process of developing written procedures for
     contracts/invoices review process with performance standards for monitoring the review time per
     invoices. The draft is currently undergoing the review of the Legal Department and may be approved
     within months.

E.       General Directorate of Urban Planning and Organization
29. This Directorate has been operating since the establishment of the MoLG in 2014. According to the
    Director General of Planning, this Directorate represents the largest of MoLG Directorate in terms of
    the sub-divisions it has serving, as well as in terms of staff reporting technically to this Directorate. The
    Directorate is mandated with developing and updating laws and regulations related to urban planning
    and building regulation, developing manuals and standards/codes required to assist LGUs in performing
    their responsibilities in planning and development, building the capacity of LGUs and the MoLG staff
    for urban planning. The Directorate has the following 6 departments: Local Planning, Regional
    Planning, Organization Department, Maps and Surveying and GIS, Detailed Planning, and Studies. One
    directly related committee to this Directorate is the High Planning Council (HPC). The Directorate was
    established in accordance with the Cities, Villages, and Buildings Law Number 79 for the year 1966.
    The GD of this Directorate also serves at the MoLG Minister’s advisor on the HPC.

30. The Directorate has 22 civil servant staff and 8 contract-based staff who are funded through donor
    support. Those staff are located centrally in Ramallah. In addition to those, it is understood that around
    40 staff in the District Directorates report administratively for their respective Directorate General
    Directors, but are accountable technically to the Director General of Planning. The majority of the 11
    MoLG District Offices in the West Bank include a Planning and Organization department, and the
    relatively small District Office include one or two staff assigned planning and organization functions.
    Those include building inspectors, surveyors, architects, and a limited number of urban planners. The
    head of each Planning and Organization in the District Office is also the Head of the Regional Planning
    Committee for each Governorate. The following provides an overview of the mandate and activities of
    the different departments:

Local Planning Department:
31. This department is in charge of the following key functions: (i) Support and capacity building to local
    governments in the preparation of new local Master Plans; (ii) Preparation of Local Master Plans on
    behalf of small and weak-capacitated LGUs; (iii) technical review of Master Plan
    revisions/amendments; (iv) carrying out of diagnostic and situational socio-economic assessments; (v)
    supervision and oversight of the planning and organization divisions and staff sitting in the MoLG
    District Directorates; (vi) Preparing urban plan packages for submittal through the review processes
    and overseeing incorporation of comments in the review and finalization of urban plans; and (vii)
    strategic planning. The latter is a new concept and is not a function mandated by the Law. Some of the
    key past and on-going activities of the department were the following:

                                                       13
        Master Planning: Perhaps master planning exercises represent the largest function of this
         department in terms of resources allocated and volume of work. A master plan forms the
         fundamental basic layer for proper strategic and investment planning for a given administrative
         boundary (local, regional, etc..), and for local integration and expansion. A Master Planning
         Manual has been development and is used by LGUs for carrying out and approving master plans
         in accordance with the Law, and this department is in charge of facilitating the preparation,
         technical review, and approval, and also provision of technical judgment, as required, on
         objections. In the cases of small communities, in general, and Area C communities in particular,
         Master Planning is carried out by the Department. The process of joint/clustered master planning
         starts with a proposal/request that is either sent from the Directorate office on behalf of a cluster,
         or endorsed by the District Directorate. It is currently estimated by the MoLG that out of the 378
         LGUs in the Palestinian Territories, 300 LGUs already have approved Master Plans, including 30
         cluster Master plans (the latter applicable to small communities and Area C communities11).

        SDIPs: Oversight of the development and testing of the Strategic Development and Investment
         Plans (SDIPs) for municipalities, and carrying out the training on the process, with the support of
         the consultants and MDLF and in accordance with the SDIP Manual. All 137 Palestinian
         municipalities now have their SDIPs prepared. Based on lessons learned from the development of
         the process and an evaluation of 66 Municipal SDIPs, it is understood that the department currently
         reviews (for updated SDIPs) consistency of SDIPs with the NDP (2014 – 2016) 4 strategic pillars.

        SDIP-Light: A simplified approach to strategic development and investment planning has been
         development by the Ministry, with external funding and technical support from JICA, in the form
         of a SDIP-Light Manual and Tools. The process was tested during development of the Manual in
         a small cluster in the Jerusalem Area12, and in another limited number of areas other areas where
         the Joint Services Councils (JSCs) were used as the administrative platform for supporting SDIP-
         Light at the LGUs level, and integrating the individual SDIP-Light(s) with the municipality SDIP
         in that cluster. It is worth noting however that the application of SDIP-Light has so far produced
         mixed results and some participating LGUs rated the tools and requirements as being too complex
         for small and less capacitated LGUs. As such, it is understood that the MoLG is currently reviewing
         the SDIP-Light requirements. As the Program Manager, the MDLF would be required to detail as
         part of the Program Operations Manual the minimum requirements for strategic development and
         investment planning for eligible LGUs (VCs and JSCs) while the MoLG reviews the requirement
         of SDIP-Light.
Regional Planning Department:
32. This department is mandated to support the following main functions:




11
   Master planning in Area C is subject to the approval of the Israeli Civil Administration, as per the provisions of
OSLO Accords. However, as inspired by the Palestinian Government’s National Development Plan 2014 2016, the
MoLG plays a hand-holding, oversight, and advocacy role to support Master plans preparation and submittal,
supported by the European Union. Master planning in Area A and B is under the Jurisdiction of the Palestinian High
Planning Council
12
   The cluster included Rafat, Al-Jdeirah, and Bir Nabala.

                                                         14
   Governorate-level Master
    Plans: In theory this means
                                           Directorate of Planning – Main Recommendations
    support to master planning
    activities similar to the Local
    Planning Department, but on            This Directorate has been and would be anticipated to be a
    the district level. District            primary partner to MDLF in supporting investments in
    Level Master planning is not            Area C as per the final description of the component in the
    exercised, justified by the             LGSIP Program Document. Under Component IV of
    difficulty in implementing              LGSIP –Investments in Area C, Financing Partners are
    district-level planning due to          considering the option of supporting master planning
    the geographical, political,            exercises in Area C clusters along with strategic
    and             administrative          development exercises.
                                           The early testing of SDIP-Light has so far produced mixed
    limitations for regional-level
                                            results and some participating LGUs rated the tools and
    master planning in the West
                                            requirements as being too complex for small and less
    Bank due to the fact that 60%           capacitated LGUs. As such, it is understood that the MoLG
    of the West Bank is in Area             is currently reviewing the SDIP-Light requirements. As the
    C and outside of the                    Program Manager, the MDLF would be required to detail
    Palestinian Government’s                as part of the Program Operations Manual the minimum
    control and also because of             requirements for strategic development and investment
    disputes on Palestinian                 planning for eligible LGUs (VCs and JSCs) while the
    regional planning boundaries            MoLG reviews the requirement of SDIP-Light.
    that are deferred to the final         The utilization of GIS and advanced Arial photography to
    status arrangements.                    speed up review is still not optimal and there is a need for
                                            public awareness to improve the public hearing/objections
                                            handling during the Master Plan Review Process. In
   Regional SDIPs: District                addition, the Master Plan approval process is lengthy,
    level SDIPs have been                   involves multiple layers of approvals, and is protracted. In a
    facilitated by this department          number of instances it has taken up to 10 years to approve
    based on the SDIP manual                Master plans, which is detrimental to achieving local
    which has been tweaked to               development objectives that the MoLG aims to achieve.
    fit    the     concept       and       National level pressure is required to establish a linkage
    application      of     regional        between the detailed cadastral layers from the Palestinian
    planning. It is understood              Land Authority in real time with the GIS at the MoLG.
    that the main differences are          The key limitation of LGU investment planning and land
                                            use information in the GIS database at the MoLG Planning
    the following: (i) regional
                                            Directorate is the lack of investment planning information
    planning exercise involves
                                            at the Village Councils level. All SDIPs and their detailed
    all LGUs and JSCs located in            information on the municipal level are already integrated in
    a given governorate, triggers           the database. The former is justified by the lack of a
    the formulation of a Steering           standardized approach for investment planning in villages,
    Committee which constitutes             which makes it difficult to integrate within an electronic
    representatives       of    line        database. An attempt to support a national standard
    ministries, security forces,            approach through use of SDIP-Light is currently being
    water and electricity utilities,        evaluated.
    the Governor’s office, and             Under the proposed LGSIP, this GIS database can provide a
    other      key      stakeholder         range of administrative, special, service delivery, and
                                            demographic baselines, for targeting, and can also be used
    organizations, and is Chaired
                                            in the future for tracking progress.
    by the Governor. It is
    understood that the process

                                             15
        has been successfully tested in Jenin governorate, based on which it was carried out in Salfit and
        will be carried out soon in Qalqilia, Tubas, and Bethlehem governorates. (ii) this exercise maps out
        macro-level regional infrastructure needs, including hospitals, tertiary education institutions,
        regional landfills, water/wastewater treatment facilities, etc..

       The Palestinian National Spatial Plan: This effort is coordinated with the Ministry of Planning
        and Administrative Development, which is the primary host of the National Spatial plan.

       Drafting of regional planning studies with relevant Ministries and other Palestinian Authority
        agencies.
Maps, Surveying, and Geographic Information Systems:
33. This department is in charge of preparing specifications, launching, and reviewing of aerial photos. In
    addition, this department is responsible for drawing/plotting, and scaling of draft and final master plans
    (at local and regional levels), and adjusts and finalizes master plans in accordance with the reviews of
    the HPC and approved objections. This department provides copies of master plans and aerial photos
    for line ministries and research institutions. The MoLG has established one of the most comprehensive
    national databases for local governments in the entire West Bank and Gaza. Once the detailed cadastral
    layers from the Palestinian Land Authority are added in real time, and GIS is linked with PCBS census
    data, this may become the “most’ important of national databases. The database – called GeoMOLG -
    is currently accessible by 120 institutions nationwide, with the number of users increasing rapidly, and
    can already provide a wide range of special, administrative, service delivery, land use, demographic
    and socio-economic data on-and-for LGUs. For instance, the Ministry of Social Affairs is currently
    relying on socioeconomic data provided by the database on the LGUs level for targeting under social
    programs. according to the MoLG, field visits of MoLG staff in Hebron District Directorate were
    reduced from 15 per week to 4 per week, and the MoLG in general has a saving of ILS400,000 and
    1,400 work days across its central and district offices in the West Bank per year, as a result of
    establishing GeoMOLG

34. Under the proposed LGSIP, this database can provide a range of administrative, special, service
    delivery, and demographic baselines, for targeting, and can also be used in the future for tracking
    progress. There may be also room for supporting policy around use of technology in master planning
    reviews and approvals. Service delivery and infrastructure layers are available for all LGUs (including
    buildings, water/waste water networks, roads, etc…). The only main limitation so far is the lack of
    investment planning information at the Village Councils level. However, all SDIPs and their detailed
    information on the municipal level are already integrated in the database. The former is justified by the
    lack of a standardized approach for investment planning in villages, which makes it difficult to integrate
    within an electronic database. In fact, it has been strongly recommended to the Bank team considering
    agreeing with the MoLG on a standard annual investment planning template for VCs (based on existing
    experiences) for rolling out gradually under the proposed LGSIP. See Annex 3 for more details on the
    MoLG GIS Database.

Department of Architectural Organization:




                                                     16
35. This department is in charge of regulating construction planning and permitting at the local and regional
    master plans levels, as well as in areas outside the boundaries of master plans that are within the
    Palestinian Authority control. As such, this department issues and disseminates updates and
    clarifications on by-laws and instructions for construction permitting and other land-use activities. The
    department also reviews and provides a technical report on applications from line ministries and other
    government agencies for the allocation of state land for public benefit (for example, a police station).
    Such a report is submitted to the Land Allocation Committee, headed by the Minister of Local
    Government for consideration. It is understood that this department receives complaints on disputes
    with LGUs regarding construction permitting, either directly from the public, or from LGUs.

High Planning Council (HPC) and Technical Support Department:
36. This department virtually hosts the HPC, which meets once per month to review and approve final
    master plans and SDIPs, and to review objections from citizens as part of the Master Plan public review
    process. The department staff organize objection cases as well as master plan and SDIP files in their
    final form to be ready for submittal to the HPC. As the name also states, it is understood that this
    department provides capacity building, administrative and technical support in topics related to urban
    planning. For example, this department organizes urban planning training for new LGU heads
    following each local elections cycle.

Directorate’s Future plans:
37. The department’s plans are focused on advancing the GeoMOLG and enabling it to better service
    delivery and inform policy making:
     Agreed with PCBS to provide the verification of information made available under the LGU
        profiles (for all LGUs), and hence the baseline of LGUs profiles for 2015;
     Agreed with PCBS to link the 2017 census with the GeoMOLG, including mapping of buildings
        and residential buildings;
     Attempting to reach an agreement with the Palestinian Land Authority to provide the land
        parcellations layer for integrating into GeoMOLG, on an updated real time basis;
     The MoLG is planning to provide public access to the database for citizens under what they describe
        as phase III of system accessibility after completing MoLG access (phase I), and launching
        institutions access (phase II). This would be subject to reaching optimal levels of accuracy and
        reliability (especially with GIS data).
     Electronic Master planning reviews and approvals using GeoMOLG.
     Electronic issuance of construction permits.
Capacity Building and technical assistance needs:
38. The department seems to be adequately capacitated with staff and equipment, largely due to the
    systematic and long term support from GIZ. There are currently 4 full time and 4 part time GIS experts
    and data entry staff, and a system administrator, in addition to technical oversight consultants supported
    by GIZ. In the meeting, however, the following two critical issues were highlighted:

       Reliable internet access for VCs is required, for VCs to reliably access and update their information
        on the integrated portal (including to update data and to submit budgets);



                                                     17
        The approval process for master planning includes 3 administrative layers (Local Planning
         Committee, District Planning Committee, and HPC), making it complex and time consuming to get
         master plans approved. According to the GIS department, for some LGUs, it has taken up to 10
         years to approve a master plan due to complications faced with the legal review process and
         addressing objections through the public viewing process. It is therefore recommended to consider
         legal and regulatory reform in this manner. Similarly, the various committees need proper training
         on the use of latest technology in the field, to achieve more efficiency and reliability in the review
         process;

        Master planning processes require the understanding of, engagement, and ownership of citizens. It
         is understood from the MoLG that in many cases, citizens are either not aware of the master
         planning process and therefore do not attend public meetings or are not aware of the objections
         option and procedures. On the other hand, the master plan presentation for public viewing is too
         complex for the ordinary citizen to understand. Accordingly, more simplification of the public
         viewing process and templates, more public awareness, and the development of appropriate
         objection/grievance redress procedures for the public, are required.


F.       Complaints Unit
39. This unit at the MoLG was established in 2009 in accordance with a Council of Minister’s Resolution
    and with the key purpose of achieving the principles of accountability, transparency, and integrity in
    the local government sector. The objective was to “deepen the communication between the citizen and
    his/her LGU to put solutions to complaints and concerns”. The unit is operated under a Special
    Complaints System which was enacted by the Council of Ministers decrees in 2003 and 2005, and is
    affiliated directly with H. E. Minister of Local Government’s Office. Since then, the Complaints Unit
    has been handling complaints in local governance affairs and it is mandated to communicate /coordinate
    with LGUs and other PA agencies that may be involved in the complaint or relevant to is, as needed.
    As such, the Complaints Units handles the following range of complaints but is not limited to them:
    Complaints from citizens on LGUs (permitting/licensing for construction/master
    planning/zoning/alleged corruption of LGU staff), complaints from contractors against LGUs or the
    MoLG, complaints from citizens or LGUs on district offices. The Complains Unit centrally is staffed
    with the complaints manager, an engineer and also a social development specialist. All 3 may carry out
    field visits for inception. However, each of the 11District Directorates in the West Bank also has a
    complaints handling officer who reports technically to the Complaints Unit Manager.

Complaints System in the MoLG13:
40. The MoLG Complaints Unit has developed a User Guide on complaints based on the Complaints Bi-
    law. According to this guide (and as confirmed by the Complaints Unit Manager) the default
    arrangement for receiving complaints is the following:

STEP ONE: Citizen is to submit a complaint to the LGU (one stop shop, complaints officer, etc..). The
Special Complaints System has designated acceptable timeframes for responding to the citizen;


13
  More details on the MoLG Complaints handing system are available in the Environmental and Social Safeguards
Assessment for the proposed Local Governance and Services Improvement Program.

                                                      18
STEP TWO: If there is no response on the complaint within the timeframe designated in the Special
Complaints System, the citizen should
approach the District Office Directorate with
                                                 Main Recommendations – Complaints Unit
copies of the communication with the LGU;
STEP THREE: If the District Office does not
cooperate or does not provide a response, the             Clearly, the presence of a functioning Complaints Unit
citizen can submit a written complaint to the             at the Molg is notable and commendable. However,
Complaints Unit at the MoLG along with                    and especially given the large volume of complaints
copies of supporting documents, and should                received and the limited staffing capacity to handle
receive a response within 1 week14. According             complaints adequately, more support would be needed
to the Special Complaints System, the citizen             focusing on:
should receive a receipt for the complaint from                 strengthening the grievance redress mechanism
the MoLG. The Unit is mandated with verifying                    at the LGUs level as a means of reducing the
the soundness of complaints and grievances and                   volume of complaints coming to the Molg
directing them for further follow up within the                  Complaints Unit;
Molg or with other government agencies, as                      public awareness in the District offices and
appropriate. The MoLG is mandated to classify                    LGUs focusing on heads, staff, LGU Council
and archive complaints received. In practice,                    members, as well as citizens. The MoLG has
                                                                 developed simple and user-friendly guides to
the issue of documentation is weak and there is
                                                                 both LGUs staff and citizens, but require
a need to establish a database and proper
                                                                 support to roll out public awareness, sponsor
archiving system for complaints.                                 workshops for LGUs, on a regular basis;
41. Due to lack of public awareness on the                      supporting an electronic complaints logging
                                                                 system.
    procedures, the Complaints Unit is
                                                                Strengthening the coordination between the
    constantly approached directly by citizens                   judiciary and executive authorities and
    and      contractors.     The   Palestinian                  enforcement of court decisions.
    Independent Commission for Human                            There needs to be proper coordination and
    Rights15 also submits complaints on behalf                   clarity of roles between the Complaints Unit
    of citizens directly to the Complaints Unit                  and the Directorate of Urban planning within
                                                                 the MoLG, as both appear to accept complaints
    at the MoLG. The Complaints Unit usually
                                                                 from citizens on Master Plans during the public
    documents complaints received and                            viewing process.
    communicates in writing with the party                      It is also important to leverage on the capacity
    complained against. There is no formal log                   of the MoLG Complaints Unit in future GRM
    system for complaints, however each                          training to LGUs envisaged under LGSIP.


14
   In the Special Complaints System for the Council of Ministers General Administration for Complaints, for 2010, it
is specified that the public office should respond in writing to the complainant informing that the complaint will be
processed for further follow up, or is rejected, within 3 days.
15 The Independent Commission for Human Rights (ICHR) was established in 1993 upon a Presidential Decree issued
by President Yasser Arafat in his capacity as President of the State of Palestine and chairman of the Palestine
Liberation Organization. The decree was subsequently published in the Official Gazette in 1995. ICHR commenced
its activities in early 1994. In accordance with the Presidential Decree, the duties and responsibilities of ICHR are as
follows: “to follow-up and ensure that different Palestinian laws, by-laws and regulations, and the work of various
departments, agencies and institutions of the State of Palestine and the Palestine Liberation Organization meet the
requirements for safeguarding human rights”. The decree entrusted ICHR with the drafting of its statutes in a manner
that would ensure its independence and effectiveness.


                                                          19
     complaint is assigned a reference code and a receipt is given to the complainant for follow up. Once
     closed, the complaint is dated and documented in physical files in the form of “Closing Report”. When
     inquired about the average time for handling complaints, it was understood that a large number of
     complaints is handled momentarily or within a week, but that some complaints can take up to 5 months
     or more, depending on the complexity of the complaint and the departments within our outside of
     MoLG that are involved. For example, if a complaint involves a realignment in a master plan, then
     addressing the complaint usually takes several months due to other procedures governing master
     planning. It was further understood that the volume of calls to the Complaints Unit may be relatively
     high, but many of those calls do not constitute valid complaints.

42. Addresses for and guidance on complaints: A complaints section on the MoLG website and on the
    LGUs portal – Baladiyat.ps – allows a complainant to send an e-mail to the Complaints Unit or call the
    Unit directly on the MoLG telephone/fax numbers presented on the websites. There has been a
    consideration, in cooperation with the Council of Ministers, to enable the Central Complaints Handling
    Unit at the Council of Ministers to view electronically the MoLG electronic log of complaints received
    by e-mail (through the websites) to monitor the timeliness of MoLG’s response, but this is still at early
    stages of conceptualization. It was understood that the Ministry used to direct complainants to a hotline
    which was stopped recently due to callers’ abuse. It is understood that complainants can still call the
    Unit at the Ministry’s publically available telephone numbers.

G.       Budgets Directorate16
43. It is understood that the            Budgets Directorate – Main Findings & Recommendations
    oversight and control of
    the execution of LGU          The Budgets Department and a number of field visits to VCs indicated
    budgets is a shared            that LGUS do not require at this stage further training on the electronic
    mandate between the           budget submittal process, as it is still on-going with support from BTC.
    Directorate of Guidance       However, the following could be proposed for further development:
    and Monitoring, and the            Sub-projects proposals under LGSIP should be consistent with the
    Budgets Directorate. The            budget submittal timeline (Budget preparation announcement in
    Budgets Directorate is              September, LGUs submit to MoLG in November, and endorsement
    also     mandated      with         between December and March), and proposed sub-projects should be
    assisting the LGUs to               included in the annual budgets;
                                       Training, in cooperation with the MoLG JSCs Directorate on the new
    achieve optimal utilization
                                        budget template for JSCs;
    of      their     financial        A relatively large number of LGUs has high staffing numbers in a
    resources. The Directorate          way not consistent with the services they provide or the relative size
    receives the annual LGUs            of the LGU. For this problem, the Budgets Directorate identified
    budgets, reviews and                Activity Use Budgeting as key training required for the Directorate
    endorses      them.    The          staff, District staff, and for LGUs.
    Budgets Directorate also
    provides capacity building and handholding to LGUs on matters with budgeting. For example, the
    Budgets Directorate holds orientation workshops for new elected LGU heads on the budget process.


16
 The Fiduciary Systems Assessment includes more details on the mandate, capacity, and processes used by the
MoLG Budgets Department.

                                                     20
     The MoLG takes pride in the utilization of an electronic budgeting system which allows LGUs
     (irrespective of size) to upload their annual budgets and submit them electronically. The budget
     Directorate includes 5 staff, in addition to a financial management specialist in each of the 11 District
     Directorates. The Fiduciary Systems Assessment provides a more detailed analysis of the capacity of
     the Budgets Directorate vis a vis its mandate, and the current relationship with LGUs.

44. During an interview with the General Director of the Budgets Department, some of the main challenges
    highlighted were the following: (i) Most LGUs deal with the issue of preparing and submitting budgets
    as a legal requirement, and do not appreciate the importance of preparing sound budgets. As such, a
    large number of budgets submitted, though sound from an accounting perspective, are poorly planned.
    In addition (ii) the relatively low collection rate for local services also reflects badly on the overall
    strength of the LGU budget. Further analysis by the Bank’s team also suggests that the overall lack of
    predictability of Government transfers of local revenues to LGUs makes it very difficult for LGUs to
    adequately plan for budgets; (iii) A relatively large number of LGUs has high staffing numbers in a
    way not consistent with the services they provide or the relative size of the LGU. For this problem, the
    Budgets Directorate identified Activity Use Budgeting as key training required for the Directorate staff,
    District staff, and for LGUs.

H.       General Directorate of Guidance and Monitoring
45. It is understood that historically this Directorate had responsibilities monitoring the soundness of
    financial, technical, and administrative performance of LGUs. Nowadays, the Directorate maintains the
    administrative and financial monitoring but its technical audit responsibilities are limited to, for
    instance, investigating public safety and health violations of LGUs. Another early mandate which is
    now transferred to a Formations and Elections Department was the review of the soundness of mayors
    and VC hears’ and elections committees appointments. The Directorate has 10 staff centrally, but each
    District Directorate has 2-3 staff forming the District Office Guidance and Monitoring Unit. The
    division of labor between the
    central level and district level unit      Monitoring and Follow Up Department - Recommendations
    is blurred, but it was understood
    that the 10 staff centrally are          While independent verification under the proposed LGSIP would
                                             need to be carried out by another PA agency outside of MoLG (to
    seconded to districts as needed an
                                             avoid conflict of interest), the General Directorate of Guidance and
    in situations where the district         Monitoring Directorate continues to play a very important role in
    unit staff are not adequate for          reforming the financial and administrative performance of LGUs.
    inspection and other field               To enable the Directorate to carry out its responsibilities diligently,
    responsibilities. The number of          the following would be envisaged:
    relevant staff in the Districts is 35.    Development and adoption of standards and minimum triggers
                                                   for technical and financial auditing spot visits;
46. Main Responsibilities: This                   Specialized training in detecting administrative fraud and
    department is mandated to carry                corruption in LGUs;
    out at least 3 regular spot visits for        Practical training, including learning from regional or
    each LGU in the West Bank. Due                 international best practice and standards in audit functions.
                                                  The Directorate could be provided with support to carry out
    to limited resources the spot visits
                                                   training to new Mayors and VC Heads on the Mayors’ Code of
    have been dropped to 1 visit per               Conduct.
    year. Following each visit, the

                                                        21
       staff member submits a report to the District Directorate, which submits the report to the Deputy
       Minister of LG who sends the report to the Director of the Guidance and Monitoring Directorate,
       centrally. The Directorate then prepares comments/recommendations and sends back to the District
       Directorate via the Deputy Minister.

47. Some of the key financial responsibilities of the Directorate of Guidance and Monitoring are the
    following: (i) monitoring the actual executed budget and its compliance with the planned approved
    budget. For LGUs that are consistently not in compliance with the budget execution standards, the
    MoLG appoints a financial controller to the LGU from the department staff for a period of few months
    to resolve issues and help restore the financial situation of the LGU. The Directorate has received
    instructions in the past two years to monitor strictly the budget movements related to water and
    electricity expenditures. (ii) monitoring and rectifying irregularity in recurrent budget execution,
    including exaggerated expenses (such as salaries, hospitality, etc…); (iii) monitoring LGUs Bank
    accounts and related irregular transactions; and (iv) inspecting and auditing warehouse records and
    advising on corrective measures. Among the administrative issues that the Directorate monitors are
    assets records in storage, vehicle movements, LGU staff appointments, leave records, and retirement.
    The Directorate has already developed a policy paper on guidance and monitoring of LGUs, and a Code
    of Conduct for Mayors and VC heads.

48. Based on the mentioned responsibilities, the capacity assessment considered recommending the use of
    the Directorate of Guidance and Monitoring to carry out independent verification functions under the
    proposed LGSIP. However, this consideration was later excluded due to conflict of interest perceived
    in carrying out the expected verification functions over MoLG oversight under LGSIP, by one of its
    own Directorates.

49. LGUs are required to carry out internal control functions, but it is understood that this requirement is
    loose with small and less capacitated LGUs, while the requirements are strict with Municipalities
    classified as A and B17. The latter are required to have an internal control unit, while LGUs less than
    this qualification are required to have an internal control officer. The Directorate of Guidance and
    Monitoring is currently developing a unified electronic reporting system for all MoLG Directorates.
    The aim is to develop minimum standard times for carrying out the responsibilities within the
    department, and to unify the reporting templates among all District offices. The Program is anticipated
    for launch in March 2015 and operation in June 2015.




17
     Classification by the MoLG related to size of the population, LGU function, and its capacity.

                                                            22
Annex 1: MoLG Organogram 2014 (Source: MoLG

                                                                   The Minister


                   Higher
                   Coordinating
                   Council
          MDLF                                                                                       Minister’s Office



 Higher Council                                                                                      Unit for Cabinet Affairs
 for Planning
                   Advisors
                                                                                                     Unit for Internal Audit

                   Policy and Strategy Unit
                                                                                                     Unit for Media and Public
                                                                                                     Relations
                   Unit for Jerusalem
                                                                                                     Unit for Complaints
                                                                   Deputy Minister

                   Assisting Deputies
                                                                                                     Office of the deputy
                                                                                                     minister
                   Coordinating Unit for the Higher
                   Committee for Projects                                                            Unit for Directorate
                                                                                                     Affairs
                   Unit for Gender Affairs


                   Information Systems Unit



                                        General .      General .         General . Dir                                           General .
    General .      General .                                                             General . Dir
                                        Dir            Dir                                                                       Dir
    Dir            Dir.                                                  for Local                            General .
                                        for Projects   Urban                             for Audit                               Joint
                   for                                                                                        Dir
    Financial &                                        Planning          Development                                             Councils
                                                                                         And
    Administrati   Legal                                                 &                                    . for Budget
    ve Affairs                                                      23                                                           And
                   Affairs                                                               Control
                                                                         Investment                                              Formations
Annex 2 - List of People Met:

H.E. Mr. Mohammed Hasan Jabbareen, Deputy Minister of Local Government
Mr. Abdel Karim Sider, Assistant Deputy Minister of Directorate Affairs
Mr. Tawfeeq Boderi, Assistant Deputy Minister of Planning
Mr. Walid Al-Halayqah, Director General of the JSCs Department
Mr. Sulaiman Abu Mufarreh, MoLG JSCs Department
Mr. Izziddin Abdul Samad, Policy Unit
Mr. Mohi El Ardah, Director General of General Directorate of Projects
Mr. Mutasem Anani, General Directorate of Projects
Mr. Moayad Shihadeh, General Directorate of Projects
Ms. Buhaisa Al Asaad, General Directorate of Projects
Mr. Azzam Hjouj, Director General, General Directorate of Urban Planning and Organization
Mr. Jamal Numan, General Directorate of Urban Planning and Organization
Mr. Shukri Radayda, Director General of Budgets
Mr. Mohammad Hassasneh, Directorate of Guidance and Monitoring
Mr. Mustafa Salah, Directorate of Guidance and Monitoring
Mr. Mohammad Mohesen, Director of Complaints Unit
Mr. Samir Dawabshe, MoLG Nablus District Office
Mr. Yousif Thabet, MoLG Nablus District Office
Mr. Hilal Snono, MoLG Nablus District Office
Mr. Safwan Al-Halbi, Director General, Ramallah District Office
Mr. Abdullah Abdelwahed, Deputy Director, Ramallah District Office
Mr. Mutaz Nawwas – Financial Controller (MoF)
Mr. Rani Daoud – Technical Advisor – GIZ




                                                 24
Annex 3 - Assessment of the GIS activities at the MoLG:
The main objective behind establishing this department was to strengthen the MoLG’s capacity for
regulating special planning at the LGU level and for improving the efficiency and accuracy of issuing
construction permits in small communities (communities that do not have the capacity and mandate of
construction licensing). Some specific objectives include the following: (i) Speeding up the processing of
LGUs applications that require initial spatial data input due to spatial data digitization; (ii) reduction in field
visits as a result of availability of aerial photos with high resolution (according to the MoLG, field visits in
Hebron district office were reduced from 15 per week to 4 per week, and the MoLG in general has saved
ILS400,000 and 1,400 work days across its central and district offices in the West Bank per year, as a result
of establishing GeoMOLG). GeoMOLG project was launched in 2012 and the system is now live. Other
databases are also included along with GeoMOLG under the Baladiyat.ps website and are fully integrated
and compatible with each others, and are accessible via user profile with different accessibility rights,
depending on the user. The key ones are the following:

GeoMOLG: An integrated special information system of the MoLG. The system provides web-based access
to institutional clients on data inputted originally through the efforts of the Mapping, Surveys, and GIS
Department staff but fully capable of accepting data entry from LGUs via user access. The database includes
all structural plans (on the district levels, from the British mandate18) and all master plans completed up to
the date of the visit, matched with aerial photos obtained between 1997 and 2014, with the latter obtained
in very high resolution (15 centimeters scale19), provided through funding from GIZ. The database can
provide the administrative boundaries and the elections boundaries for all municipalities and village
councils, and can provide the information on the area of Areas A, B, and C (in accordance with OSLO
Accords). The software is linked with and compatible with the other systems on the MoLG portal
baladiyat.ps, including the budget software, and the LGUs profile.20
LGU Profiles: This database includes information more related to the administration, staffing, and services
delivery functions of LGUs. The information includes the following: population, LGU type, area, date of
establishment, Board members, staff, including their names and educational attainment and type of contract,
membership in Joint Services Councils, types of services provided, administration infrastructure (such as
service buildings owned by the LGUs, lands and other properties owned by the LGUs, current
projects/investments, etc..). It is worth mentioning that the exercise that the Policy Department launched
early during program preparation fed into the completion of this database.
Budgets Portal: This is the same web-based system that the MoLG department has adopted and trained
LGUs to use.



18
   It is understood that those old-dated plans are the same plans used by the Israelis for permitting in Area C,
where there are no master plans approved.
19
   Under the Land Administration Program, the Palestinian Land Authority was not permitted by the Israelis to
obtain aerial photos of this scale.
20
   The following is a summary of the types of spatial data provided by GeoMOLG: Urban master plans (in Areas A,
B, and C), approved, and in objection phase; Partial master plans (from the Israeli occupation prior to 1992);
modifications on master plans, administrative classification in accordance with Oslo Accords, land use maps
(including for agricultural use); cadaster maps (blocks and parcels); natural reserves; rivers and streams; state land
(registered, announced, surveyed); different layers of communities (LGU administrative, services, master plans
status); public facilities; aerial maps, services infrastructure.

                                                          25
