Public Disclosure Authorized   Public Disclosure Authorized   Public Disclosure Authorized                                  Public Disclosure Authorized




             2016–2023
           GENDER STRATEGY
                                                                   and Inclusive Growth
                                                                                                         WORLD BANK GROUP
                                                                   Gender Equality, Poverty Reduction,
Contents
    FOREWORD




ô              ô
ABBREVIATIONS
  World Bank Group Gender Strategy {FY16-23): Gender Equality, Poverty Reduction and Inclusive
  Growth

SSN                  social safety net
STEM                 science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
TVET                 technical vocational education and training
WDR                  World Development Report




                                                                                             Page 5
KEY DEFINITIONS
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY









 PART I: GENDER, POVERTY REDUCTION, AND INCLUSIVE GROWTH: AN
                           OVERVIEW




Introduction
The Conceptual Framework
World Bank Group Gender Strategy {FY16-23): Gender Equality, Poverty Reduction and Inclusive
Growth

level, geographic location, and migratory status, can lead to multiple overlapping layers of
vulnerability and discrimination.

The WDR identified three key domains of gender inequality: endowment, economic opportunity,
and agency (figure 1.1). For each area, it highlighted the key issues that needed to be addressed. In
endowment, it singled out gender gaps in education, such as among the very poor and marginalized
communities; and excess female mortality at specific periods of the life cycle, in particular, skewed
sex ratios at birth. excess mortality of girls in infancy and early childhood, and stubbornly high rates
of maternal mortality in reproductive years. On economic opportunities, it noted the excessive time
spent by women on domestic work and child care, the gender gaps in access to assets and inputs,
and the continuing discrimination in paid employment. ln relation to agency, the key issues were
and remain women's lack of societal voice due to underrepresentation in national and local
decision-making bodies; the muted voice of women within households in many countries, which is
associated with their limited control over household resources and fertility; and their exposure to
gender-based violence.

The WDR posited that households, markets, and institutions (both formal and informal), and the
interactions between them, all influence gender equality and economic development. The
foundational premises are threefold: First, households are composed of individuals with varying
preferences and needs; they are not homogeneous units. Second, markets and institutions
influence the relationship between economic development and gender equality, directly and
indirectly. Third, markets and institutions are dynamic, with society influencing their attributes.
Consequently, markets and institutions can evolve in response to external stimuli, including policy
interventions. These three principles lay the foundation for a framework that captures the ways in
which household members make decisions, how they interact with markets and institutions to
influence gender equality outcomes, and the role of policy in determining these interactions and
outcomes (World Bank 2011).

This strategy adopts the general framework of the WDR but tweaks it to capture three additional
dimensions: the interconnectedness between the three domains (as represented by the red arrows
in figure 1.1); the potential of programmatic interventions to tackle specific issues in these domains
(as represented by the oil can on the right in figure 1.1); and in a world facing climate change and
conflict-related shocks, the interactions between households, markets, and institutions that
influence gender equality growth, and resilience.




                                                                                                Page 13
POLICIES



                                          INTERVENTIONS




                       INFORMAL
                     INSTITUTIONS
                                                                    ECONOMIC
                                                                   OPPORTUNITIES




           MARKETS                  HOUSEHOLDS
                                                                              ENDOWMENTS
                                                          AGENCY




                       FORMAL
                     INSTITUTIONS
Progress since 2000




Human Endowments
Economic Opportunities
Voice and Agency
A Focus on Gender Equality in Fragile and Conflict -Affected
Situations

















          PART II: INTERNATIONAL POLICY FRAMEWORK




The Evolution of the Framework and Gender Mainstrea ming
World Bank Group Gender Strategy {FY16-23): Gender Equality, Poverty Reduction and Inclusive
Growth

this approach. Contrary to early optimism, mainstreaming has not succeeded in embedding a
gender equality orientation in the institutional DNA of most development agencies, and gender
equality results have been fragmented and too rarely scaled up. Commitments to address gender
equality frequently are not followed by efforts to build staff capacity, allocate adequate financing,
and monitor and evaluate results. One part of the problem is language. The terminology of "gender
perspective" does not help identify which gender inequalities are central to development outcomes,
which results are to be achieved across sectors, and how to pursue the goals. Another problem lies
with the multidimensional nature of gender equality, which cuts across program categories or
sectors where development partners typically work. Rather than being multidimensional or aligned
across sectors, interventions often end up being concentrated in specific sectors (for example, in
education and health). Finally, mainstreaming has not been linked to flows of funding. The routines
of government resource allocation have not generated information about financing requirements
and funding gaps for the achievement of gender equality and women's empowerment; and
development partners often, in turn, do not provide adequate resources for the achievement of
gender equality across sectors.

Neither donor resources nor country budgets match the policy rhetoric on gender equality. Since
1991, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development-Development Assistance
Committee has been tracking member countries' commitments to gender equality and female
empowerment using a policy marker that screens commitments according to whether their
principal objective is to promote gender equality and women's empowerment or whether the
promotion of these objectives figures as a significant component within a larger program. The
"principal objective" category reflects stand-alone projects targeting women and girls, and the
"significant" category reflects gender mainstreaming (for example, interventions within a larger
sector program such as education, agriculture, rural development, water and sanitation, and so on)
For example, agriculture projects may include special components to recruit and train women
extension workers or education programs may include special subsidies for girls to attend school.
From 2002 to 2013, the amount of screened aid that could be attributed to the promotion of gender
equality and women's empowerment ranged between 8 and 18 percent (with the higher
percentages mainly in the latter six years).19 More than 50 percent of aid for gender equality was
in education and health. At the country level, gender budget initiatives have estimated that
governments commit between 1 and 3 percent of own resources to promoting gender equality,
which is low even in the absence of agreed-upon funding targets (UNU-WIDER 2014).

The past few decades have witnessed the growth of private sector actors in development
assistance to support gender equality, along with a rise in partnerships between public sector
agencies and the private sector (public-private partnerships). Many corporate initiatives directly
seek to increase women's economic status; among others, the more high-profile private sector
initiatives include 10,000 Women, started by Goldman Sachs in 2008 and currently working in 43
countries; the Coca-Cola 5x20 Program, which seeks to enable the economic empowerment of 5
million women entrepreneurs across the company's value chain by 2020, now present in more than
12 countries; and Wal-Mart's Women's Economic Empowerment Program. Encouraging and
partnering with the multinational and local private sector in developing countries can be beneficial
for women entrepreneurs.




                                                                                             Page 23
The Role of the Multilateral Development Banks
World Bank Group Gender Strategy {FY16-23): Gender Equality, Poverty Reduction and Inclusive
Growth

Strategy will strengthen the country-driven approach, build the evidence on what works, and
harness key partnerships at the country level to widen the policy dialogue.




                                                                                         Page 25
 PART III: EVOLUTION OF THE BANK GROUP'S APPROACH TO GENDER
                             EQUALITY




Bank Group Support for Gender Equality
Lessons Learned


























PART IV: THE STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES
Improving Human Endowments
Health
F IRST -G ENERATION I SSUES
ô
E MERGING ISSUES




                   (
Education
F IRST -G ENERATION I SSUES




E MERGING I SSUES
World Bank Group Gender Strategy {FY16-23): Gender Equality, Poverty Reduction and Inclusive
Growth

Young women tend to take longer to find their first job, which is likely to less good than the ones
their male counterparts find, and they face a higher probability of inactivity. If they do not have a
secondary education, the higher-paying categories of formal wage employment are likely to be
closed to young women (Filmer and Fox 2014). The occupational choices for those who have not
completed primary education are more limited, especially for women, who usually cannot obtain
the higher-earning, semi-skilled work (wage employment or self-employment) that is available to
men without a secondary education (in construction trades, mechanics, or transportation services)
(Campos and others 2013). In the Middle East and North Africa, low rates of female labor force
participation persist despite dramatic improvements in educational attainment. and the school-
to-work transition, which is difficult for all young people, is especially challenging for educated
women.

Other barriers to female labor force participation include safety issues on the way to work and in
the workplace; low availability of quality care services for children, the sick, and elderly dependents;
and lack of safe and affordable transportation (54 YE 2015). The constraints facing young women
are exacerbated by the norms and behaviors modeled by the women they encounter in their lives.
The lack of confident, independent women who have gone to school, are earning a living outside the
home, and can serve as role models can limit the aspirations of young women themselves.

Programs and interventions need to encompass multiple components to affect multiple outcomes
simultaneously. The approach that appears to yield the greatest impact is to bundle a set of
interventions. Programs based on a single intervention cannot expect to affect all outcomes, and
recent research suggests that integrated interventions are delivering the best results (Taylor and
Pereznieto 2014; Filmer and Fox 2014). On the labor supply side, programs supported by the Bank
Group and development partners are adopting a mix of counseling and life-skills training to try to
change behaviors and instill confidence, business training, vocational training, and follow-up
support. The Adolescent Girls Initiative (box 4.2), is an example of such combinations of inputs.

However. in contrast to education and health, and despite ongoing research and impact
evaluations, rigorous evidence is limited on what works in general to promote access to jobs; and
on the relative emphasis between supply- or demand-side constraints; best fit of specific
interventions to specific contexts; and cost-effectiveness. More work is needed to address
regulatory and policy distortions that constrain labor demand and inhibit job creation, especially in
the formal sector and for young men and women of different educational backgrounds. Few supply-
side interventions report costs, and many of those that do are expensive. The Empowerment and
Livelihoods for Adolescents program implemented by BRAC in Uganda has begun with a more
selective approach focusing on interventions to relax social norms. The program identified
sociocultural factors as the binding constraints, focusing on human development outcomes as well
as broader economic and social empowerment. In the future, the Bank Group will strengthen the
evidence base on complementarities between demand- and supply-side interventions and trade-
offs between simpler, cheaper models and results attained. On the supply side, efficiency in
program delivery, experiments to understand which components matter most, and use of
technology (such as providing job information through mobile phones) could lower costs
dramatically.




                                                                                               Page 35
World Bank Group Gender Strategy {FY16-23): Gender Equality, Poverty Reduction and Inclusive
Growth



 Box 4.2 The Adolescent Girls Initiative

 Transitioning from school to productive employment presents an array of challenges for young
 people in general and adolescent girls in particular. Reaching adolescent girls is critical because
 decisions made and behaviors established during this period affect their horizons later in life. Adolescence
 for boys typically ushers in increased mobility and autonomy, but for girls it often comes with increased
 restrictions-fewer opportunities and less freedom to exercise choice.

 The Adolescent Girls Initiative (AGI) was designed to better understand what works in helping
 adolescent girls and young women transition to productive employment. In several countries, the AGI
 piloted and rigorously evaluated innovative interventions that included business development skills
 training, technical and vocational training targeting skills in high demand, and life-skills training.

 In Liberia, AGI supported the Economic Empowerment of Adolescent Girls and Young Women
 project, which trained about 2,500 young women for either wage employment or self-employment plus
 life skills, with an emphasis on job placement and follow-up support. The project evaluation showed that
 employment rose by 47 percent while earnings increased by about US$32 per month, an 80 percent gain.
 The impacts were larger for the self-employment track than for the wage-employment track, but these
 are still much larger impacts than seen in other youth training programs. The project also significantly
 increased girls' savings by about US$36, and had positive effects on their self-confidence and job
 satisfaction.

 In Nepal, the Adolescent Girls Employment Initiative trained 4,410 young women in three rounds.
 Livelihood training spanned 39 occupations across 44 districts of Nepal. Trainees also received life-skills
 training and assistance with job search and placement or for starting their own businesses. One year later,
 the treatment group had increased their nonfarm employment by 14 percentage points, for an overall gain
 in employment of 47 percent relative to the control group. Average monthly earnings increased by
 approximately 45 percent for the 2010 cohort and 66 percent for the 2011 cohort. In contrast, limited
 effects were found on empowerment, reproductive health, or household-level outcomes.

 The rigorous evidence on program impacts that have resulted from the AGI not only contribute to the
 evidence base on what works, but also provide a strong case for (1) designing youth employment programs
 that are responsive to the needs of young women and (2) better understanding demand-side and
 regulatory constraints that hamper successful school-to-work transitions. Efforts are under way to scale
 up approaches used in AGI pilots in national-level employment programs in Nepal and Rwanda. Evidence
 and operational tools are also being used to inform project design in Bhutan, the Indian State of
 Jharkhand, the Sahel region, and Zambia, among others.



Teacher Training and Curriculum Reform to Improve Educational Outcomes for
Underperforming Boys
Weaker learning outcomes and educational achievement may be a limiting factor for boys and
young men. Across the 64 countries that participated in the most recent Programme for
International Student Assessment, results reveal a widening gap between male and female
academic achievement. They also show that young women often outperform their male peers. In
these countries, girls now go to school longer than boys and significantly outperform boys in
reading, and boys are also more likely to post low scores in math and science, with these learning




Page 36




Social Protection
F IRST -G ENERATION I SSUES




E MERGING I SSUES











Economic Opportunities

Removing Constraints for More and Better
Jobs
World Bank Group Gender Strategy {FY16-23): Gender Equality, Poverty Reduction and Inclusive
Growth



 Box 4.4 Green Jobs and Gender Equality

 Although definitions vary, "green jobs" are viewed generally as those occupations or skills that help
 countries move toward a less carbon-intensive economy and adapt to the impacts of climate change.
 Green jobs include employment in such industries as renewable energy, energy efficiency, and other
 services contributing to climate mitigation, as well as those contributing to adaptation and climate
 resilience.

 Opportunities in the green economy have the potential to increase economic possibilities for women.
 Particularly in newer industries such as renewable energy, potential exists to break long-standing
 occupational sex segregation through attention to science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
 education; technical training; and job placement for female students and trainees. It is estimated that
 by 2030, at least 20 million jobs will be created in the green economy. Enhancing women's
 entrepreneurship in this sector and women's access to green jobs can lead to greater and more
 sustainable economic growth. Although often described only with regard to their climate vulnerability,
 women are also change agents and environmental managers-through their involvement in agriculture,
 animal husbandry, and forestry at levels from local to national-who can influence the development and
 deployment of sustainable solutions.

 Sources: ADB 2011; Bowen 2012; Kuriakose and others 2013; World Bank 2012b; USAID and IUCN 2014;
 and ILO 2015.


The availability and design of infrastructure, and the services it provides, are key to accessing jobs
and economic opportunities-as well as being a potential source of jobs. Infrastructure expansion
and service provision can play a role in mitigating important constraints on women's time and
physical mobility. Investments in electricity, water, roads, lCT, and transportation can free up time
that women need for home production; paid employment; entrepreneurship; and access to
education, health, and other services. They can provide important enabling functions as the world
undergoes the largest wave of urban growth in history. More than half of the world's population
now lives in towns and cities, and by 2030 this number will swell to about 5 billion. Much of this
urbanization will unfold in Africa and Asia, bringing huge social, economic, and environmental
transformations.

Women and men's social and economic roles are at the root of their specific and differential needs
for transport. Women have unique travel needs related to their household, economic, and social
roles. Their travel patterns in urban areas are more likely to be characterized by more frequent,
shorter, and more complex trips than those of men. In rural areas, women tend to have less access
to economic opportunities and transportation choices and tend to look for jobs close to home to
juggle their other roles. There is a growing realization that women bear a greater transport burden
than men, and suffer "time poverty," which can negatively affect low-income women's ability to
reduce their economic vulnerability.

Economic opportunities differ significantly between urban and rural settings, and rural women face
specific barriers, as noted earlier, including in land ownership and tenure security. Overall, the labor
burden of rural women exceeds that of men, and includes a higher proportion of unpaid work related



Page 42
World Bank Group Gender Strategy {FY16-23): Gender Equality, Poverty Reduction and Inclusive
Growth

to preparing food and collecting fuel and water as a result of infrastructure deficits. Time-use
surveys with data by activity show that weeding and harvesting are predominantly female
activities. Women are overrepresented in unpaid, seasonal, and part-time work, and women are
often paid less than men for the same work. Recent data show that agriculture is becoming
increasingly feminized in the developing world; in Sub-Saharan Africa and the Middle East and
North Africa, women constitute the bulk of unskilled labor in the fruit, vegetable, and cut-flowers
export sectors. The Bank Group has begun experimentation with and evaluation of new approaches
to enhance the productivity of female smallholders (for example, through provision of child care
and mechanisms to hire labor) and incorporate female workers into higher-value segments of
agriculture value chains. In Sub-Saharan Africa, the Bank Group will focus on the gender gap in
agricultural productivity and agribusiness operations, whereas in South Asia the focus will be on
nutrition-sensitive and safe food systems and sustainable livelihoods, as well as on linking
smallholder farmers to value chains.

Partnerships with the private sector are critical to advancing economic opportunities for women
and including men in supporting gender equality in the workplace. One such partnership led by the
IFC is SheWorks, a global private sector partnership to improve employment opportunities and
working conditions for more than 360,000 women by 2016 through knowledge sharing and best
practices. In its first year, the partnership recruited 13 leading private sector companies (in nine
countries and 20 sectors, including traditionally male-dominated industries such as financial
services, real estate, telecommunications, construction, petrochemicals, energy, and information
technology) that have pledged to implement a minimum of three measures to support women in
the workplace: flexible work, effective anti-sexual-harassment mechanisms, and programs to
accelerate women in leadership. The EDGE Certified Foundation, the International Labor
Organization, and UN Global Compact provide knowledge support and facilitate implementation of
best practices. Early results show increases in women's employment numbers. This model will be
used to consolidate learning and best practices for replication by other companies, industries, and
regions in the years to come.

To guarantee access to entry-level jobs and welfare-to-work transitions for poor women, the Bank
Group is also strengthening the economic-inclusion dimension of public works and employment
services. Public employment programs help households smooth revenue and cope with seasonal
variation in employment and climate risks. India's National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
increased female participation by applying the same statutory wage rate for women and men; that
rate previously was above the market rate for female casual labor but below that of men.
Tanzania's Productive Social Safety Net Program is expanding the range of activities supported to
include care provision, and promoting greater female participation by locating worksites closer to
villages and allowing different household members to hold jobs. These interventions are also key to
strengthening resilience.

An emerging area for the WBG is bringing a gender lens to climate resilience and developing gender-
smart solutions to climate change. This area involves both analytic work and operations. A
companion report to the recently launched Shock Waves report (Hallegate and others, 2015) on
climate change and poverty will explore the links between gender, poverty, and climate change.
Additionally, analytical work on gender and renewable energy is planned through the Climate
Investment Funds (CIFs) and on gender-smart sustainable forest management through the Forest
Investment Program (FIP) of the CIFs and the PROFOR program (Asfaw and others 2015). With



                                                                                            Page 43
C ARE
T RANSPORT
O CCUPATIONAL S EX S EGREGATION
           o

           o
           o
           o




E NTREPRENEURSHIP















        ô




    ô












Removing Barriers to Women’s Ownership
of and Control over Assets









































Enhancing Women’s Voice and Agency and Engaging Men
and Boys




Child Marriage
Gender-Based Violence
Engaging Men and Boys to Change Social Norms about Masculinity and
Femininity
Women’s Participation and Decision Making in Service-Delivery
Governance Structures : Community-Driven Development Programs, Water
User Associations, School Boards, and Local Government Service
Management
      PART V: OPERATIONALIZING THE STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES




Deepening the Country-Driven Approach
Enhanced Country-Level Diagnostics




More and Better Sex-Disaggregated Data
World Bank Group Gender Strategy {FY16-23): Gender Equality, Poverty Reduction and Inclusive
Growth


The Bank Group has a unique capacity to contribute to and invest in data for development, including
through investments in data collection as part of broader support for national statistical capacity
and systems. As of FY15, active and pipeline projects in eight African countries will, among other
activities, build capacity of the national statistics offices to collect and use gender statistics. 28
Examples of additional activities include providing technical support for analyzing a time-use
survey in Ethiopia, highlighting differences in roles and unpaid work between males and females. In
South Sudan, the Statistical Capacity Building Project supports the statistics agency to conduct
several surveys, including the 2015 Crisis Recovery Survey that aims to collect information from
internally displaced males and females. The survey questionnaire includes topics such as gender-
based violence. The Bolivia Strengthening of the Statistical Capacity Project supports a number of
surveys that will allow for sex-disaggregated analysis.

The WBG's new data strategy for supporting household survey programs provides for establishing
best practices on collecting high-quality, individual-level information in priority areas, such as asset
ownership and control, time use, control over income, and employment, which will help client
countries meet the increasing demand for this type of information as part of SDG 5 and beyond.
Further work to incorporate relevant gender questions and appropriate sampling methods to
obtain information from females and males will be prioritized in the Living Standards Measurement
Study surveys, Enterprise Surveys, and Doing Business Surveys.

In addition to its country-level work the Bank is engaging in a number of global initiatives that could
boost the availability of operationally useful sex-disaggregated data. Given the associated costs
and challenges, the Bank is working in partnership with the United Nations and selected country
statistical offices to enhance data collection in four priority areas: (1) physical and financial asset
ownership and control, (2) time use, (3) employment, and (4) welfare. Each area has three
components: methodological research, data production, and data dissemination and usability (box
5.1).




Page 64
World Bank Group Gender Strategy {FY16-23): Gender Equality, Poverty Reduction and Inclusive
Growth

 Box 5.1 Enhancing the Availability of Individual-Level and Welfare Data

 lntrahousehold, individual-level, physical and financial asset ownership and control-Methodological
 Experiment on Measuring Asset Ownership (MEXA) . Building on the rich body of research from the Gender
 Asset Gap project, the World Bank Living Standards Measurement Study has collaborated with the United
 Nations Evidence and Data for Gender Equality (EDGE) initiative and the Uganda Bureau of Statistics to design,
 implement, and analyze within-household individual-level asset data in Uganda. Other household surveys
 informed by the MEXA work under the UN EDGE umbrella include those in Fiji, Georgia, Maldives, Mexico,
 Mongolia, the Philippines, South Africa, and Swaziland. Ongoing research based on MEXA data throughout
 2015-16 will inform the UN EDGE guidelines on the measurement of individual ownership and control of assets
 in household surveys, which will be submitted to the UN Statistical Commission for adoption in 2017.

 Employment. The World Bank has partnered with the Hewlett Foundation, the International Labor
 Organization (ILO), the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, and the United Nations
 Foundation Data2X initiative to implement the new definition of work as defined by the International
 Conference of Labor Statisticians. The new definition makes a clear distinction between "employment," which
 generates paid income for the household, and "work," which includes unpaid activities such as household chores
 and production for own consumption. The change has important implications for the types of activities that
 females undertake. The new partnership supports the World Bank-led implementation of two country pilot
 surveys in 2015, in parallel with seven other country pilots supported by the ILO. These pilots will inform the
 formulation of guidelines for the measurement of the new definitions of employment, unemployment, and labor
 underutilization in household surveys. These guidelines will eventually provide standards for questionnaires in
 labor force and household surveys.

 Time use. The World Bank will run household survey experiments on time use to test traditional recall- and
 diary-based methods in tandem with hybrid approaches that will also consider the use of commercial activity
 trackers (including accelerometers, heart rate monitors, and global positioning system trackers) that could
 provide data on type, duration, and intensity of physical activities. One key aspect of the experiments is to
 assess the potential cost savings offered by the new data-collection technologies.

 Welfare. The World Bank is conducting research on improving the measurement of selected dimensions of
 individual welfare within household surveys. The work will focus on assessing the feasibility of individual-
 specific, objective measurement of biomarkers of well-being. Subjective, self-reporting-based scales will be
 piloted in tandem with the objective measurement efforts that will yield physical markers to capture the same
 dimensions of well-being.

 One key partner for advancing the gender data agenda is Data2X, an initiative led by the United Nations
 Foundation. It serves as a platform for improved data collection that can be used to guide policy, better leverage
 investments, and spur global economic and social progress for gender equality and women's empowerment.
 Data2X conducted a recent mapping of gender data gaps across five domains-health, education, economic
 opportunities, political participation, and human security-and four dimensions-coverage, international
 standards, complexity, and granularity. With regard to assets, for example, the mapping found that data
 coverage is limited for all asset ownership, financial services, and information and communications technology
 (ICT). Data on ICT also lack international standards, complexity, and granularity, while data on asset ownership
 lack complexity and granularity.




                                                                                                           Page   65
Aligning Country-Level Planning with Higher Objectives
Developing a Better Understanding of What Works
World Bank Group Gender Strategy {FY16-23): Gender Equality, Poverty Reduction and Inclusive
Growth


describes and identifies problems, patterns, trends, gaps, and associations between attributes. It
helps clarify what to test in an impact evaluation and how to interpret some of the results. For
example, Anderson and Ray's (2010) careful analysis of census data revealed excess mortality
among adult women in Sub-Saharan Africa, in part due to maternal mortality. This finding helped
change the prevailing view that there was no gender bias in "missing women" in the region.
Subsequent research has linked these excess deaths with son preference: women reduce birth
spacing and increase pregnancies to have sons, which increases their mortality risks. This
understanding places maternal mortality at the intersection of public health and social norms, as
well as social policy in providing women with alternative arrangements for the services that sons
are supposed to provide, such as care, protection against widowhood, housing, and the like.

Impact evaluation provides the second type of research, which helps build understanding of which
approaches work and in which contexts. As noted earlier, the World Bank's Regional Gender
Innovation Labs (Glls) were created to strengthen the evidence base for what works (and what
does not) in particular contexts to promote gender equality. Currently, across all regions the GI Ls
have 75 impact evaluations under way (box 5.2) on skills, land rights, access to infrastructure, labor
force participation, entrepreneurship, youth employment, voice and agency, gender-based
violence, and teenage pregnancy. Based on early findings, support is being sought for setting up
full-fledged GI Ls in all six regions.

 Box 5.2 The Regional Gender Innovation Labs

 The first Gender Innovation Lab (GIL) was created in the Africa Region in 2011 and now supports more
 than 40 impact evaluations across 20 countries covering areas such as land rights, agriculture, private
 sector development, youth employment, and voice and agency. The Latin America and the Caribbean GIL
 has launched 13 impact evaluations in seven countries. In addition to impact evaluations on economic
 opportunity, one evaluation considers teenage pregnancy, an issue of particular relevance for the region.
 The South Asia GIL was launched in FY14 with a focus on the underlying causes of female and male
 disadvantages in access to infrastructure services, labor force participation, and gender-based violence.
 Currently, the lab contributes to nine evaluations in Afghanistan, Bangladesh, India, and Nepal. The East
 Asia GIL began in FY15 and will focus on removing barriers to productivity of women farmers, and helping
 them move up the agriculture value chain and into markets; reducing trade-offs between women's
 household and market roles; enhancing women's skills; and reducing gender asset gaps. Of the other
 regions that have yet to formally launch GI Ls, Europe and Central Asia has initiated an impact evaluation
 series on gender gaps in the region-especially looking at behavioral experiments related to gender
 equality in access to economic opportunities. Three impact evaluations now test interventions to
 effectively change mindsets of students and generate changes in their aspirations and effort, and assess
 how gender, ethnicity, and social skills play a role in labor market discrimination and opportunities. In the
 Middle East and North Africa, three impact evaluations are underway, testing (1) whether provision of
 legal aid services can decrease obstacles women face in accessing justice services in Jordan, (2) the
 effectiveness of internship programs for increasing employment among young women in the Republic of
 Yemen, and (3) how to best support young female entrepreneurs in Morocco.


Balancing the regional focus in the work programs of the GI Ls with the potential for global insights
from coordinated work programs will be important. Primary responsibility for project-level



Page 68
Building on What Works
Better Identify and Disseminate Sectoral Good Practices




Improve Staff Capacity
Improve Alignment and Collaboration across Sectors




Establishing a Strategic Approach to Mainstreaming that
Helps Achieve Results
A New Monitoring System
Leveraging Partnerships for Effective Outcomes
Implementation and Results Framework
World Bank Group Gender Strategy {FY16-23): Gender Equality, Poverty Reduction and Inclusive
Growth


Table 5.1 The Results Chain
 OUTPUTS                  ACTIVITIES              END-FY16               END-FY17                 END-FY23

 The Bank and the         The Bank Group          Guidelines are         Guidelines are           Based on country-
 government define        adopts robust           strengthened and       followed in all FY17     level analysis and
 the key gender           guidelines for the      followed in            diagnostics.             relevant diagnostics,
 challenges at the        inclusion of gender     relevant                                        CPFs will illustrate
 country level and        equality outcomes in    operations.                                     the alignment
 frame the outcomes       its diagnostic tools-                                                   between objectives
 to be supported          SCD and Jobs                                                            and instruments, and
 through the Bank         Diagnostic-and in                                                       incorporate specific
 program.                 country partnership                                                     gender equality
                          documents.                                                              results in the CPF
                                                                                                  results framework.

                          RGAPs summarize         SAR and LAC            Other four regions
                          regional objectives     RGAPs completed.       RGAPs reviewed
                          and discuss how best                           and updated.
                          to support their
                          achievement.

 The Bank Group           GPs/IFC                 Three GPs produce      Remaining GPs            Independent
 promotes the             departments develop     follow-up notes.       complete follow-up       evaluation assesses
 piloting, testing, and   follow-up notes to                             notes.                   success in
 scaling-up of            the strategy            Gender CCSA and                                 implementing follow-
 gender-smart             indicating how they     GIL produce two                                 up notes in selected
 solutions in             propose to build on     papers on what                                  GPs.
 operations.              good practices in       works, based on
                          addressing gender       meta evaluations
                          equality in their       in key sectors.
                          operational
                          programs.

                          GI Ls are introduced    New governance         Guidance on              Independent
                          in all regions and      approach to GI Ls is   strategic priorities     evaluation to assess
                          strategic guidance      approved.              is provided.             the degree to which
                          provided on focus of                                                    the conclusions of
                          testing and impact                             Funding is secured       the GIL evaluations
                          evaluation to add to                           for establishing GI Ls   have been useful and
                          "                       GIL impact             in other regions.
                            what we know                                                          have contributed to
                                                  evaluations begin
                          works."                                                                 take-up by both the
                                                  in East Asia and
                                                                                                  Bank and
                                                  Pacific Region.
                                                                                                  governments of
                                                                                                  promising
                                                                                                  approaches
                                                                                                  identified.




Page   74
World Bank Group Gender Strategy {FY16-23): Gender Equality, Poverty Reduction and Inclusive
Growth

                      New training             Training               New                    Revised modules on
                      modules are              implemented and        curricula/courses      closing gender gaps
                      developed.               new curricula          introduced as          are incorporated into
                                               developed as           needed.                all operational
                                               needed.                                       training.

                      IFC develops an e-       E-learning course is   E-learning course is   All IFC operational
                      learning course on       finalized and          introduced and at      staff have taken the
                      closing gender gaps      piloted.               least 25% of all       online training
                      and business                                    operational staff      course.
                      benefits.                                       complete it.

                      IFC hosts regular        Three training         More sector-specific
                      face-to-face training    courses hosted         training courses
                      courses on closing       (agriculture,          rolled out.
                      gaps between men         finance,
                      and women in             extractives ).
                      specific sectors.


 Governments and      Bank publications         Bank publications     Bank publications      PLRs of relevant
 private sector       and outreach             and outreach           and outreach           CPFs and RGAPs
 clients implement    programs                 programs               programs               provide examples of
 and scale up         disseminate gender-      disseminate            disseminate gender-    gender-smart
 successful gender-   smart approaches.        gender-smart           smart approaches.      approaches
 smart approaches                              approaches.                                   introduced through
 throughout their                                                                            Bank operational
 development                                                                                 work that has been
 programs.                                                                                   taken up or is under
                                                                                             consideration by the
                                                                                             government
                                                                                             concerned.

                      Bank Group projects                             GI Ls and WBL track    PLRs of relevant
                      support scaling-up                              how much research      CPFs and RGAPs
                      effective approaches.                           uptake is taking       report on gender
                                                                      place in projects.     equality support
                                                                                             programs that have
                                                                                             contributed to
                                                                                             national level scale-
                                                                                             up.

 The monitoring       The identification of    Guidelines for the     The new monitoring     Tracking continues.
 framework for the    outcomes is              new monitoring         system is piloted,
 Bank and the IFC     undertaken at the        system are issued.     revised, and a
 signals the          design stage of                                 baseline
 importance of        projects and tracked                            established.
 results and allows   throughout the
 the achievement of   project lifespan.
 results to be
 evaluated.           Progress on results is   New guidelines for     The guidelines are     All MTR ISRs and
                      tracked during           ISRs and ICRs are      applied in ISRs for    ICRs use the new
                      implementation and                                                     guidelines for




                                                                                                           Page 75
Conclusion
World Bank Group Gender Strategy {FY16-23): Gender Equality, Poverty Reduction and Inclusive
Growth

opportunities to address them at the country level, as are stronger links between the diagnostics
and the various instruments the Bank Group has available to support the achievement of country-
level outcomes. A new monitoring system will be put in place to provide the metrics needed to
assess whether the Bank is contributing to outcomes.

Gender equality remains one of the most important and daunting challenges facing the global
community in the years ahead. There is a sharp income gradient on gender equality outcomes
between countries, and within countries between women of different income levels. Poor women
in low-income countries are thus doubly disadvantaged. This gradient makes promoting gender
equality central to the WBG's goals of reducing poverty and promoting shared prosperity. In many
countries women have little or no say about whether they will pursue higher education, when they
will marry, and how many children they will have. Across countries, women still earn less than men
for the same work even when they have the same abilities and experience, and they are still
underrepresented in many of the best-payingjobs in growing sectors. Women are also increasingly
affected by shocks linked to fragility, conflict, and climate change, but they are key protagonists
for strengthening their resilience and that of their households and communities. At the same time,
in many societies, men are constrained by an outdated view of masculinity that perpetuates
violence and self-destructive behaviors. In recommitting itself through this strategy to addressing
these issues, the Bank Group has indicated that it is willing to do its part in tackling them. At the
same time, the WBG recognizes that partnerships at the global and country levels are critical to
making change happen. In the coming years, management and staff will demonstrate that the
institution is doing whatever is necessary to take its contribution to gender equality to the next
level and make it transformational.




                                                                                             Page 77
APPENDIX A: THE EXTERNAL CONSULTATION PROCESS FOR THE
STRATEGY

Consultation Process




Stakeholders Consulted






Findings


Feedback on the Strategy Framework and Focus Areas



















Challenges and Issues
E NDOWMENTS



























E CONOMIC O PPORTUNITIES : M ORE AND B ETTER J OBS AND O WNERSHIP OF AND C ONTROL
OVER P RODUCTIVE A SSETS

































V OICE AND A GENCY
 

















Recommendations on the Strategy’s Approach
R ESULTS
 













S TRATEGIC A PPROACH TO MAINSTREAMING
 

















C OUNTRY - LED APPROACH
 














F RAGILE AND C ONFLICT -A FFECTED S ITUATIONS
 










Additional Issues the WBG Should Take into Consideration












APPENDIX B: IDA 17 POLICY COMMITMENTS ON GENDER EQUALITY






























    
APPENDIX C: MULTILATERAL DEVELOPMENT BANK MONITORING
SYSTEMS
















APPENDIX D: A STRENGTHENED METHODOLOGY FOR ASSESSING
WORLD BANK PERFORMANCE ON GENDER AND DEVELOPMENT

























  • Identify gaps in           Actions             • Support mechanisms
  outcomes between                                  to measure changes in
 women and men in a       • Design interventions      outcomes between
given sector or project     to address the gaps        women and men
        context            between women and
                                    men


    Analysis                                               M&E
    
    

    















    

        


        





World Bank Group Gender Strategy {FY16-23): Gender Equality, Poverty Reduction and Inclusive
Growth


Notes

1 Socioeconomic opportunities can be defined to include income-generation opportunities as well as human capital, voice
and agency, and freedom from violence.
2 The social definitions of what it means to be female or male vary among cultures and change over time. Recently the

concept of gender has been expanded to include gender identity, an individual's internal, personal sense of being male or
female or some other gender, which may or may not coincide with that person's birth-assigned sex.
3 Indeed, this was reflected in the external consultations held by the Bank in preparation for this strategy, where in a

number of countries the majority of participants were women.
4 World Bank, World Development Indicators.
5 Such occupations tend to pay less than other jobs with otherwise similar characteristics (Budig, England, and Folbre

2002). Women's segregation in care jobs helps explain the persistence of gender differences in pay.
6 World Bank, World Development Indicators. http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/world-development-indicators.
7 Countdown to 2015 is a multipartner initiative that tracks and supports country progress toward achieving the health-

related MDGs. Countdown tracks progress in the 75 countries where more than 95 percent of all maternal and child
deaths occur, including the 49 lowest-income countries identified by the Global Strategy for Women's and Children's
Health.
8 See "Every minute, a young woman is newly infected with HIV"

(http:/ /www.unaids.org/en/resources/infographics/20120608gendereveryminute).
9 Gender CCSA Team analysis conducted using WBG Gender Data Portal. http:/ /data.worldbank.org/topic/gender.
10 Gender CCSA Team analysis conducted using WBG Gender Data Portal. http:/ /data.worldbank.org/topic/gender.
11 For example, even with similar-sized plots, women produce up to 66 percent less than men in Niger (World Bank 2014c).
12 International Telecommunication Union/ICT indicators database; GSMA Intelligence. http://www.itu.int/en/ITU-

D/Statistics/Pages/publications/wtid.aspx.
13 UNICEF global databases 2014.
14 Inter-Parliamentary Union, 2014. Women in Parliaments. http://www.ipu.org/wmn-e/world.htm.
15 The UN Refugee Agency. "Women: Particular Risks and Challenges." http://www.unhcr.org/pages/49c3646c1d9.html.
16 The UN Refugee Agency. "Women: Particular Risks and Challenges." http://www.unhcr.org/pages/49c3646c1d9.html.
17 The six countries that have not ratified the convention are the Islamic Republic of Iran, Palau, Somalia, Sudan, Tonga,

and the United States.
18 Beijing Platform for Action, Strategic Objective H.2. A recent review found that while donor policies emphasize

mainstreaming, most development partner investments follow a twin-track approach, combining integrated activities in
specific sectors with targeted support to women and girls (Brouwers 2013).
19
   All 24 DAC members now use the marker when they report their aid statistics. However, in interpreting the data, the
OECD-DAC (2012, 4) cautions analysts to take into account the proportion of aid that is screened with the marker, since
"a high percentage of gender equality focused aid alone does not mean that aid is well aligned with the gender equality
policy objective; such a conclusion would only be valid for a donor with 100 percent coverage." In 2011, approximately 80
percent of commitments were screened for the marker.
20 The labs work closely with project teams inside and outside the Bank to foster ownership and uptake of evaluation

results, and to complete the feedback loop to inform scale-up and replication decisions. This helps inform the WBG
country dialogue by providing new insights gleaned from the impact evaluations into the drivers of gender inequality.
The labs integrate skills and issues across sectors (for example, poverty, social protection, and rural development). To
do this, gender lab teams work with project implementation teams from the design of the project to ensure that an
impact evaluation is feasible, but also, in some cases, to build innovative interventions to test questions such as "can
we break gender segregation in occupations by mentoring and training young women?" The evaluations are joint efforts
of the gender lab team and the project implementation team, addressing questions that they develop together. Similarly,
the results are jointly owned-and shared within projects and governments and across regions.
21 The proportion of country strategies and operations that are required to meet these three criteria has increased over

time. All WBG country strategies prepared in FY14 drew on gender assessments, and 90 percent of country strategies
integrated gender in the three dimensions (analysis, actions, and the results framework). Of lending projects approved in
FY14, 55 percent integrated gender in analysis, actions, and the results framework. A target of 66 percent has been set
for FY17.
22 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. 2015. Program for International Student Assessment

(PISA). http://www.oecd.org/pisa/.




Page 92
World Bank Group Gender Strategy {FY16-23): Gender Equality, Poverty Reduction and Inclusive
Growth


23 Literature shows that in the United States, small businesses secure 70 percent of their financing against movable
assets, but by comparison, nearly 90 percent of movable assets that can be pledged as collateral to U.S. banks would
likely be rejected by Nigerian banks (Almod6var-Reteguis, Kushnir, and Meilland, n.d.).
24 For more information, see the GBA web site at http://forum.gbaforwomen.netf.
25 World Bank, IFC, Young Innovations, and Computer Association of Nepal. Fight Violence against Women and Girls web

site. http://fightvaw.orgj.
26 The sector-specific Violence against Women and Girls Resource Guides developed by the World Bank Group, the Global

Women's Institute, the Inter-American Development Bank, and the International Center for Research on Women are
available at http://www.vawgresourceguide.org/.
27 The Great Lakes Emergency Sexual and Gender-Based Violence and Women's Health Project was financed under IDA

16 and therefore is not included in the accounting toward the IDA 17 targets.
28 The eight countries are Burkina Faso, Ethiopia, Malawi, Mali, Niger, Nigeria, Tanzania, and Uganda.
29 Currently, the Bank's monitoring system ('gender tag") monitors and rates projects on their "depth" of gender

integration by assessing whether the project design integrates (1) gender analysis and / or consultation on gender or
gender-related issues; (2) specific actions to address the distinct needs of women and girls, or men and boys, or to
positively affect gender gaps; and (3) mechanisms to facilitate the monitoring and / or evaluation of gender impacts
through the results framework.
30 These include pre-consultative meetings with the Nordic-Baltic Group (Norway, January 2015) and the Commission on

the Status of Women (New York City, March 2015).
31 Currently, the Bank's monitoring system (gender tag") monitors and rates projects on their "depth" of gender

integration by assessing whether the project design integrates (1) gender analysis and/ or consultation on gender related
issues, (2) specific actions to address the distinct needs of women and girls, or men and boys, or to positively affect
gender gaps, and (3) mechanisms to facilitate the monitoring and / or evaluation of gender impacts through the results
framework.
32 A gender indicator provides factual information about the status of women and men, relative to an explicit reference

group. Gender indicators are presented as a ratio (female to male), as an absolute gap (female - male) or as a relative gap
((female - male)/female). Indicators may also be women- or men-specific, in that they measure conditions that occur
only among women or men (for example, maternal mortality).




                                                                                                                 Page   93
World Bank Group Gender Strategy {FY16-23): Gender Equality, Poverty Reduction and Inclusive
Growth




References

ADB {Asian Development Bank}. 2011. Women and Labour Markets in Asia: Rebalancing for Gender Equality. Manila: Asian
        Development Bank.
AfDB (African Development Bank Group). 2015. Investing in Gender Equality for Africa's Transformation. Abidjan, Cote
        d'Ivoire: AfDB. http://www.afdb.org/fileadmin/uploads /afdb /Documents/Policy-Documents/2014-2018_ -
        _Bank_Group_Gender _Strategy.pdf.
Almod6var-Reteguis, Nayda, Khrystyna Kushnir, and Thibault Meilland. n.d. "Mapping the Legal Gender Gap in Using
       Property and Building Credit." Women, Business, and the Law, International Finance Corporation, Washington.
       http://wbl.worldbank.org/-/media/FPDKM/WBL/Documents/Notes/Legal-Gender-Gap-in-Using-Property-
       and-Building-Credit.pdf.
Anderlini, Sanam Naraghi. 2011. "Background Paper for the World Development Report 2012: Gender Equality and
          Development." World Bank, Washington, DC.
Anderson, Siwan, and Debra J. Ray. 2010. "Missing Women: Age and Disease." Review of Economic Studies 77 (4): 1262-
        300.
Asfaw, Solomon, Clare Bishop-Sambrook, Yvette Diei, Ilaria Firmian, Norbert Eugen Henninger, Christine Heumesser,
        Sophia Huyer, Patti Kristjanson, Corina Lefter, Szilvia Lehel, Yuvei Li, Giuseppe Maggio, Azzurra Massimino,
        Ingrid Marie Pierre Mallard, Christiane Monsieur, Morgan C. Mutoko, Julia Isabel Navarro Espinal, Sibyl Nelson,
        Monica Percic, Aina Randrianantoandro, Janie Rioux, Natalia Winder Rossi, Andrea Sanchez Enciso, Larissa
        Setaro, Sanna Liisa Taivalmaa, Andrea Thulstrup, and Leon D. Williams. 2015. Gender in Climate-Smart
        Agriculture: Module 18 for Gender in Agriculture Sourcebook. Agriculture Global Practice. Washington, DC:
        World Bank Group, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, and the International Fund for
        Agricultural Development. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2015/10/25135830 /gender-climate-
        smart-agriculture-module-18-gender-agriculture-sourcebook.
Berlinski, Samuel, and Sebastian Galiani. 2007. "The Effect of a Large Expansion of Pre-primary School Facilities on
          Preschool Attendance and Maternal Employment." Labour Economics 14 (3): 665-80.
- - - , and Patrick McEwan. 2008. "Preschool and Maternal Labour Market Outcomes: Evidence from a Regression
         Discontinuity Design." Economic Development and Cultural Change 59 (2): 313-44.
Berthe Ion, Matias, Diana Kruger, and Melanie Oyarzun. 2015. "The Effects of Longer School Days on Mothers' Labor Force
          Participation." Discussion Paper 9212, Institute for the Study of Labor, Bonn, Germany.
Bloom, D. E., D. Canning, G. Fink, and J. Finlay. 2007. "Realizing the Demographic Dividend: Is Africa Any Different?" PGDA
         Working Paper 2307, Program on the Global Demography of Aging, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA.
Bowen, Alex. 2012. "Green Growth, Green Jobs and the Labor Market." Office of the Chief Economist, Sustainable
        Development Network, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Brouwers, Ria. 2013. "Revisiting Gender Mainstreaming in International Development: Goodbye to an Illusionary
        Strategy." International Institute of Social Studies Working Paper 556, Erasmus University, Rotterdam, the
        Netherlands.
Budig, M., P. England, and N. Folbre. 2002. "Wages of Virtue: The Relative Pay of Care Work." Social Problems 49 (4):
         455-73.
Bussolo, Maurizio, Johannes Koettl, and Emily Sinnott. 2015. Golden Aging: Prospect for Health, Activities and Prosperous
         Aging in Europe and Central Asia. Washington, DC: World Bank Group.
Buvinic, Mayra, Monica Das Gupta, Ursula Casabonne, and Philip Verwimp. 2013. "Violent Conflict and Gender Inequality,
         An Overview." World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 6371, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Buvinic, Mayra, Rebecca Furst-Nichols, and Emily Courey Pryor. 2013. A Roadmap for Promoting Women's Economic
         Empowerment. Washington, DC: United Nations Foundation and Exxon Mobil.
Buvinic, Mayra, Rebecca Furst-Nichols, Gayatri Koolwal. 2014. Mapping Gender Data Gaps. Washington, DC.



Page 94
World Bank Group Gender Strategy {FY16-23): Gender Equality, Poverty Reduction and Inclusive
Growth


Campos, Francisco. 2011. "Gender Gaps at the Enterprise Level: Evidence from South Africa." Africa Region Gender
        Practice Policy Brief 1, World Bank, Washington, DC.
- - - , M. Goldstein, L. McGorman, A. M. Munoz Boudet, and 0. Pimhidzai. 2013. "Breaking the Metal Ceiling: Female
         Entrepreneurs Who Succeed in Male-Dominated Sectors in Uganda." Africa Region Gender Practice Policy Brief
         9, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Cockerham, W. C., M. C. Snead, and D. F. Dewaal. 1997. "Health Lifestyles in Russia and the Socialist Heritage." Journal
        of Health and Social Behavior 43 (1): 42-55.
Cuberes, David, and Marc Teignier. 2014. "Aggregate Costs of Gender Gaps in the Labor Market: A Quantitative Estimate."
         UB Economics Working Paper E14/308, University of Barcelona, Barcelona.
Denboba, Amina, Amer Hasan, and Quentin Wodon, eds. 2015. Early Childhood Education and Development in Indonesia.
        An Assessment of Policies Using Saber. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Doss, Cheryl, Carmen Diana Deere, Abena D. Oduro, Hema Swaminathan, J. Y. Suchitra, Rahul Lahoti, W. Baah-Boateng,
         L. Boakye-Yiadom, Jackeline Contreras, Jennifer Twyman, Zachary Catanzarite, Caren Grown, and Marya
         Hillesland. 2011. The Gender Asset and Wealth Gaps: Evidence from Ecuador, Ghana. and l<arnataka, India.
         Bangalore: Indian Institute of Management Bangalore.
EBRD (European Bank for Reconstruction and Development). 2015. Strategy for the Promotion of Gender Equality 2016-
         2020.

El-Zoghbi, Mayada. 2015. "False Neutrality: Ensuring Policies and Regulations Benefit Women." Blog post. Consultative
         Group to Assist the Poor.
FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization). 2011. The State of Food and Agriculture 2010-11. Women in Agriculture: Closing
        the Gender Gap for Development. Rome: FAO.
Filmer, Deon, and Louise Fox. 2014. Youth Employment in Sub-Saharan Africa. Washington, DC: World Bank and Agence
         Fram;aise de Developpement.
Gender and Development, Poverty Reduction and Economic Management Network. 2011. "World Bank Group Gender
        Action Plan: Four Year Progress Report (January 2007 - December 2010)." World Bank, Washington, DC.
GHWA (Global Health Workforce Alliance). 2015. "Synthesis Paper of the Thematic Working Groups (DRAFT for
      consultation). Health Workforce 2030: Towards a Global Strategy on Human Resources for Health." World
      Health Organization, Geneva.
Hallegatte, Stephane, Mook Bangalore, Laura Bonzanigo, Marianne Fay, Tamaro Kane, Ulf Narloch, Julie Rozenberg, David
         Treguer, and Adrien Vogt-Schilb. Forthcoming. Shock Waves: Managing the Impacts of Climate Change on
         Poverty. Washington, DC: World Bank.
IASC (Inter-Agency Standing Committee). 2015. Guidelines for Integrating Gender-Based Violence Interventions in
         Humanitarian Action. Inter-Agency Standing Committee.
IDA Resource Mobilization Department, Concessional Finance and Global Partnerships. 2013. "Special Themes for IDA
        17." World Bank, Washington.
IDB (Inter-American Development Bank). 2015. "Gender and Diversity Sector Framework Document." IDB, Washington,
          DC. http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?docnum=39435256.
IEG (Independent Evaluation Group). 2010. Gender and Development: An Evaluation of World Bank Support 2002-2008.
         Washington, DC: Independent Evaluation Group, World Bank.
- - - . 2015. World Bank Support to Early Childhood Development. An Independent Evaluation. Washington, DC:
         Independent Evaluation Group, World Bank.
IFC (International Finance Corporation). 2008. The Business of Health in Africa: Partnering with the Private Sector to
          Improve People's Lives. Washington, DC: International Finance Corporation, World Bank Group.
         http:/ /documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2008/01/9526453/business-health-africa-partnering-private-
         sector-improve-peoples-lives.




                                                                                                              Page   95
World Bank Group Gender Strategy {FY16-23): Gender Equality, Poverty Reduction and Inclusive
Growth




- - - and GPFI (Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion). 2011. Strengthening Access to Finance for Women-Owned
        SMEs in Developing Countries. Washington, DC: International Finance Corporation.
ILO (International Labour Organization). 2015. Gender Equality and Green Jobs. Geneva: Green Jobs Programme,
         International Labour Organization.
K.uriakose, Anne T., Rasmus Heltberg, William Wiseman, Cecilia Costella, Rachel Cipryk, and Sabine Cornelius. 2013.
         "Climate-Responsive Social Protection." Development Policy Review 31 (S2): o19-o34.
Martinez, Sebastian, Sophie Naudeau, and Vitor Pereira. 2012. "The Promise of Preschool in Africa: A Randomized Impact
         Evaluation of Early Childhood Development in Rural Mozambique." The World Bank and Save the Children,
         Washington, DC.
McCleary-Sills, Jennifer, Lucia Hanmer, Jennifer Parsons, and Jeni Klugman. 2015. "Child Marriage: A Critical Barrier to
        Girls' Schooling and Gender Equality in Education." Review of Faith and International Affairs 13 (3): 69-80.
Morrison, Andrew, Gabriela Vega, Anne-Marie Urban, Nathyeli Acuna, and Luis Marquez. 2014. "Progress Report on the
         Implementation of the Gender Policy and Gender Action Plan for Operations, 2011-2013." Inter-American
         Development                              Bank,                         Washington,                    DC.
         http: //idbdocs. iadb.org/wsdocs / ge tDocume nt. aspx? D0 CNU M=3 93 84358.
Notzon, Francis C., Yuri M. K.omarov, Sergie P. Ermakov, Christopher T. Sempos, James S. Marks, and Elena Sempos.
        1998. "causes of Declining Life Expectancy in Russia." JAMA 279 (10):793-800.
OECD-DAC (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development-Development Assistance Committee). 2012. Aid
       in Support of Gender Equality and Women's Empowerment. Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
       Development.
PMNCH, WHO, World Bank, and AHPSR (Partnership for Maternal, Newborn, and Child Health; World Health
      Organization; World Bank; and Alliance for Health Policy and Systems Research). 2014. Success Factors for
      Women's and Children's Health: Policy and Programme Highlights from 10 Fast-Traci< Countries. Geneva: World
      Health Organization.
Rees Smith, Emilie, Yonatan Yehdego Araya, Verena Phipps, and Elizabeth Alonso-Hallifax. Forthcoming. Conflict, Forced
        Displacement and Gender in the Great Lakes Region: Analysis of key issues and Cha//enges in Burundi,
        Democratic Republic of Congo and Uganda. Washington, DC: Learning on Gender and Conflict in Africa (LOGiCA).
S4YE (Goldin, N. and M. Hobson with P. Glick, M. Lundberg, S.Puerto). 2015. "Toward Solutions for Youth Employment: A
        Baseline for 2015." Solutions for Youth Employment, Washington, D.C.
Singh, Susheela, Jacqueline E. Darroch, and Lori S. Ashford. 2014. Adding It Up: The Costs and Benefits of Investing in
         Sexual and Reproductive Health 2014. New York: Guttmacher Institute.
SOFA Team, and Cheryl Doss. 2011. The Role of Women in Agriculture. ESA Working Paper 11-02. Rome: Agricultural
       Development Economics, FAO.
Taylor, Georgia, and Paola Pereznieto. 2014. Review of Evaluation Approaches and Methods Used by Interventions on
         Women      and     Girls'     Economic      Empowerment.      London:   Overseas   Development     Institute.
         http://www. od i.org/p u blication s/8275-review-evaluation -approaches-methods-used-by-interventions-
         women -girls-economic-empowerment.
United Nations. 2002. "Gender Mainstreaming: An Overview." United Nations, Office of the Special Adviser on Gender
        Issues and Advancement of Women, New York.
UN AIDS. 2012. "Every Minute, a Young Woman Is Newly Infected with HIV." Geneva, Switzerland.
UNESCO. 2015. "EFA Global Monitoring Report, Gender and EFA 2000-2015, Achievements and Challenges". Paris,
       France.
UNHCR (United Nations Refugee Agency). 2014. World at War. UNHCR Global Trends. Forced Displacement in 2014.
       Geneva: UNHCR.
UNICEF. 2008. The State of the World's Children 2009: Maternal and Newborn Health. New York, USA: UNICEF.



Page 96
World Bank Group Gender Strategy {FY16-23): Gender Equality, Poverty Reduction and Inclusive
Growth


UNDP {United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division). 2012. "changing Levels and
       Trends in Mortality: The Role of Patterns of Death by Cause." United Nations publication ST/ESA/SER.A/318,
       UNDP, New York.
UNU-Wider. 2014. Position Paper - Aid and Gender Equality. Helsinki, Finland: UNU World Institute for Development
       Economics Research.
UN Women. 2012. "Between Gender and Ageing: The Status of the World's Older Women and Progress since the Madrid
      International     Plan     of      Action      on       Ageing."      UN    Women,        New       York.
      http://www.un.org/womenwatch/osagi/ianwge2012/Between-Gender-Ageing-Report-Executive-Summary-
      2012.pdf.
USAID and IUCN (US Agency for International Development and International Union for Conservation of Nature). 2014.
        "Women at the Forefront of the Clean Energy Future: White Paper of the USAID/IUCN Initiative Gender Equality
        for Climate Change Opportunities (GECCO)." USAID and IUCN, Washington, DC.
Vyas, Seema, and Charlotte Watts. 2009. "How Does Economic Empowerment Affect Women's Risk of Intimate Partner
         Violence in Low and Middle Income Countries? A Systematic Review of Published Evidence." Journal of
         International Development 21 (5): 577-602.

WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA, World Bank, and UN Population Division. 2014. Trends in Maternal Mortality 1990-2013:
      Estimates by WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA, The World Bani< and the UN Population Division. Geneva: World Health
      Organization.
World Bank. 2006. "Gender Equality as Smart Economics: A World Bank Group Gender Action Plan (Fiscal years 2007 -
        2010)." World Bank Group, Washington, DC.
- - - . 2011. World Development Report 2012: Gender Equality and Development. Washington, DC: World Bank.
- - - . 2012a. The Effects of Women's Economic Power in Latin America and the Caribbean. Washington, DC: World
         Bank.
- - - . 2012b. The World Bani< Social Protection and Labor Strategy 2012-2022: Resilience, Equity and Opportunity.
         Washington, DC: World Bank.
- - - . 2013a. Building Resilience: Integrating Climate and Disaster Risi< into Development. Washington, DC.
- - - . 2013b. Women, Business, and the Law 2014: Removing Restrictions to Enhance Gender Equality. Washington,
         DC: World Bank.
- - - . 2014a. Gender at Work A Companion to the World Development Report on Jobs. Washington, DC: World Bank.
- - - . 2014b. Voice and Agency, Empowering Women and Girls for Shared Prosperity. Washington, DC: World Bank.
- - - . 2014c. ''voices of Men and Women Regarding Social Norms in Niger." Poverty Reduction and Economic
         Management Africa Region Report 83296-NE, World Bank, Washington, DC.
- - - ONE Campaign. 2014. Levelling the Field: Improving Opportunities for Women Farmers in Africa. Washington, DC:
       World Bank.
World Bank Group. 2009. Confronting "Death on Wheels": Making Roads Safe in Europe and Central Asia. Establishing
        Multisectoral Partnerships to Address a Silent Epidemic. Washington, DC: World Bank.
- - - . 2015. Women, Business, and the Law 2016: Getting to Equal. Washington, DC: World Bank Group.




                                                                                                               Page 97
