Kuala Lumpur   |   Johor Bahru   |   George Town   |   Kuantan   |   Kota Kinabalu               |    Kuching




                                                                         of Competitive Cities in Malaysia
                                                                               Achieving a System

                                                                                    Overview
                                              A
                                                                            s Malaysia looks toward the future, there is a strong recognition
                                                                            that urbanization will play an increasingly important role as a
                                                                            driver of economic growth. The evidence linking higher levels of
                                                                            urbanization, higher productivity and overall economic growth
                                                                            is well established. Yet cities can grow in different ways that will
                                                                            affect their competitiveness and livability. They can be successful
                                                                            at creating opportunities, providing services for residents and citizens,
                                                                            and enhancing public spaces to create vibrant and attractive places to
                                                                            live. But cities can also neglect investments in critical infrastructure and
                                               ACHIEVING                    basic services, and mismanage land, environmental and social policies
                                                                            which result in traffic congestion, sprawl, slums, pollution, and crime.
                                               A SYSTEM OF
                                                                             This overview summarizes a study carried out by the World Bank under
                                               COMPETITIVE                   the guidance of the Economic Planning Unit (EPU) of Malaysia and
                                                                             Khazanah Nasional Berhad. The study focuses on understanding three key
                                               CITIES
                                                                             aspects of city competitiveness: economic growth, urban governance, and
                                                 social inclusion. The analysis is based on existing data provided through the Malaysian Department
                                                 of Statistics, GIS data from local authorities, international comparative data, and primary data
                                                 collected through extensive field work carried out from April to October, 2014. This study focused on
                                                 six selected cities in Malaysia: Kuala Lumpur, Johor Bahru, George Town, Kuantan, Kota Kinabalu and
                                                 Kuching. Lessons from international experience were used as guidance in the context of Malaysia’s
                                                 own experience and provided critical input to the set of recommended policy options. An assessment
                                                 of city-level benchmarking efforts, specifically the Malaysian Urban-Rural-National Indicators
                                                 Network on Sustainable Development (MURNInets) was also carried out with key recommendations
                                                 proposing the adoption of international benchmarking to allow cities to compare how they are doing
                                                 relative to other cities with similar attributes.




                                                                                 This study focused on six
                                                                                selected cities in Malaysia.
                                                                                                                                y
                                                                                                                    Kota Kinabalu

                                                    w
                                           George Town



                                                                         xKuantan
                                                 Kuala Lumpur   u
                                                                                          Kuching

                                                                              v         z
                                                                      Johor Bahru


KL Tower. © Smileseafox | Dreamstime.com                                                            1
            ECONOMICALLY COMPETITIVE                                                                                                                            Low economic density. Global experience suggests that economic density, as measured by either
                                                                                                                                                                jobs per km2 or gross domestic product (GDP) per km2, rises with the level of development; and the
            and ENVIRONMENTALLY SUSTAINABLE CITIES                                                                                                              densest places in the world are in the richest countries. The economic density of Malaysian cities,




      F
                                                                                                                                                                however, is relatively low compared to other large cities in East and Southeast Asia. For example, the
                      rom an economic perspective, maximizing the gains from urbanization to strengthen the role                                                employment density of Seoul, Singapore and Hong Kong is 2.5, 5 and 10 times that of Kuala Lumpur
                      of cities as the growth engines of the national economy is fundamental to helping Malaysia                                                respectively, while the gross value-added per km2 of these cities is 4, 13 and 22 times that of Kuala
                      transform from a middle-income country to a high-income one. Continued investments in                                                     Lumpur. This limits the benefits of agglomeration and impedes transformation to a knowledge-based
                      rural areas will ensure equity and balanced development at the national level. Analysis                                                   service economy.
                      based on the framework developed in the World Bank’s World Development Report 2009,
            which characterizes geographic transformations for economic development in three dimensions:                                                       	Inefficient urban that results in high transport costs and negative environmental impacts.
            density, distance and division, points to three main constraints to the economic competitiveness of                                                 Sprawling urban form can undermine livability, affordability and environmental sustainability. The
            Malaysian cities1:                                                                                                                                  relatively low spatial density of Malaysia’s cities results in long commutes for work, and ultimately
                                                                                                                                                                affects transport costs which are high compared with other East Asian cities. The share of transport
        1
            	Density refers to the size of population and economic activities per km2, distance refers to the ease of reaching markets and determines access    costs in household income is 50 percent higher than in Hong Kong and Tokyo. Adding to the high
             to opportunity, and division arises from barriers to economic interactions created by social, cultural and other barriers which restrict market
             access. These three spatial dimensions can drive markets and affect competitiveness.                                                               transport costs is traffic congestion, currently a serious problem in the larger cities of Malaysia. Urban




                                                                                                                                                                                             Job density (1,000 persons/km2) of Malaysian cities                                          15.9
                                                                                                                                                                                         is relatively low compared to other large cities in East Asia
                                                                                                                                                                                           Job density = Persons employed by geographical location of work/km2
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Source: Oxford Economics 2012; World Bank 2015.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   7.6       8.0

            Density Measured                                 Distance The ease or                                      Division Density and                                                                                                                4.1
            as the mass of population and                    difficulty for goods and services,                        distance are also affected by                                                                                      3.4     3.4
            economic activity per unit of                    labor, capital, information, and                          division. Within-city disparities                                                             1.8        2.7
                                                                                                                                                                                             1.0    1.5      1.6
            land.                                            ideas to traverse space, capturing                        in welfare and housing, and                      0.7      0.7
                                                             both time and monetary aspects of                         associated social issues such
                                                             costs.                                                    as crime.




                                                                                                                                                                     wn



                                                                                                                                                                                    n


                                                                                                                                                                                              lu


                                                                                                                                                                                                           ru



                                                                                                                                                                                                            r


                                                                                                                                                                                                                       g


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ai



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            k


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    o



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             l


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     e


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             rta



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ng
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ou
                                                                                                                                                                                                          pu




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ko




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   or
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     in




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ky
                                                                                                                                                                                  ta




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               gh
                                                                                                                                                                                            ba


                                                                                                                                                                                                         ah




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ko
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ka
                                                                                                                                                                   To




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ch




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Se
                                                                                                                                                                                an




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ap
                                                                                                                                                                                                        m




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ng



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                To
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             an
                                                                                                                                                                                          na


                                                                                                                                                                                                      rB




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ja
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Lu


                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ku




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ng
                                                                                                                                                                              Ku




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ng
                                                                                                                                                                   ge




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ba
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Sh
                                                                                                                                                                                        Ki


                                                                                                                                                                                                   ho




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ho
                                                                                                                                                                 or




                                                                                                                                                                                                    a




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Si
                                                                                                                                                                                                  al
                                                                                                                                                                                    ta


                                                                                                                                                                                                 Jo
                                                                                                                                                               Ge




                                                                                                                                                                                               Ku
                                                                                                                                                                                  Ko




2   Johor Bahru.                                                                  2                                                                                                                                            3
  sprawl also contributes to greenhouse gas emissions. Temperature records for the past 40 years already show     functions. Settlements of different sizes complement one another with large cities, secondary cities, market
  that temperature anomalies in Malaysia’s cities have increased faster than the global average. In the medium    towns and villages all linked through complementary functions. Large cities typically would concentrate on
  to long term, climate change is expected to result in more heat waves and to exacerbate the urban heat island   services and innovation, whereas secondary cities and medium sized cities, which tend to have more land,
  effect, in turn increasing energy demand for cooling and increasing water consumption. Heavy, more frequent     would concentrate on manufacturing and can specialize on specific industries according to their comparative
  precipitation events are expected and will increase the risk and severity of urban flooding and landslides,     advantages and designated strategies. Smaller towns connect rural and urban areas and act as market centers
  requiring careful land use planning and attention to spatial form.                                              for agricultural products and other rural outputs. The structure of Malaysia’s cities included in this study is
                                                                                                                  roughly as follows: Kuala Lumpur is the large primary city, followed by two large secondary cities (Johor Bahru
 	 Insufficiently integrated institutions and policies. Institutional complexity and coordination issues across   and George Town), and several medium-sized cities (Kuantan, Kota Kinabalu, and Kuching). Each city faces
   various levels of government affect the efficiency of urban planning and implementation. For example, land     some specific challenges with regard to its economic productivity, land use patterns and spatial development.
   use planning and urban transport are generally not well integrated. Institutional coordination and strong      Key points related to economic, land use and spatial factors were analyzed at the individual urban level, these
   capacity in execution and enforcement are important for integrating land use with strategic and structural     points are described below for each of the six conurbations.
   investment planning across sectors in Malaysia’s cities.
                                                                                                                    Kuala Lumpur Greater Kuala Lumpur is the economic center of Malaysia and has considerable potential to
The framework for analysis also denotes cities as a portfolio of assets, each differentiated by characteristics     become a world-class business center. To allow this to happen, Kuala Lumpur would benefit from growth
that include size, location, and density of settlement. Extensive research highlights the fact that businesses      in services and innovation sectors, with more standardized industries moving to smaller cities and towns,
and people can exploit economies of scale and agglomeration if their settlements perform their intended             as has been the experience of other developed countries. The relative degree of specialization in financial,




Kuala Lumpur.                                         4                                                                                                                 5
business and consumer services in Kuala Lumpur decreased from 2003 to 2012, although industry                          Nearly half the land within 1km of the city center of Kuala Lumpur is used
is still a large part of its economy. Kuala Lumpur’s labor productivity is behind most competitor                            by institutions or is designated as open / recreational space.
cities in the East Asia region as well as global comparators with similar economic structure. With
regard to land use and spatial development, Greater Kuala Lumpur has low density, partly due to
the underutilization of land in the central areas of the city. Nearly half the land within 1 km of the
city center is used by institutions, or is designated as open/recreational space. Although the Kuala
Lumpur Structure Plan 2020 envisioned large residential development projects, land use analysis
shows that the Federal Territory of Kuala Lumpur (FTKL) actually lost residential area between 2000
and 2010, especially in areas close to the city center. This suggests that these large projects have
occurred mostly outside FTKL, which could make commuting times to jobs in the city center even
longer.

Johor Bahru benefits from the economic spillovers of its neighbor, Singapore, as is evident from
the growing share of consumer services in the local economy. However, Johor Bahru still has low
productivity, including in the service sector, which suggests that economic efficiency needs to be
enhanced. There is much potential for Johor Bahru to leverage its proximity to Singapore. Different
approaches would exploit the city’s comparative advantages: land availability, cheaper labor,
lower-cost housing, all of which could help promote new industries. A strong understanding of the
economic dynamics of both cities is essential to finding the most productive direction for Johor                                            n Institutional land use   n Green/Open space
Bahru’s economic development. With regard to land use and spatial development, institutional
land dominates the center of Johor Bahru, occupying 80 percent of land within the first 1km
buffer zone. It may be more efficient to use this centrally-located land for commercial or business
                                                                                                              purposes, i.e. for an economic purpose that reflects its high value. Residential areas, mainly
                                                                                                              located in the 3 km buffer zone are largely co-located with industrial and commercial use, which
                                                                                                              is a good sign for mixed-use developments.

Portfolio of cities: Maximizing the productivity gains from agglomeration and specialization                  George Town is recognized as a leading hub for electronics and high tech manufacturing and
                    Cities as a portfolio of assets, each differentiated by characteristics
                                                                                                              has a strong focus on instruments (including medical instruments) and pharmaceuticals. Overall,
                            that include size, location, and density of settlement.
                                                                                                              industrial productivity is significantly higher than in Kuala Lumpur. The economy, however, has
                                                                                                              struggled in recent years, and has been weaker than the national average. Land use and spatial
 TOWNS AND SMALL CITIES                    MEDIUM-SIZE CITIES                        METROPOLISES
                                                                                                              analysis show that of the four cities analyzed, George Town had the least amount of land allocated
                                                                                                              to institutional use. Most new industrial land has been the expansion of existing industrial clusters,
                                                                                      a
                                                                                                              indicating that further spatial concentration of manufacturing firms show signs of agglomeration
                                                                                                              economies. This also corresponds to the conurbation’s spatial development plan, which locates
                                                                                                              specialized manufacturing centers largely based on existing industrial clusters.

                                                                                                              Kuching has performed well in the past decade with strong growth and substantial increases in
                                                                                                              per capita income; both above the national averages. It has relatively high industrial productivity
                                                                                                              which can be attributed to the spatial concentration of its industrial firms, and to the nature
Allow firms and farms                  Facilitate urbanization                 Facilitate localization
                                                                                                              of their industrial activities. Kuching’s clusters of manufacturing industries are located in the
to exploit internal scale              economies via exchange                  economies by letting firms
economies, by providing                of ideas and technology for             choose workers & materials
                                                                                                              Sama Jaya Free Industrial Zone (FIZ), and in other industrial parks/zones. Reports suggest that
infrastructure (roads) to              innovation and growth. Let              from a larger pool. Produces   industries are attracted to Sarawak as it has more competitive electricity rates than other cities
move inputs and outputs, and           firms share facilities, inputs,         beneficial competition         in the region. The federal government, with the support of the state government, offers incentives
school’s for workers’ families.        workers, and risks and connect          between producers.             and import duty exemptions to investors, which creates a favorable business environment.
                                       people globally.


                                                      6                                                                                                            7
                                                                                                                  URBAN GOVERNANCE



                                                                                                                 G
                                                                                                                                overnments have an important role to play in the delivery of effective and efficient
                                                                                                                                urban services and infrastructure. They need to design and support policies for land
                                                                                                                                and housing markets; raise and equitably redistribute revenues; and promote a safe
                                                                                                                                and sustainable urban environment through strong institutions, both at the national and
                                                                                                                                local levels.

                                                                                                                  The scope of the analysis related to governance in this study focuses on institutions as they pertain
                                                                                                                  to urban planning, development and service delivery in Malaysia. It includes aspects such as: the
                                                                                                                  roles and responsibilities of government agencies; the system of strategies, plans, policies, laws
                                                                                                                  and regulations; implementation arrangements and coordination mechanisms; and monitoring
                                                                                                                  and evaluation. The analysis involved desk reviews, extensive stakeholder interviews with various
                                                                                                                  government agencies at all levels and across all six conurbations, as well as a review of selected
                                                                                                                  global case studies.

                                                                                                                  In carrying out the analysis, many of the issues in relation to urban planning, development and
                                                                                                                  service delivery may appear to be of technical or financial nature at first glance, but with further
                                                                                                                  analysis the underlying causes tend to be institutional. For example, despite differences in legal
                                                                                                                  frameworks and specific institutional arrangements between Peninsular Malaysia, and Sabah and
Kota Kinabalu.
                                                                                                                  Sarawak, many of the institutional issues identified were confirmed during stakeholder interviews
                                                                                                                  as being similar to those on the peninsula.

       Kota Kinabalu’s economic output appears to have experienced more volatility than the other
       Malaysian cities reviewed in this study. This may be related to data issues and/or reflect patterns
       of investment driven by the 2009 financial crisis and subsequent recovery. With regard to spatial
       and land use patterns, Kota Kinabalu has a higher proportion of residential land than other
       Malaysian cities, and its green/open space accounts for nearly half the city’s total area. This
       amount of unbuilt land so close to the city center is unusual, but is a result of the large hills/
       steeply sloping terrain close to the center.

       Kuantan city is less industrialized than Kuching and Kota Kinabalu, and of the six Malaysian cities
       reviewed for this study, it has the highest share of agriculture in its economy. Consumer services
       are a significant component of the local economy, accounting for over 25 percent of the city’s
       GDP. Kuantan stands as the gateway to the broader East Coast Economic Region, which offers a
       significant source of raw materials for various industries. Kuantan also hosts the main port for the
       east coast of Peninsular Malaysia. Given its existing economic structure and geographic location,
       Kuantan could focus on its comparative advantage of internal (plant-level) scale economies. In
       this regard, improved connectivity to large rural areas, as well as to the large cities on the west
       coast of the peninsula, could facilitate access to raw materials as well as to markets. This needs
       to be accompanied by continued enhancements in infrastructure and by the provision of services
       such as quality education and healthcare.




                                                       8                                                      LRT train in Kuala Lumpur. © Evgeny Prokofyev | Dreamstime.com
                                                                                                           SOCIAL INCLUSION



                                                                                                           A
                                                                                                                        key aspect of a city’s competitiveness is its ability to be socially inclusive and allow all
                                                                                                                        people, including the disadvantaged, to share in and to contribute to rising prosperity.
                                                                                                                        Malaysia has made great strides in reducing poverty in recent decades: the incidence of
                                                                                                                        poverty is just one percent in urban areas (not including foreign workers). Inequality,
                                                                                                                        however, remains a challenge. The Gini coefficient for Malaysia is one of the highest in
                                                                                                           Asia, and is substantially higher in urban areas than in rural areas.

                                                                                                           The movement from rural areas to urban areas is significant and has been taking place in Malaysia
                                                                                                           for decades. In the last five years alone, about 2.5 percent of households moved out of rural to urban
                                                                                                           areas. Young people between the ages of 20 to 30 account for the largest share of internal rural to
                                                                                                           urban migration. While the move to cities can offer opportunities, not everyone benefits from these
Kuching.
                                                                                                           opportunities. This can create divisions in society that can be quite evident in urban areas and can
                                                                                                           lead to social problems, especially for young people who may have dropped out of school or who
                                                                                                           may be unemployed.
Three main institutional issues were identified.
                                                                                                           The analysis focused on at-risk youth in urban areas (aged 15-30) as this group is often identified
Centralization/federalization of urban service delivery. Local development and urban                       as particularly vulnerable to exclusion, and given that other recent studies have covered broader
service delivery in Malaysia are highly centralized through federal/national-level government              aspects of social exclusion. Four aspects of social exclusion were covered: economic, political,
agencies. Local authorities in Malaysia are responsible for delivering relatively few services, and        socio-cultural, and spatial. Qualitative field work was carried out in the six areas included in the
many functions related to the delivery of core urban services such as public transport, roads, water       study, and included focus group discussions, key-informant interviews and round table discussions
supply, sewerage, solid waste management, drainage, public health, police and emergency services,          with key stakeholders. Some of the key findings are noted here.
and education come under federal government control. The challenges identified in the delivery
of urban services suggest that the high degree of centralization has not always had the intended
benefits of increasing efficiency and effectiveness. The creation of new agencies has also made
coordination and implementation more complex.

Challenges in urban and spatial planning. Although Malaysia has a comprehensive planning
system that guides urban development, weaknesses exist in coordination and linkages within the
planning system. The current National Physical Plan has not been well implemented in sectoral
planning and budget allocations. Large project investments that are designed and planned centrally
may not reflect local knowledge and priorities, while some local plans and zoning may be inconsistent
with state-issued land titles and projects initiated at higher levels.

Financial and technical constraints facing local authorities. Local authorities in Malaysia
have limited financial resources. Most local authorities rely on property assessment tax for the
majority of their revenue, but in many cases assessment rates and assessed property values have
not been updated regularly. At the same time, the fiscal transfers that local authorities receive as
grants from federal and state levels are relatively limited and unevenly distributed. Local authorities
continue to face growing pressure from the public for service delivery and maintenance, and often
end up using their own funds for stop-gap repairs of facilities or infrastructure that are not their
responsibility. In addition, local authorities face constraints in terms of staff and their technical
expertise. They have difficulty recruiting, motivating and retaining the right staff; they face staffing
controls exercised by the federal-level Public Service Department, and offer relatively lower pay and
fewer opportunities for career development compared to federal and state level agencies.


                                                   10                                                      Kota Kinabalu. © Tatiana Morozova | Dreamstime.com
                                                                                                                POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS



                                                                                                               I
                                                                                                                      t is important to acknowledge that Malaysia has done well on many fronts. Its economic and
                                                                                                                      social indicators demonstrate impressive progress in recent decades. Achievements in poverty
                                                                                                                      reduction have been remarkable: the share of households living in poverty dropped from over
                                                                                                                      50 percent in the 1960s to less than two percent in 2012.

                                                                                                                       As Malaysia sets its sights on high income status, it will be essential to harness the benefits of
                                                                                                                urbanization through a system of competitive cities that draws on the advantages of each individual
                                                                                                                city. When analyzing key opportunities to attain this goal, several policy recommendations emerge
                                                                                                                based on the analysis summarized above. Some will require major policy shifts and strong political
                                                                                                                will to implement, and these changes may benefit most from phasing in gradually. Other policy
                                                                                                                options may be easier to implement, and could be initiated within a relatively short time frame. Over
Kuching.
                                                                                                                time, however, these recommendations will best achieve results when implemented in their entirety
                                                                                                                rather than through partial or selective implementation. The recommendations are summarized
                                                                                                                below.
Economic aspects. Three main dynamics were identified through the field work as contributing
to vulnerability and to a sense of social exclusion. They deal with individuals as well as the broader
family: i) youth unemployment linked to lack of education or skills training; ii) poverty and rising
costs of living; and iii) irregular work patterns and dysfunctional families.                                                u	Fostering Economic Growth
Political aspects. At-risk youth found it difficult to make their voices heard; they also believed that
they had limited influence on decision-making, which contributed to a sense of exclusion. This has
negatively impacted their perceptions of their role in neighborhood committees, also in places of                            v	Ensuring Environmental Sustainability
worship and religious organizations especially at the local community level.

Socio-cultural aspects. Difficulties in accessing the education system were identified as key
contributing factors to both vulnerability and exclusion. Recurring themes in all six cities were issues
                                                                                                                             w	Strengthening Institutions for City Competitiveness
related to discipline in school resulting in absenteeism and expulsion. Issues identified through
focus group discussions relate to a lack of interest in classes that do not cater to students’ learning
needs, to teachers’ disciplinary style that discourages students from attending, and family problems.                        x	Fostering Social Inclusion
Broader issues concerned problems with the education system that could hinder the development of
non-academically inclined students.
                                                                                                                             y	Promoting Innovation through Information
The issue of criminalization of young people involved in anti-social behavior was also raised.
Police reports, arrests and lock-ups have created bad experiences for many of the young people the
research team encountered. Some groups expressed strong distrust of institutions and saw little
hope for the future.
                                                                                                            u	Fostering Economic Growth
Spatial aspects. The majority of the urban poor and low-income families live in public housing —
                                                                                                            a. Strengthening institutions for managing land markets and developing land policies. Well-
high-rise flats for newer construction, and 5-story walk-up flats for older construction. Regardless of     functioning institutions are important to help promote economic density and dissipate economic and
the type of flats, the issues raised by flat dwellers were similar and included: issues of affordability,   social divisions. This can be achieved by encouraging: flexible land use regulations and better utilization
the lack of appropriate community spaces, poor maintenance and limited public transportation.               of land; coordination of land use planning with development of connective infrastructure; and use of
Safety concerns, including the prominence of crime and violence were also identified.                       public transport.

                                                   12                                                                                                              13
              Flexible land use regulations. Malaysia needs flexibility in land use to cater to the changing     b. Target interventions to improve efficiency in the system of cities. These can include
              demand for land and to accommodate more dense and compact urban development. Relaxing              incentives to cluster service- and knowledge-based sectors in larger cities and to relocate land-
              any overly stringent restrictions on land use, such as low plot ratios is crucial for achieving    intensive manufacturing industry to smaller cities and towns. Initiatives to repurpose old industrial
              this. Realizing the potential of underutilized land for more productive uses, such as affordable   districts could include infrastructure redevelopment and catalytic projects to make the city’s spatial
              residential and commercial developments, would contribute to increasing economic density           structure more efficient, livable, and sustainable. At the same time, continued investments in rural
              and foster economic growth.                                                                        areas are necessary for equity and balanced development across the country. While some of these
                                                                                                                 initiatives are already underway in Malaysia, there are opportunities for deepening them to improve
              Coordination of land use planning with transport infrastructure development. Besides               efficiency.
              relaxing stringent regulations and ensuring fluidity of the land market, there are other urban
              planning tools, such as mixed-use planning, that can help change the spatial structure of cities   At the city level, analysis indicates optimal utilization of available land close to the Kuala Lumpur
              and limit urban expansion and sprawl. Efficient land use through transit-oriented development      city center2 could facilitate agglomeration economies and increase economic density through a
              (TOD) or smart growth that prioritizes new developments along established public transport         number of policy actions. The spatial development strategy for the center of KL focuses mainly on
              routes may help Malaysian cities reduce distances from places where jobs are concentrated.         mixed-use development and on ensuring that the residential component remains strong; the success
                                                                                                                 of this strategy depends on the pattern of these residential areas close to the city center, i.e. high
                                                                                                                 density residential, as reflected by high plot ratio, can be commensurate with the high value of land,
                                                                                                                 and can promote mixed-use development and more compact urban form.
                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                     Federal Territory of Kuala Lumpur and adjacent areas in the state of Selangor.




14   Kuantan. Photo: © Salehuddin Lokman | Dreamstime.com   14                                                                                                                  15
         For the Johor Bahru/Iskandar Region, a key recommendation is to adjust the existing strategy to pursue
         more vertical linkages with Singapore. This could focus on selected sub-sectors in manufacturing
                                                                                                                   v	 Ensuring Environmental Sustainability
         and in finance and business services. Further analysis of successful and failed initiatives and the
                                                                                                                   Encouraging the use of public transport. The provision of public transport infrastructure
         most dynamically growing industries could indicate possible growth areas.
                                                                                                                   and services could be accompanied by fiscal incentives to encourage the use of public transport

         In the case of the George Town conurbation/Penang area, significant work has been done in recent          and reduce reliance on private vehicles. This would help reduce congestion and transport costs
         years on its economic and urban strategy. This study recommends a deepening of the implementation         in Malaysian cities. Fiscal instruments are primarily price-based and take advantage of market
         of existing plans. The recent slow-down in the electronics sector, and weakness in other sectors of the   mechanisms. Examples of these instruments include: congestion charges, emission and/or pollution
         economy, point to the need for George Town to move the manufacturing sector up the value chain,           tax or charge (e.g. carbon tax, sulfur tax), fuel tax (e.g. any excise tax on fuel), vehicle tax (e.g.
         along with the services sector. This is taking place already and is supported by the government, as       ownership, licensing or registration fee) and subsidies (e.g. subsidies for clean fuels, efficient
         reflected in its spatial development plan.                                                                vehicles, and public transport). These instruments are expected to cut travel demands, encourage
                                                                                                                   commuters to use public transport; substitute polluting fuels (e.g. petroleum products) with clean
         As for Kota Kinabalu, Kuching and Kuantan, further study would be required to match the extent            fuels (e.g. ethanol, hydrogen, compressed natural gas), and encourage the public to use vehicles with
         of analysis that has been done for Kuala Lumpur, Johor Bahru and George Town; a specific
                                                                                                                   higher fuel economy.
         recommendation would be to perform this analysis in any future work.




16   George Town.                                          16                                                                                                       17
Incorporating risk reduction into land use and infrastructure planning could have positive
economic impacts and ultimately save lives. Given climate change projections, Malaysia can expect
more frequent precipitation events and an increase in the risk and severity of urban flooding and
landslides. This is likely to disrupt economic activity and infrastructure. In the longer term, sea-level
rise also threatens many Malaysian cities: all six cities in this study are located at or near the coast.



w	 Strengthening Institutions for City Competitiveness
a. Localizing the delivery of selected urban services. There are substantial opportunities for
transforming institutional structures to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of service delivery.
This can be done by shifting more management and decision-making roles to the local level and
promoting an enhanced system of local performance indicators.

Identify services to be delivered locally. The criteria for identifying the appropriate level for
service delivery include: economies of scale; externality effects; equity; and local responsiveness
and accountability. Based on these criteria, some services that are currently managed centrally
could be devolved to lower levels of government. Such services could include: intra-urban highways
and federal intra-urban roads; urban public transportation including buses and rail; drainage and
flood mitigation; solid waste management and disposal; and emergency services.

Metropolitan governance. In certain cases, localization would mean that some functions and
services, particularly planning, would be organized at the conurbation level, involving several local
authorities and possibly more than one state. This would facilitate improved planning and coordination      Kuala Lumpur.
across local authorities within a conurbation, while also allowing for prioritization of local needs.
Globally, various institutional arrangements for metropolitan management exist, for example, a
metropolitan-level agency for one specific sector, controlled jointly by a group of local governments.

City performance indicators. Indicators are essential for tracking improvements in urban service            Fiscal transfers. The system of fiscal transfers to local authorities could be revised to be more
delivery. For each localized service, one or more quantitative indicators should be measured, and           transparent, predictable and formula-based. The specific formula for grant transfers, including
needs to be supported by a baseline and regular monitoring. Malaysia has the building blocks for            constituent variables, needs to be carefully considered, and needs to take into account the diversity
this, including the Star Rating System and the Malaysian Urban-Rural-National Indicators Network            of needs across the country. At least part of the grant formula could be based on needs, such as level
on Sustainable Development (MURNInets). There are opportunities for enhancing these systems                 of development, extent of land area, and number of residents served. In principle, transfers could
through the use of internationally standardized indicators to benchmark performance and identify            also be structured as performance-based grants. Based on performance indicators for a particular
good practices from leading cities worldwide.                                                               service, incentive payments in the form of increased grant funding could be given to local authorities
                                                                                                            for excellent performance.
b. Increasing the capacities of local authorities. Ensuring that service delivery at the local
level is optimized will require some strengthening of the financial and technical capacities of local       Staffing. The technical capacities of local authorities could be improved to help them recruit,
authorities, including own-source revenues, fiscal transfers, and staffing.                                 motivate and retain the right staff. Options for this could include: relaxing some centralized staffing
                                                                                                            controls, and increasing opportunities for career development by enabling local authority staff to
Property assessments. Dismantle the barriers, political or otherwise, that have prevented the               rotate and serve at other government agencies. To the extent that some of these changes would be
property assessment system from working the way it was intended to work. This could include                 undertaken with the proposed PBT Transformation Plan, the implementation of this plan should be
revising assessment rates and updating assessed values. Safeguard mechanisms could be built into            a priority.
the system to avoid placing sudden or excessive property tax burdens on individual property owners,
particularly for lower- and middle-income groups.


                                                   18                                                                                                         19
                                                                                                               disciplinary policies can have a range of benefits. These include decreases in: absenteeism, fighting,
         x	 Fostering Social Inclusion                                                                         bullying, and vandalism, and the promotion of educational motivation and classroom engagement. It
                                                                                                               also helps to improve academic performance, school attendance and completion rates.
         Strengthening programs for at risk urban youth. Some policies and programs targeted at
         enhancing support for at-risk youth have been successful in other countries. Such programs help       Scale up targeted programs for vulnerable youth. While Malaysia has been spending a
         to: prevent school dropouts; encourage entry to the labor market; and facilitate inclusion through    significant amount of its fiscal resources on social protection, much of that has been devoted to
         spatial integration (e.g. housing, transport).                                                        non-targeted programs which do not necessarily reach vulnerable youths. International experience
                                                                                                               points to a range of programs that could be supported including: “second chance programs” such as
         Support policies aimed at keeping children in school. Global evidence shows that                      literacy and comprehensive educational/job training programs that provide school dropouts with an
         implementing policies that encourage children to remain in secondary school is one of the most        opportunity to complete high school and enter tertiary education or the labor market; job training
         important preventive investments a country can make for at-risk youth, both in terms of improving     programs that include a mixture of technical skills, life skills and internships; and mentorship
         their educational outcomes and in reducing almost all risky kinds of behavior. Completing secondary   programs. The My Skills Foundation program in Malaysia provides a good example.
         school can serve as one of the strongest protective factors for young people in two key ways: i)
         through the knowledge and skills that they acquire, which enable them to make informed decisions;     Invest in safe neighborhood programs. Safe neighborhood programs are another way to foster
         and ii) through the sense of connectedness that students often feel to adults within the school.      a sense of belonging and support participants’ aspirations, ultimately having a powerful impact in
         Promoting school connectedness through efforts to improve school quality; providing financial         changing the lives of youth-at-risk, as well as changing the dynamic between young people and other
         incentives to stay in school; incorporating life skills training into the curriculum; and revising    community members. Such programs should be informed by a clearly articulated design principle, a
                                                                                                               coherent structure and should focus on measuring impact on the ground.

                                                                                                               Improve coordination, design and implementation of programs. Given the multidimensional
                                                                                                               and cross-sectoral nature of youth interventions, the implementation of any such program would need
                                                                                                               to be well coordinated by several government ministries. The establishment of an interagency task
                                                                                                               force on youth-at-risk could enhance coordination. There are also important opportunities to engage
                                                                                                               the community, local government and civil society organizations in the design and implementation
                                                                                                               of programs at the local level.

                                                                                                               y	 Promoting Innovation through Information
                                                                                                               Deepen open data policies. Providing open access to data from Government and other sources
                                                                                                               can create new business opportunities, and help solve civic problems. As technology advances,
                                                                                                               cities around the world are experimenting with ways to use data from a number of sources to
                                                                                                               better understand their urban environment and their citizens, trying to use technology to respond
                                                                                                               more effectively to citizens’ needs. As a technologically advanced society, Malaysia is in a good
                                                                                                               position to take advantage of new and innovative means of data-enabled urban management. Many
                                                                                                               Malaysian government agencies collect large amounts of data, some of which are available publicly
                                                                                                               online, and some agencies have developed mobile phone applications to help citizens access these
                                                                                                               data. However, more could be done to use the data to facilitate collaborative decision-making
                                                                                                               between government agencies and between the government and citizens, ultimately enhancing the
                                                                                                               competitiveness of cities.




20   George Town.                                        20                                                                                                     21
SUMMARY TABLE OF ISSUES                                                                                                               Issues                                             Recommendations

AND RECOMMENDATIONS                                                                                                v	Ensuring Environmental Sustainability
                                                                                                                                                              ●●   Encourage the use of public transport
                                                                                                                                                                   –	 Instruments could include congestion charges, emission and
                  Issues                                                Recommendations                            2.1	 Low density and long distances have
                                                                                                                                                                      pollution tax, fuel tax, vehicle tax, subsidies for clean fuels,
                                                                                                                        negative impact on the environment
u	Fostering Economic Growth                                                                                                                                           efficient vehicles and public transport, substitute polluting
                                                                                                                                                                      fuels with clean fuels
                                              ●● Increase the flexibility of land use in cities to facilitate
                                                 increased economic density                                                                                   ●● Prioritize green growth policies
                                                 –	 Relax some restrictions (e.g. plot ratios, mixed use)                                                        –	 e.g. public transport use, LED lighting, green buildings
1.1	 Low economic density                        –	 Repurpose ‘low land use’ areas where feasible                  2.2	 GHG emissions and climate change      ●● Integrating policies for climate change and disaster risk

                                              ●● Manage a system/portfolio of cities; Align sectors with city
                                                                                                                                                                 reduction into urban planning and management
                                                 size: i.e. cluster service and knowledge based economies in                                                     –	 Risk reduction for land use and infrastructure planning
                                                 large cities, and relocate manufacturing to smaller cities        w	Strengthening Institutions for City Competitiveness
                                              ●●   Improve urban connectivity through public transport,                                                       ●●   Localize the delivery of selected urban services
1.2 	Large distances within cities	                transit-oriented development, ensure service for low income
                                                                                                                                                                   –	 Improve the efficiency and effectiveness of service delivery
                                                   communities
                                                                                                                   3.1	 Centralization of urban service               by shifting more management and decision making to the
                                              ●● Coordinate land use planning with development                          delivery                                      local level
                                                 of infrastructure                                                                                                 –	 Use an enhanced system of local performance indicators to
1.3 	Challenges of division
                                              ●● Institutional coordination across different levels
                                                                                                                                                                      track performance
                                                 of government (Chapter 4)
                                                                                                                   3.2	 Challenges in urban and spatial       ●●   Develop metropolitan governance arrangements to improve
                                              ●● Target interventions to improve efficiency in the system               planning                                   planning and coordination
1.4 	Addressing city specific needs              of cities
                                              ●● Further develop city level plans                                                                             ●●   Strengthen the capacities of local authorities
                                                                                                                                                                   –	 Enable the property assessment system to work as designed
                                              ●● Ensure optimal utilization of land close to the city center
   Kuala Lumpur                                                                                                                                                       while protecting property owners from sudden or excessive
                                              ●● Identify areas of low-use land that could be feasibly developed
   ●● Room to grow the services and                                                                                3.3	 Financial and technical constraints           tax increases
                                                 for more productive use
      innovation sectors, while relocating                                                                              facing local authorities                   –	 Revise the system of fiscal transfers to local authorities to
                                              ●● Plan and implement new developments on specific land
      industrial activities to other cities                                                                                                                           be more transparent, predictable and formula based
                                                 parcels, including affordable housing for middle income
   ●● Low density and potential for
                                                 groups                                                                                                            –	 Improve the ability of local authorities to recruit, motivate,
      improving the utilization of land
                                              ●● Encourage the relocation of industrial activity to other cities                                                      and retain staff
      near the city center
                                                 possibly through a programmatic approach
                                                                                                                   x	Fostering Social Inclusion of At-risk Youth
                                              ●●   Consider adjusting the Iskandar region’s strategy to pursue
   Johor Bahru                                     more vertical linkages with Singapore                           4.1	 Economic aspects                      ●● Support policies aimed at keeping children in school
   ●● Proximity to Singapore not fully                                                                                                                           Improve school quality, financial incentives to stay in school,
                                                   –	 Review the existing strategy (including the new CDP2) and                                               ●●

      leveraged, productivity is still low                                                                         ●●   Youth unemployment, poverty, low         including life skills training, revise disciplinary policies
                                                      identify opportunities for adjustment
   ●● Existing strategies have not                                                                                      wages, work patterns                  ●● Job training programs including technical and life skills,
                                                   –	 Implement specific actions/investments related to vertical
      achieved full economic returns                                                                                                                             internships
                                                      linkages identified
                                                                                                                                                              ●● Support programs that specifically target at-risk youth in urban
   George Town                                                                                                     4.2	 Socio-cultural aspects                   areas
   ●● High industrial productivity but        ●●   Deepen implementation of existing plans
                                                                                                                                                              ●● Rehabilitation and second chance opportunities for ‘dropouts’,
      other sectors are weaker                                                                                     ●● School absenteeism, school expulsion,
                                                                                                                      underperforming                            e.g. literacy, education/job training, life skills
   Kota Kinabalu                                                                                                                                              ●● Mentoring programs
                                              ●●   Carry out follow-up studies at the specific city level          ●● Discrimination, stateless children
   Kuching                                                                                                                                                    ●● Ensure access for all
                                                                                                                   ●● Gender, safety issues
   Kuantan                                                                                                                                                    ●● Public awareness programs




                                                          22                                                                                                              23
                     Issues                                                     Recommendations

x	Fostering Social Inclusion of At-risk Youth (continuation)
                                                      ●● Invest in safe neighborhood programs
4.3	 Spatial aspects                                  ●● Youth-friendly spaces and activities in public buildings
                                                      ●● Foster good police-community relations

●●   Limited public transport, safety                 ●● One-stop centers in high-risk communities
     concerns (in low cost housing), crime            ●● Review the design of low-cost housing
     and violence                                     ●● Ensure public transport access in low-income communities

                                                      ●● Review of current routes and hours of operation


4.4	 Political aspects                                ●●   Engage communities in the design of programs
●●   Limited voice in decision-making	
                                                      ●● Improve coordination, design and implementation of programs
4.5	 Program design and implementation                   to meet needs
     challenges                                       ●● Establish an interagency task force on youth-at-risk

                                                      ●● Follow-up study


y	Improving Data Access and Quality
5.1	 Data access is very difficult                    ●●   Deepen open data policies at all levels of government
                                                      ●●   Invest in ensuring data representation at the city and intra-city
                                                           levels
5.2	Limited availability at the city and
                                                           –	 Spatial data
    intra-city levels
                                                           –	 Economic data
                                                           –	 Socio-economic data
                                                      ●●   Improve standardization
                                                      ●●   Consider international system of benchmarking for city level
5.3	 Data is not always reliable or
                                                           indicators with third party verification
     comparable
                                                           –	 ISO standard 37120
                                                           –	 Participate in GCIF for those cities not ready

z	Urban Growth Boundaries
                                                      ●●   Gain consensus and implement approach to redrawing the
6.	 Conurbation boundaries cross                           conurbations’ boundaries to take into account jurisdictional,
    administrative and service                             administrative and service boundaries as well as economic,
    boundaries                                             social, transportation and environmental aspects.
                                                           –	 Guidelines for drawing boundaries provided
6.2	 Urban management challenges within
                                                      ●●   Improve approaches to metropolitan governance
     conurbations




Graphic design: miki@ultradesigns.com

Unless otherwise noted, all photos © Thinkstock.com


                                                                  24                                                           25   Kuala Lumpur
