AUTORITE DU BASSIN DU NIGER                                                       NIGER BASIN AUTHORITY
       Secrétariat Exécutif                                                        Executive Secretariat
     B.P 729, Niamey (Niger)                                                    P.O.Box 729, Niamey (Niger)


                                                                                              102271

     INVESTMENT PLAN FOR THE
 STRENGTHENING OF RESILIENCE TO
CLIMATE CHANGE IN THE NIGER BASIN



                                                    Final version




Version 7.3                                                                               November 2015




 The World Bank has supported the preparation of the document   In collaboration with the African Development Bank




             With the support of the CIWA project               And in collaboration with the African Water Facility
       INVESTMENT PLAN FOR THE STRENGTHENING OF
       RESILIENCE TO CLIMATE CHANGE IN THE NIGER
                         BASIN


                                                                       Final version

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY......................................................................................... 1


PREAMBLE ............................................................................................................ 3


1.       VULNERABILITY OF THE NIGER BASIN TO CLIMATE RISKS .................... 7
     1.1 Main characteristics of the Niger Basin                                                                                      7
     1.2 Extreme vulnerability to climate risks                                                                                       8


2.       FRAMEWORK OF THE CLIMATE RESILIENCE INVESTMENT PLAN
         DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY ........................................................................ 10
     2.1 CRIP development strategy                                                                                                    10
     2.2 Method of selecting the measures of the CRIP                                                                                 13
             2.2.1  Definition of the criteria for selection of the measures                                                          13
                  2.2.1.1 Aims                                                                                                        13
                  2.2.1.2 The selection criteria                                                                                      13
             2.2.2 Justification of the measures selected                                                                             19


3.       CLIMATE RESILIENCE INVESTMENT PLAN AIMING TO
         STRENGTHEN CLIMATE RESILIENCE IN THE NIGER BASIN .................. 21
     3.1 Presentation and architecture                                                                                                21
     3.2 Selected actions                                                                                                             23
     3.3        CRIP expected results and impacts - Monitoring and evaluation                                                         41
     3.4 Implementation strategy                                                                                                      45
             3.4.1         Programmation                                                                                              45
             3.4.2         Gender equality                                                                                            45


4.       FUNDING OF THE CLIMATE RESILIENCE INVESTMENT PLAN ............... 46
     4.1 Positioning with regard to other adaptation programmes                                                                       46
     4.2 Cost of the Climate Resilience Investment Plan                                                                               46
     4.3 Funding plan                                                                                                                 49

d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique



Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
        4.3.1    Current state of identified funding sources                                                                                                    49
        4.3.2    Fundraising strategy                                                                                                                           50


5.    NEXT STAGES OF THE PROCESS .............................................................. 53


APPENDIXES ....................................................................................................... 55
     Appendix A :       Definitions                                                                                                                            56
     Appendix B : Design process of NBA’s planning documents                                                                                                   60
     Appendix C : Climate projections and impacts on the water cycle in the
         Niger River Basin                                                                                                                                     62
     Appendix D : Sectoral impacts of climate change in the Niger River Basin                                                                                  67
     Appendix E : Selection methodology of the actions to be incorporated into
         the Climate Resilience Investment Plan                                                                                                                74
     Appendix F : Documents and contributions used for the selection of the
         actions 78
     Appendix G : Selected actions classified by country                                                                                                       81
     Appendix H : Financial and implementation schedule of the CRIP actions                                                                                  114
     Appendix I : Adaptation and Resilience funding sources identified                                                                                       135
     Appendix J : Implementation strategy                                                                                                                    138
     Appendix K : Bibliography.                                                                                                                              149
     Appendix L : Acronyms and abbreviation                                                                                                                  151




                                  d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique


                Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger
                Basin
TABLE OF ILLUSTRATIONS


LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1-1: Map of the Niger Basin .................................................................................................... 7
Figure 1-2 : Vulnerability index to climate change (ND-GAIN 2013) .................................................. 8
Figure 3-1: Distribution of the CRIP actions contribution to socio-economic infrastructure
             development in the Niger basin ................................................................................... 43
Figure 3-2: Distribution of the CRIP actions contributing to ecosystem conservation and
             resources protection in the Niger basin ....................................................................... 43
Figure A-1 : Diagram defining the climate risk and possible strategies to strengthen
             resilience to climate change. ....................................................................................... 57
Figure C-2: Development of climate and hydrological elements as a result of climate change
             - cause and effect flow chart ........................................................................................ 66



LIST OF TABLES
Table 2-1: Criteria for the selection and prioritisation of the measures in the CRIP to
             strengthen resilience to the impacts of climate change ............................................... 15
Table 3-1 : Breakdown of CRIP actions based on the type of adaptation measure ........................ 22
Table 3-2 : CRIP performance indicators ......................................................................................... 41
Table 4-1: Cost of the Climate Resilience Investment Plan per type of adaptation measure .......... 47
Table 4-2 : Financial programming of the CRIP actions based on the 3-year plans of the OP. ...... 48
Table 4-3: Level of identification of funding for the measures selected in the Climate
                                                                                                              3
             Resilience Investment Plan aggregated by type of adaptation measures ................. 49
Table 4-4 : Breakdown of the identified and to be identified funding sources for the CRIP
             actions according to the 3-year plans of the OP. ......................................................... 50
Table C-1: Possible effects of climate change in the NRB .............................................................. 65




d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
Executive Summary                                                                                                                     1




                                                 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The African continent is among the most vulnerable to climate change due to a combination of the
anticipated effects of climate change and to ongoing development challenges, high poverty levels,
and low adaptive-capacity. Among a wide array of possible impacts of climate change, Africa will
experience compounded stress on water resources that already face significant strain from
overexploitation and degradation, with drought stress exacerbated in drought-prone regions. The
Niger River Basin in West Africa is on the extreme end of the vulnerability scale. The Basin suffers
further from a large Adaptation Deficit - national and local governments are not equipped to
respond to ongoing climate-related events, much less escalated future events.

The Niger Basin is an expansive region in West Africa that is home to more than 130 million people
throughout the nine countries of Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Chad, Ivory Coast, Guinea, Mali,
Niger, and Nigeria. The Niger River and its tributaries are a vital lifeline providing drinking water,
irrigation, aquaculture, energy, and transport to these nine riparian countries. Heavy reliance on
natural resources, combined with ongoing conflicts, and political instability make it one of the most
fragile river basins in Africa. Over 70% of the population lives in areas where food security depends
on unreliable rainfall and highly variable inter-annual and intra-annual river flows. Climate variability
has long been a challenge and an obstacle for development in the Basin.

Climate change will compound these extreme events and raise further obstacles to the region ‟s
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals related to water management, food security,
environmental sustainability, and health, among others. The impacts of climate change increase
the risk of natural disasters such as floods and droughts, degrade the biodiversity and ecosystems
associated with the river, and have consequences on every economic sector. These impacts have
a compounding effect that threatens food and energy security, economic development, and the
preservation of the ecosystems in the Niger Basin.

Financial, technological and managerial capacity gaps in the Niger Basin increase the overall
challenge of managing the river‟s variability and responding effectively to peoples‟ needs. In
addition, the absence of adequate infrastructure undermines countries‟ abilities to store water in
times of scarcity, control flooding, and provide stable and affordable energy. All of these factors
increase threats to food and energy security, economic development, health of the ecosystems,
and overall stability in the Basin.

Yet despite these development challenges and high poverty levels – 6 of the 9 riparian countries
are considered Least Developed Countries (LDCs) and are among the twenty poorest in the world
– there are vast opportunities for improving livelihoods in the Basin and strengthening its overall
development. Two key elements bring hope to the region for addressing these challenges: (1) a
history of cooperation between the riparian countries of the Niger Basin; and (2) an exceptionally
high potential for sustainable development that includes resilience-building and strengthening of
adaptive capacity.

The Niger Basin countries recognize that the shared nature of their water resources presents
an opportunity for a collaboration and coordination that will derive greater resilience-building
outcomes. The Investment Plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger
River Basin (abbreviated as Climate Resilience Investment Plan - CRIP) was prepared and will be
implemented by the Niger riparian countries and the Niger Basin Authority (NBA), one of the oldest
African intergovernmental agencies, created in 1964 in Niamey, Niger.

In the spring of 2015, during a ministerial round table on the future of the Niger River, the nine
riparian countries agreed to launch an initiative directed at building a coherent ensemble of actions


d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
Executive Summary                                                                                                                                             2



and investments to strengthen the resilience to climate change in the Niger River Basin, with the
objective of mobilizing resources for climate-related development.

The CRIP includes 246 actions that are divided in two packages: (1) the Knowledge Package and
(2) the Sectoral Investment Package. Actions were culled from the NBA‟s Operational Plan,
member countries‟ National Adaptation Programmes of Action (NAPAs) and N ational Adaptation
Plans (NAPs), as well as country proposals. These actions include:


    Knowledge Package                                                Sectoral Investment Package
Measures to enhance                      Measures targeting vulnerability to water stress
knowledge and strengthen
response to climate and                  Measures targeting vulnerability to flooding
hydrological risks                       Measures targeting vulnerability to soil degradation
                                         Measures targeting vulnerability to degradation of the grazing
Measures to assess                       land
vulnerability, communicate, and          Measures targeting vulnerability to degradation of the
raise awareness                          ecosystems
                                         Measures targeting vulnerability to deterioration of the water
Measures to strengthen capacity          quality
and integrate adaptation into            Measures targeting vulnerability linked to the rising sea-level
bodies and management
instruments of the national and          Measures strengthening resilience (e.g. generation of jobs,
regional institutions of the Basin       revenues, etc.)


Full implementation of the plan is estimated to cost USD $3.11 billion. The plan will mobilize
funding from a wide array of sources, some of which have committed support early in the Plan‟s
development process. Additional funds will be mobilized with the support of regional and
multilateral partners, such as the Niger Basin Authority (NBA), the African Development Bank
(AfDB), and the World Bank (WB). In practice, the CRIP will bring together adaptation measures
planned in the Niger River Basin and help to mobilize complementary adaptation financing,
including from specialized climate funds. All financing for the investment plan is aligned and
consistent with existing plans at the regional and national levels.

The CRIP integrates fully with the NBA‟s Operational Plan that structures the implementation of th e
Overall Development Plan of the Niger River Basin. Activities in the CRIP are programmed based
on the level of urgency expressed by the countries and the level of preparedness of these
activities. Each investment included in the Plan was examined and vetted by the Member States
through a comprehensive consultative process with multi-sectoral participation, strategically
coupled with exercises to build local capacity.

This comprehensive basin-approach to addressing development and resilience is widely
considered a best practice, but rarely implemented in the developing world due to the urgency of
development needs as well as resource and capacity constraints. Yet in light of the rapidly
advancing effects of climate change and the certain devastation that these impacts will bring to the
most vulnerable countries and communities in the world, the CRIP is a bold and necessary step
toward concerted action for a sustainable future in the Niger Basin.




                              d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique


               Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger
               Basin
Preamble                                                                                                                              3




                                                                       PREAMBLE

        “In recent decades, changes in climate have caused impacts on natural and human systems
        on all continents and across the oceans. Impacts are due to observed climate change,
        irrespective of its cause, indicating the sensitivity of natural and human systems to changing
        climate. “
                                                     Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
                                                       th
                                                     5 Assessment Report (2013)

Between 2013 and 2014 the leading global consortium of scientists known as the
                                                                             th
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), released their 5 Assessment Report
confirming the onset of climate change. They proved what many small farmers, native tribes, and
laypeople were already noticing in their surrounding environment. More startlingly in the IPCC
report – known for its conservative approach to climate scenarios – was the affirmation that
“Continued emission of greenhouse gases will cause further warming and long -lasting changes in
all components of the climate system, increasing the likelihood of severe, pervasive and
irreversible impacts for people and ecosystems.” In other words, mitigation of greenhouse gases,
regardless of its level of ambition and pervasiveness, can no longer deter the inevitable impacts of
an already changing climate. Countries worldwide must prepare for these impacts and adapt to the
changes to come.

The African continent is among the most vulnerable to climate change due to a combination of the
anticipated effects of climate change and to ongoing development challenges, high poverty levels,
and low adaptive-capacity. Among a wide array of possible impacts of climate change, Africa will
experience compounded stress on water resources that already face significant strain from
overexploitation and degradation, with drought stress exacerbated in drought-prone regions. Water
resource scarcity is directly linked to potential increased human security risks, violent conflict, and
migrations, which are among the most disquieting potential consequences of climate change for
the African continent. The IPCC warns that increased migration could lead to human suffering,
human rights violations, political instability and conflict. These are all dangers that African
countries must avoid in order to protect their societies and to continue progressing in their
development.

The Niger River Basin in West Africa is on the extreme end of the vulnerability scale, especially to
impacts on water resources and coastal zones. The Basin suffers further from a large Adaptation
Deficit - national and local governments are not equipped or prepared to respond to ongoing
climate-related events, much less escalated future events. This deficit is directly related to the
level of development and capacity in the region – 6 of the 9 riparian countries are Least Developed
Countries – as well as political and security challenges that are pervasive throughout the Basin.
These issues take the forefront of government agendas and financial planning, demanding what
limited resources there are and leaving countries in a compromised position to begin addressing
climate change. While the knowledge and financing requirements for climate adaptation in the
Basin are high, the abilitity to attend to these needs are beyond their reach. What this means in
practical terms for these countries is that they have a much longer, more costly road to travel to
secure the future safety and well-being of their people. Intensified efforts to increase adaptation
can reduce risks and impacts, but under current circumstances only to a limited extent. What is
clear is that the region needs to find a way to continue their sustainable development while also
adapting to climate change – effectively, the Niger riparian countries need a climate resilience-
building approach to development.

Understanding the importance and urgency of increasing their ability to address climate change,
and further recognizing the increased benefit of regional cooperation to strengthen these efforts,
the Niger Basin countries have undertaken to prepare a regional approach to building climate
resilience while continuing development efforts.



d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
Preamble                                                                                                                                                     4



In a bold effort to tackle the onset of climate change with ambition and courage, the nine riparian
countries of the Niger Basin – Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Chad, Ivory Coast, Guinea, Mali,
Niger, and Nigeria – developed and adopted the Niger Basin Climate Resilience Investment Plan
(CRIP). Collectively they pledged to advocate for technical support and financing to implement its
246 resilience-focused priority actions and quickly put into motion its components. The Plan builds
on a history of strong riparian cooperation in the Niger Basin and represents an important
opportunity to take a coordinated approach in building regional climate resilience.

After the ministerial round table on the future of the Niger River, held on 19th April, 2015 in
Washington, D.C., during the Spring meetings of the World Bank and the International Monetary
Fund, participants agreed to launch an initiative aiming to constitute a coherent set of measures
and concrete investments that directly contribute to strengthening climate resilience in the Niger
Basin. With the support of BRLingenierie consultants, this initiative led to the development of the
Investment Plan for the Strengthening of the Resilience to Climate Change of the Niger Basin
(abbreviated to Climate Resilience Investment Plan - CRIP), which will be presented to the
international community during the 21st session of the UNFCCC Conference of the Parties in Paris
in December 2015 (COP 21). In view of the funding needs of the basin in terms of strengthening
the resilience to climate change, this initiative is also a means of harmonizing the adaptation
programmes planned in the Niger River Basin (NB) and mobilising the sources of climate funding.

This document constitutes a consolidated version of the CRIP. It incorporates the contributions and
suggestions transmitted by the Member States during the national consultative workshops held in
August 2015, during the civil society regional consultative workshop (NGO, Regional Coordination
of Users, National Coordinations of Users) held on 12 September 2015 at Cotonou, Benin and
during the Extraordinary Session of NBA Council Ministers, held on 29 and 30 September 2015 at
Cotonou, Benin.

The CRIP consists of a selection of measures contributing to strengthening the resilience to climate
change in the Niger Basin, identified in the following existing plans and programmes, and
subsequently validated by a consultation process with the countries:
 Ten-year Operational Plan of the Niger Basin Authority (NBA), based on the contributions of the
   Member States and in line with the Sustainable Development Action Plan (SDAP) for the Niger
   Basin and its Investment Programme. For its implementation, the Operational Plan draws on
   the Integrated Programme for Agricultural Development and Adaptation to Climate Change
   (PIDAACC, an NBA/ADB project), the measures of which have been incorporated into the
   CRIP;
 National Adaptation Programmes of Action (NAPA) and National Adaptation Plans (NAP) of the
   Member States;
 Other national or regional programmes for adaptation to climate change and contributions of the
   States.

Particular attention has been paid to the consistency and compatibility of the CRIP with the various
national initiatives (Intended Nationally Determined Contribution - INDC) and regional initiatives
(economic communities, basin organisations) in order to facilitate the subsequent implementation
of these initiatives at national level by the countries.

This document was presented during the meeting of the Finance Ministers of NBA Member States
that took place in Lima (Peru) on 7 October, 2015 as part of the annual World Bank and IMF
meetings.




                             d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique


              Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger
              Basin
Preamble                                                                                                                              5



The Extraordinary Session of NBA Council Ministers, held between 2 and 5 November 2015 at
Bamako, Mali, recommended the adoption of the CRIP by the Heads of States and Governments
of the Member Countries, in the context of the presentation of the initiative during the United
Nations Convention on Climate Change COP21, in December, 2015 in Paris, France, where
countries are also expected to agree to a new global climate pact for addressing climate change.




d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
1. Vulnerability of the Niger Basin to climate risks                                                                                  7



1. VULNERABILITY OF THE NIGER BASIN TO CLIMATE
   RISKS
1.1            MAIN CHARACTERISTICS OF THE NIGER BASIN
The Niger Basin covers an area of over 2.2 million km², including approximately 1.5 million km² of
hydrologically active basin spread across 9 countries - Guinea, Côte d'Ivoire, Mali, Burkina Faso,
Niger, Benin, Chad, Cameroon, Nigeria1. Its geographical coverage, composed of vast desert
areas, is characterised by the presence of wide valleys, flood plains and areas of swamp (NBA,
2007).

The basin‟s population of 130 million is expanding very rapidly and is projected to possibly surpass
180 million inhabitants by 2025 (NBA, 2007). Living conditions are threatened by the extremely
variable flow of the Niger River. A long period of low water levels (the annual flow at Bamako
between1970-2005 was over 30% less than that between 1905-1970), linked to falling rainfall, was
followed by a period of higher water levels. This led to flooding which caused significant damage in
the basin (particularly in 2013 and 2014). Most of the population and the economy of the countries
in the Niger Basin rely on agriculture, pastoralism or other means of subsistence based on natural
resources, and is directly dependent on the water resources of the Niger River or its tributaries.
Fair distribution of the water resources and the preservation of the aquatic ecosystems in the basin,
including the remarkable wetlands of the Inner Delta and the maritime delta, are thus two of the
greatest challenges faced by the riparian countries of the Niger River and its tributaries.
                                                            Figure 1-1: Map of the Niger Basin




                                  Source: Atlas – Niger Basin, WWF – Wetlands – UNOPS, NBA 2007.




1 Algeria is connected to the basin through ephemeral rivers, which occasionally contribute small proportions of flow to
     the Niger drainage system, and is not a member country of the Niger Basin Authority.

d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
8                                                                   1. Vulnerability of the Niger Basin to climate risks


1.2     EXTREME VULNERABILITY TO CLIMATE RISKS

AN EXTREMELY VULNERABLE REGION

The Niger Basin (NB) is a region considered by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC) to have one of the highest vulnerabilities to the negative impacts/adverse effects of
climate change in the world. The main vulnerability factors in the basin are as follows:
 6 out of the 9 Member States are ranked among the Least Developed Countries by the United
   Nations (Benin, Burkina Faso, Guinea, Mali, Niger, Chad). Their Gross National Product per
   capita, their Human Capital Index and their Economic Vulnerability Index are among the least
   favourable. A large section of their populations is vulnerable, as characterized by high mortality,
   high malnutrition, low levels of education, and little access to clean drinking water and energy;
 Populations with natural resources-dependent livelihoods that are highly sensitive to climatic
  variations;
 Frequent droughts which have had a negative impact on the natural resources;
 Continuous degradation of the forest resources, mainly for firewood to satisfy the energy needs
  of the population;
 High average rate of population growth of around 3% annual growth on average across the
  basin‟s populated zones, which puts strong pressure on the natural resources and the
  environment;
 Fragile institutions;
 Security problems and displaced populations in the region, particularly in Mali, Niger, Chad,
  Cameroon, Nigeria, etc.) The impacts of climate change and recurrent natural disasters also
  lead to mass migration in the region.
These vulnerability factors are also to be found in other regions of the world but the combination of
all these factors in the same region is very rare and results in considerably complicating the
situation. As a consequence, the NB is exceptionally vulnerable to climate risks (see Figure 1-
2)
                 Figure 1-2 : Vulnerability index to climate change (ND-GAIN 2013)




                             d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique


               Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger
               Basin
1. Vulnerability of the Niger Basin to climate risks                                                                                  9


GREAT UNCERTAINTY WITH REGARD TO CLIMATE RISK

Assessment of the climate risks in the Niger Basin carried out by the Niger Basin Authority (NBA)
and the World Bank in 2013 on the one hand and the Member States as part of their preparation of
the National Adaptation Programmes of Action (NAPA) on the other indicate that inter-annual and
intra-annual climatic variations are naturally high in the basin.

With regard to climate change, these studies highlight the uncertainty of climate projections for
the NB. Nevertheless, they do identify three broad trends with regard to climate change:
 An overall rise in temperature of 1°C to 3°C, and consequently an increase in
  evapotranspiration;
 A rise in sea-level in the maritime delta;
 Increased variability of rainfall and the extreme weather events associated with this such as
   flooding and drought).

The impact of climate change on the average annual rainfall remains uncertain however, with some
climatic models suggesting a decrease and others an increase (see Appendix C).

The significant level of uncertainty in climatic projections makes it very difficult to assess the
impacts of climate change on the water cycle in the Niger Basin, requiring consideration of an
increase in both the frequency and intensity of extreme weather events such as flooding or severe
drought, and a rise or fall in the average values of climate and hydrological parameters.


MULTIPLE SECTORAL IMPACTS

The impacts of climate change on the water cycle increase the risk of natural disasters such as
floods and droughts, degrade the biodiversity and ecosystems associated with the river, and have
consequences on every economic sector - agriculture, livestock, fishing, hydroelectricity,
navigation, health, etc. – via the following pathways:
 Change in availability of the water resources impacts the agricultural yields, animal
  production and hydroelectric power capability.
 Modification of the flow regime of the river and its tributaries , including increased siltation,
  has a damaging effect on the navigability of the river, increases the risk of flooding and impacts
  the safety and security of the issues at stake, degrades the soil and destabilises the
  ecosystems along the river;
 Changing quality of the water affects the cost of producing clean drinking water, facilitates the
  circulation of water-borne diseases, modifies the habitats of the aquatic ecosystems and thus
  affects fish production.

These impacts have a compounding effect that threatens food and energy security, economic
development, and the preservation of the ecosystems in the Niger Basin.

See detailed description of the sectoral impacts in the flowcharts included in Appendix D.

In response to climate change, the main levers for action to protect, manage and develop the water
resources of the Niger River include the development of storage infrastructures and improved
water usage efficiency, the fight to protect the remarkable ecosystems of the basin against
degradation, improvement of the resilience of the populations and the strengthening of regional co-
operation (World Bank, 2012).




d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
10                     2. Framework of the Climate Resilience Investment Plan development strategy




2. FRAMEWORK OF THE CLIMATE RESILIENCE
   INVESTMENT PLAN DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY


2.1      CRIP DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY

ORIGIN OF THE INITIATIVE

The demographic challenges of the Niger Basin and the resulting increase in water and energy
requirements, the threat of the cycle of droughts which began at the start of the 1970's continuing,
and the environmental issues faced by the basin have led the Member States to make a strong
commitment, in the context of the NBA, in the "Shared Vision" process, which in 2007 resulted in
the formulation of the Sustainable Development Action Plan (SDAP) and subsequently its
transformation in 2008 into an Investment Plan (IP). After a first phase of implementation of the IP
in the form of a priority five-year plan (2008-2012), the Member States furthered their commitment
to regional co-operation through a second phase of the implementation of the SDAP/IP by giving
the NBA a Strategic Plan (2013-2022) and a ten-year Operational Plan (2016-2024).

Aware of their vulnerability with regard to climate change, the Member States emphasized their
willingness to adopt a coherent approach to tackling climate related challenges during the
ministerial round table on the future of the Niger River, held on 19th April, 2015 in Washington,
D.C. during the Spring Meetings of the World Bank and the IMF, the participants agreed to launch
an initiative aiming to constitute a coherent set of measures and concrete investments to
strengthen resilience to climate change in the Niger Basin.

This initiative has resulted in the development of an Investment Plan for the Strengthening of
Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin - abbreviated to Climate Resilience Investment
Plan - "CRIP" - based on existing key planning documents for the Niger Basin. The CRIP is a
short/medium term initiative (5 to 10 years) and aims to highlight a group of measures that can be
implemented rapidly.


A CONSULTATIVE DEVELOPMENT PROCESS BASED ON THE EXISTING PLANNING
DOCUMENTS

The existing planning documents used for its development include mainly:
 The Operational Plan 2016-2024 (currently being finalised). This follows on from the Strategic
  Plan (2012) and aims to continue the implementation of the measures of the SDAP and its
  revised Investment Programme. It includes the 256 priority measures directly identified by the
  Member States during the implementation process conducted from 2013 to 2015 (see details of
  the way the NBA planning documents have developed in Appendix B). This includes the
  measures driven by the various projects of the NBA and its technical and financial partners
  (PIDAACC/ADB, P-DREDGE/WB, PGBFN/WB, P-GIRE2/AFD, etc.);
 The National Adaptation Programmes of Action (NAPA) and the National Adaptation Plans
  (NAP) developed by 6 of the 9 Member States 2 with the support of the UNFCCC and the
  UNDP from 2006 to 2010. For the other Member States, equivalent documents (e.g. NAPCC in
  Cameroon) or national subscriptions were used;
 The contributions put forward by the Member States during the national consultations
  conducted in August 2015 and during a Regional Workshop held on 12 September, 2015 at
  Cotonou, for the preparation of this document.

2 Cameroon, Côte d’Ivoire and Nigeria have not officially submitted an NAPA to the UNFCCC.

                                 d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique


                Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger
                Basin
2. Framework of the Climate Resilience Investment Plan development strategy                                                           11


The consultation process conducted with the Member States through their NBA National Focal
Structure, their CRIP focal point and their COP21 focal point, representatives of the civil society
(IUCN, Wetlands International, Regional Coordination of Users, National Coordination of Users),
regional organisations, and donors, ensures that local, national and regional stakeholders adopt
the CRIP initiative.


A PLAN FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE

The Climate Resilience Investment Plan thus consists of a selection of measures resulting
from these documents and contributing to strengthening resilience 3 of the populations in
the Niger Basin to climate change.

Strengthening resilience to climate change of the populations, ecosystems, infrastructures and
institutions of the Niger Basin consists in reducing their exposure, reducing their sensitivity
and strengthening their adaptive capacity to the climate risks specific to the Niger Basin (see
Figure A-1) according to an overall development path where climate change is one of the major
constraints.


                                                                                                               3                       3
The CRIP thus includes mainly measures for adaptation , and also measures for mitigation
as collateral benefits resulting from the adaptation measures, thereby representing win-win
                     3               3                              3
measures. No-regret and low-regret measures and flexible adaptation are also included in the
CRIP.

For example, some agricultural, agroforestry or forest restoration and management measures not
only make it possible to enhance the resilience of the populations to climate change, but also
constitute mitigation measures by carbon sequestration in the plant biomass or in the soils, which
they foster. In the same way, the construction of a multi-purpose dam is deemed to be an
adaptation measure as the dam contributes to improving the availability of the water resource
during low-water periods, the protection against flooding and the improvement of the means of
subsistence of the local populations (fishing, tourism). The hydroelectric component of the dam
also constitutes a mitigation measure, contributing to energy generation without the emission of
greenhouse gas (GHG).

Particular attention is paid to the integration of the measures of the CRIP on a larger scale, over a
longer time-frame and under contrasting hypotheses for the future changes, and also to the
consideration of interactions between sectors and between funding in order to avoid any risk of
                 3
maladaptation. Some measures aiming to reduce vulnerability to climate change can thus have a
negative effect or even increase the vulnerability of other systems, sectors or social groups. For
example, the reservoirs of dams may evaporate large volumes of water. These volumes
evaporated into the atmosphere will not feed the usages for which they were intended downstream
and damage the water balance on the scale of the basin, which in turn increases the vulnerability of
users to droughts.

The package of measures included in the CRIP targets the different entry points inherent to the
reduction of climate risk. It includes preventive measures - prevention of the negative effects of
climate change on the management of water resources, preparation - before the occurrence of the
climate contingency (e.g. improvement/development of stream flow or climate networks, early
warning systems), - reactionary measures during the contingency (e.g. secure the water supply
during drought / periods of severe low water levels), and measures to restore or repair after the
contingency (e.g. restoration of infrastructures). Moreover, all the sectors related to the
management of water resources will be incorporated.




3 See definitions in Appendix 3.

d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
12                   2. Framework of the Climate Resilience Investment Plan development strategy


Finally, the CRIP takes into account the extreme uncertainty which reigns over the future
climate in the Niger Basin. By remaining open to the future integration of measures yet
unidentified or which are not currently eligible, the CRIP maintains a degree of flexibility and
continues to adapt to the very diverse potential impacts foreseen in the Niger Basin.


CONSISTENCY WITH NATIONAL AND REGIONAL INITIATIVES

The CRIP will be presented to the international community during the 21st session of the UNFCCC
Conference of the Parties in Paris in December 2015 (COP 21). In view of the funding of the needs
of the basin in terms of strengthening the resilience to climate change, this CRIP is also a means of
mobilising funding. The sources of funding identified are the funds financing adaptation such as the
Green Climate Fund, the Climate Investment Fund or the Adaptation Fund, and multilateral and
bilateral donors in countries with or without links to a climate initiative. In order to be able to call
upon these funds, the CRIP fulfils the conditions and criteria of each of them (see details in
Appendix I).

The initiatives for the COP21 relating to the Niger River Basin are numerous, particularly in terms
of adaptation to climate change. The Intended Nationally Determined Contributions (INDC) of the
countries includes an adaptation part. The regional institutions (BOAD, ECOWAS, WAEMU,
ECCAS, CEMAC, or CILSS) each have initiatives for adaptation to climate change specific to the
water resource management sector. These take the form of interventions (e.g. setting up of the
Regional Water Observatory for West Africa for the CCRE (Water Resources Coordination Centre)
or the Irrigation in the Sahel initiative of the CILSS) or funding tools (e.g. the Fund for the Green
Economy in Central Africa (FEVAC) set up by the ECCAS). These strategic documents define
priority areas for intervention at national and regional level to enhance resilience to climate change.
The CRIP has thus been developed so that, on the one hand, the measures selected are
compatible and complementary to these initiatives and on the other hand to ensure they are
coherent at national and regional level.

Finally, some countries in the NB also share other international basins, the management authorities
of which have also developed initiatives for the COP21 (VBA, LCBC, CICOS, OMVS). Particular
attention has been paid to ensuring the coherence of these initiatives in order to facilitate their
subsequent implementation at national level by the countries.




                              d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique


               Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger
               Basin
2. Framework of the Climate Resilience Investment Plan development strategy                                                           13




2.2            METHOD OF SELECTING THE MEASURES OF THE CRIP
2.2.1              Definition of the criteria for selection of the measures
2.2.1.1 Aims
The first aim is to define criteria that makes it possible to select from measures in the existing
planning documents (the OP, NAPA/NAP‟s and contributions of the Member States submitted
during consultations), those measures relevant to the protection, management and development of
the water resources in the basin which appear in the thematic field of action of the NBA and
contribute to strengthening the resilience of the populations, ecosystems, infrastructures and
institutions in the Niger Basin to the climate risks specific to that region. This involves laying down
criteria specific to water resources management projects in the Niger Basin.

The second aim is to ensure the selection of measures which fall within the geographical area of
the basin, which are adopted by the countries and which display a level of preparation allowing
rapid implementation to be envisaged, in order to facilitate access to the sources of funding
identified.

2.2.1.2 The selection criteria
Ten criteria have been defined. They are classed according to their nature as technical,
institutional, administrative or economic (Table 2-1).




d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
14                      2. Framework of the Climate Resilience Investment Plan development strategy


A measure must fulfil both of the following conditions to be selected in the CRIP:
 It must contribute to strengthening resilience to climate change and thus fulfil at least
   one of the following 2 corresponding criteria. These two criteria correspond to the two
   main categories of adaptation measures identified:
          Institutional measures, knowledge enhancement measures or capacity-building
           measures contributing to enhancing resilience to climate change (criterion 1).
           This category includes knowledge enhancement measures et measures for forecasting
           hydro-climatic hazards and their impacts on the water resources regime (sub-criterion
           1.1), measures contributing to the assessment of the vulnerability of populations,
           ecosystems, infrastructures and institutions in the NB, to communication, education and
           awareness-raising (sub-criterion 1.2) and measures contributing to enhancing the
           integration of climate change adaptation into the capabilities, bodies and management
           instruments of the national and regional institutions of the Basin (sub-criterion 1.3)
           Sector-specific measures contributing to strengthening resilience of the populations and
            ecosystems of the basin to the climate changes identified in the Niger Basin (criterion 2).
            All the flowcharts in appendix D are an integral part of the definition of technical criterion
            No.2. Any measure targeting one of the impacts identified in these flowcharts belongs to
            this category. This includes measures aiming to reduce vulnerability linked to water
            stress conditions, flooding, deterioration of the water quality, soil degradation,
            degradation of the grazing land, degradation of the ecosystems, or to the rising sea-level
            and measures aiming to strengthen resilience (e.g. generation of jobs, revenues, etc.)
 Moreover, it must satisfy all of the following criteria (3 to 10):
           contribute to the sustainable development and management of the Niger Basin (criterion
            3)
           avoid maladaptation (criterion 4) (see Appendix E)
           contribute to the protection, management and development of the water resources in the
            Niger Basin, as well as of the related ecosystems (criterion 5)
           be compatible with the planning documents and agreements concerning the Niger Basin
            (criterion 6)
           be well-adopted by the Member States (country ownership) (criterion 7)
           demonstrate the level of preparation required (criterion 8)
           pre-identified funding (criterion 9)
           economic feasibility (criterion 10)

The detailed methodology for comparing projects with each of these criteria is provided in Appendix
E.

The criteria subject to scoring (criteria 1, 2, and 8) will be used to prioritise the measures selected
in the CRIP.

Criteria 9 and 10 focus more specifically on the funding of the measures:
 Criterion 9 aims to assess the project funding conditions. The level of funding identified for each
  operation has been collected from the countries. Projects benefiting from signed financing
  agreements are not selected. This criterion allows the selection of measures for which funding
  has been identified for all or part of the budget but not confirmed, or for which no funding has
  been identified.
 The feasibility of the measures (criterion 10) will be assessed at the time of their selection for
funding. This analysis will be conducted based on feasibility studies produced by the countries for
each measure, as part of their preparation. Measures for which no feasibility study has been
produced are selected in the CRIP with the aim of mobilizing funding in order to carry out these
feasibility studies. The associated target amount corresponds to a portion of the overall amount
indicated for these measures.


                                 d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique


                 Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger
                 Basin
       2. Framework of the Climate Resilience Investment Plan development strategy                                                                                                                                        15


       Table 2-1: Criteria for the selection and prioritisation of the measures in the CRIP to strengthen resilience to the impacts of climate change

Criteria                                                                              Justification                                               Description/Example and [nature of the measure]
Criteria for the assessment of the contribution of the measures to resilience to climate change
1. • Institutional measures, knowledge enhancement                                    Managing hydro-climatic variability and uncertainty         1.1 Contribute to strengthening knowledge and forecasting of hydro-
measures or capacity-building measures                                                requires an improved knowledge of the climate and           climatic events and their impacts on the water resources regime.
contributing to enhancing resilience to climate                                       its impacts on the water resources, enhancement of             Collection/generation of meteorological, hydrological and
change                                                                                the capacities of the stakeholders and strengthening            hydrogeological data, development of monitoring networks,
                                                                                      of the institutions.                                            setting up of reliable information networks and effective
                                                                                      For the purpose of prioritisation, this criterion will be       management and sharing platforms (improvement of the quality
                                                                                      scored from 1 to 3 in order to quantify the                     and accessibility of the data)
                                                                                      contribution to resilience with regard to the impacts           [Reduction of exposure – Preparation]
                                                                                      of climate change identified in the Niger Basin.
                                                                                                                                                     Research activities aiming to model the processes and assess
                                                                                                                                                      the impacts of climate change on the water resources, the
                                                                                                                                                      wetlands and soil degradation and their vulnerability
                                                                                                                                                      [Reduction of exposure – Preparation]
                                                                                                                                                     Development and implementation of decision-making tools for the
                                                                                                                                                      management of climate-related risks and to improve weather-
                                                                                                                                                      forecasting (rainfall, stream flow) in the short, medium and long
                                                                                                                                                      term.
                                                                                                                                                      [Reduction of exposure – Preparation]
                                                                                                                                                    Communication, awareness-raising

                                                                                                                                                  1.2 Contribute to the assessment of the vulnerability of populations,
                                                                                                                                                  ecosystems, infrastructures and institutions in the Niger Basin, to
                                                                                                                                                  communication and awareness-raising.
                                                                                                                                                     Communication / awareness-raising with regard to the
                                                                                                                                                      vulnerability of the populations to climate change
                                                                                                                                                     Assessment of the vulnerability of the populations, ecosystems,
                                                                                                                                                      infrastructures and institutions to climate change

                                                                                                                                                  1.3 Contribute to ensuring the integration of climate change
                                                                                                                                                  adaptation into the capabilities, bodies and management
                                                                                                                                                  instruments of the national and regional institutions of the Basin
                                                                                                                                                     Strengthening the technical and regulatory capacities, etc.
                                                                                                                                                     Integration of the adaptation strategy in the preparation of
                                                                                                                                                      international agreements, strategic documents, the regulations,
                                                                                                                                                      standards and organisational procedures of the NBA and the

       d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

       Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
       16                                                                                          2. Framework of the Climate Resilience Investment Plan development strategy


Criteria                                              Justification                                                  Description/Example and [nature of the measure]
                                                                                                                        institutions of the Basin.
                                                                                                                       Promotion of rules for the management of the natural resources
                                                                                                                        that are compatible with the aim of this CRIP.
                                                                                                                       Implementation of international agreements linked to climate
                                                                                                                        change.
2. Sector-specific measures contributing to           This is the main aim of the Climate Resilience                 Any measure targeting the favourable or unfavourable effects
strengthening resilience of the populations and       Investment Plan: contribute to reducing the                    identified in each of the sectors or strengthening resilience of the
ecosystems of the basin to the climate changes        vulnerability of the issues at stake (by reducing the          populations, ecosystems, infrastructures and institutions with regard
identified in the Niger Basin                         exposure or sensitivity or improving the resilience)           to these impacts fulfils this criterion. It is based on the flowcharts
                                                      to the sectoral impacts identified in the Niger Basin          illustrating the effects of climate change per sector laid out in
                                                      For the purpose of prioritisation, this criterion will be      Appendix D.
                                                      scored from 1 to 3 in order to quantify the                    Measures to strengthen resilience will target:
                                                      contribution to resilience with regard to the impacts                       Vulnerability to water stress conditions
                                                      of climate change identified in the Niger Basin.
                                                                                                                                  Vulnerability linked to flooding
                                                                                                                                  Vulnerability linked to the deterioration of the water quality
                                                                                                                                  Vulnerability linked to soil degradation
                                                                                                                                  Vulnerability linked to degradation of the grazing land
                                                                                                                                  Vulnerability linked to degradation of the ecosystems
                                                                                                                                  Vulnerability linked to the rising sea-level
                                                                                                                             Strengthening of the resilience (e.g. generation of jobs,
                                                                                                                              revenues, etc.)
                                                                                                                     For the purpose of prioritisation, this criterion will be scored from 1
                                                                                                                     to 3 in order to quantify the contribution to resilience with regard to
                                                                                                                     the impacts of climate change identified in the Niger Basin.
Criteria for funding measures
3. Contribute to the sustainable development and      This involves ensuring that the measures selected              Measures concerning the regions outside the catchment area of the
management of the Niger Basin                         have implications within the boundary of the Niger             Niger Basin will not be selected.
                                                      Basin. This concerns cross-border operations and               E.g.
                                                      national or local operations.
                                                                                                                     Measures concerning the coastal area of Côte D'Ivoire and Guinea
                                                                                                                     will not be selected.
4. Integration on a larger scale, over longer time-   The aim of this criterion is to avoid selecting                Some adaptation measures may increase the vulnerability of other
frames and under contrasting hypotheses with          measures which generate "maladaptation"                        ecosystems, sectors or populations if (i) they increase emissions of
regard to the future changes, consideration of the                                                                   greenhouse gas, (ii) they disproportionately affect the most
interactions between sectors and between funding. -                                                                  vulnerable, (iii) they have a very high opportunity cost, (iv) they


                                                                                                             d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique


                       Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
       2. Framework of the Climate Resilience Investment Plan development strategy                                                                                                                                       17


Criteria                                                                              Justification                                          Description/Example and [nature of the measure]
Maladaptation                                                                                                                                reduce incentives to adapt, or (v) if they set paths which limit the
                                                                                                                                             choices available to future. These five risks of maladaptation offer a
                                                                                                                                             basis by which adaptation measures can be screened for their
                                                                                                                                             possible adverse effects (Barnett & O‟Neill, 2009).

                                                                                                                                             In the field of management and development of the water resources,
                                                                                                                                             and especially for large hydraulic structures, this criteria aims to
                                                                                                                                             eliminate measures which, for example:
                                                                                                                                                     cause a deterioration of the global water balance
                                                                                                                                                     lead to poor or low economic valorization of the water
                                                                                                                                                      resource
                                                                                                                                             The overall water balance and the economic valorization of the
                                                                                                                                             water resource are assessed with the help of indicators. These
                                                                                                                                             indicators are described in detail in Appendix E.
5. Contribute to the protection, management and                                       The NBA will lead the implementation of the CRIP.      E.g. Measures consisting of the creation of food banks do not
development of the water resources in the Niger                                       The measures included in it must remain within its     contribute to the protection, management and development of the
Basin, as well as related ecosystems.                                                 thematic field of action, linked to the management     water resources of the Niger River. They are deemed to be outside
                                                                                      and development of the water resources of the          the field of action of the NBA.
                                                                                      Niger River.
6. Compatibility with the main planning documents                                     The measures included in the CRIP and which are        Measures which are not compatible with the measures of the
and agreements concerning the Niger Basin, (IP,                                       not among the measures in the strategic documents      strategic documents and agreements such as the Water Charter
SP, OP, Water Charter and its appendices)                                             of the NBA must be compatible with the agreements      and its appendices are disqualified.
                                                                                      currently in force in the Basin such as the Water
                                                                                      Charter and its appendices.
                                                                                                                                             N.B. this criterion is deemed to be satisfied by measures selected
                                                                                      Moreover, the CRIP is intended to be an upgradable     from among the strategic documents of the NBA (Operational Plan)
                                                                                      document into which measures can be integrated in
                                                                                      the future.
7. Country ownership. Consultations of the                                            Sound adoption of the measures by the countries        N.B. this criterion is deemed to be fulfilled by the measures selected
stakeholders.                                                                         involved guarantees the long-term sustainability of    from the Operational Plan and from the SDA/NAP which have been
                                                                                      the expected results.                                  the subject of a national consultation, identification and prioritisation
                                                                                                                                             process. The fact that these measures are included in these
                                                                                                                                             documents is deemed to indicate that these measures have been
                                                                                                                                             successfully adopted by the countries.
8. Stage of preparation of the project.                                               Criterion of certain climate investment funds: rapid   What is the stage of preparation of the project: idea, identification,
                                                                                      implementation measure                                 feasibility, preliminary outline, final design, detailed design (planning
                                                                                      Required to trigger a decision to offer financial      of) implementation?
                                                                                      support.


       d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

       Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
        18                                                                                      2. Framework of the Climate Resilience Investment Plan development strategy


Criteria                                             Justification                                               Description/Example and [nature of the measure]
                                                     With regard to the quality of the studies, compliance       This criterion is subject to scoring. N/A: no information, 1: idea, 2:
                                                     with good practices and international standards             identification carried out, 3: feasibility carried out, 4: preliminary
                                                     promoted by the World Bank and multilateral donors          outline / final design completed, 5: detailed design completed or
                                                     is taken into consideration in the process for the          (planning of) implementation.
                                                     selection of measures to include in the CRIP.
                                                                                                                 Threshold: the identification studies must be complete. Measures
                                                                                                                 which do not satisfy this threshold are disqualified.
9. Level of funding identified                       Criterion of certain climate investment funds: no           What proportion if the estimated cost of the project is covered by the
                                                     substitution for national or regional funding.              identified funding?
                                                                                                                 The threshold is yet to be set.
                                                                                                                 It is considered that measures for which a financing agreement has
                                                                                                                 been signed are in the process of being implemented and are not
                                                                                                                 selected. Measures for which funding has been identified for all or
                                                                                                                 part of the budget but not signed, or for which no funding has been
                                                                                                                 identified are selected.
10. Economic feasibility                             Criterion of certain climate investment funds:              The feasibility of the measures (criterion 10) will be assessed at the
                                                     Required to trigger a decision to offer financial           time of their selection for funding. This analysis will be conducted
                                                     support                                                     based on feasibility studies produced by the countries for each
                                                                                                                 measure, as part of their preparation. Measures for which no
                                                                                                                 feasibility study has been produced are selected in the CRIP with
                                                                                                                 the aim of mobilizing funding in order to carry out these feasibility
                                                                                                                 studies. The associated target amount corresponds to a portion of
                                                                                                                 the overall amount indicated for these measures.




                                                                                                         d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique


                         Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
2. Framework of the Climate Resilience Investment Plan development strategy                                                           19




2.2.2              Justification of the measures selected
This section aims to provide the main justification concerning the selection or non-selection of the
measures with regard to their contribution to strengthening resilience to climate change. For this
purpose, the table shown below crosses the main types of sectoral activities (lines) with the
various types of adaptation measures (columns). The table also indicates the risks of
maladaptation linked to a decline in the water balance (second to last column) and the possibility
of co-beneficiaries in terms of mitigation (last column).

For the record, the strategic focuses of the Strategic Plan and the Operational Plan to which the main
types of sectoral measures belong are reiterated.

It should be noted that this table only concerns the contribution to strengthening resilience (criteria 1
and 2) and, in part, criterion 4 on the risks of maladaptation. The other criteria are considered
elsewhere.

The justification for each of the measures taken individually and for the other eight criteria are supplied
in Appendix E.

It should be noted that the measures resulting from programmes for adaptation to climate change
(NAPA, NAPCC, PIDAACC, etc.) contribute de facto to strengthening the resilience to climate change.
However, assessment of the measures from the NAPA lies in the following questions:
 Is their geographical area compatible with the geographical area of the Niger Basin? (criterion 3)
 Do they generate maladaptation? (criterion 4)
 Do they contribute to the protection, management and development of the water resources in the
  Niger Basin? (criterion 5)
 Are they compatible with the strategic documents concerning the Niger Basin? (criterion 6)




d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
20                                       2. Framework of the Climate Resilience Investment Plan development strategy




                                                                                                                    to



                                                                                                                    to




                                                                                                                    to



                                                                                                            l a to
                                                      de cti o deg ra e r q to




                                                                               i n a bi tem t o


                                                                                                                   to
                                                    R ada of v dat ty l i li ty
                                                                                                                  d



                                                                                                                  d




                                                                                                               ed


                                                            uc n ne zi n ed
                                                                                                    t ed




                                                                th f v e ec y li d
                                                                       ri s l ne osy ked



                                                                                                 ve ed
                                                                                                   i ua




                                                                                         a - li s
                                                                                                              ke



                                                                                                              ke




                                                                                                               n




                                                                                                                l
                                                                                                               -




                                                                                                           ba
                                                                     t io ul i on nk


                                                        ed at io v ul gra l ink
                                                                                                           ss




                                                         ed s o v ul wa ink




                                                                                             l e nk
                                                      R ad i nteg are y




                                                                              v u s l in



                                                                                                           n




                                                                                                         n
                                                                                                        l it




                                                                                                          i




                                                                                           e glo
                                                                                                     ne




                                                                ti o of ra b g
                                                                                                        l


                                                                                                       l
                                                                     na is aw bi




                                                                                                     s
                                                                          of tres li ty


                                               g. ter of ing i li ty




                                                              ad of he i li ty




                                                                                                     l
                                                                                                    of




                                                                          of the li ty




                                                                                     se l ity




                                                                                                   e
                                                                 ti o r and era




                                                                        o h il it




                                                                                 l a he
                                                                                                  l




                                                                                             nc
                                                                                               n



                                                                                                i




                                                                                              bi
                                                                                               i
                                                                  ti o er rab



                                                         d e ti on ood rab




                                                                                  t b
                                                                  ti o n o ab
                                                              u n en es e




                                                                  ti o tio ti o
                                                                                           ln




                                                     de cti o of era




                                                                             ba of t
                                                                                        ili e
                                                          m s m nci at




                                                              u c tio lner




                                                                                      nc
                                                                         io f vu




                                                              u c ta ra




                                                                                         r
                                                              u c at lne



                                                                            fl e




                                                                                     ne
                                                   om s e lim




                                                                                      s
                                                                                     a
                                                                                    ln




                                                                          n n




                                                                        er n
                                                         ed ap g




                                                                                 re
                                                                                  n



                                                                                  s




                                                                                    f


                                                                                   r
                                                                       w u




                                                                     at ti o
                                                                          l in




                                                                                  t
                                                                  io v u
                                               C s e ing f c

                                                                  ic t o




                                                                               u
                                                                              v




                                                                              g

                                                                             a
                                                                            o




                                                                            n




                                                                            e

                                                                          in
                                                                          of
                                                                           a




                                                                        ad
                                                  b. c o dg e




                                                                        il




                                                                     en
                                                                       n



                                                                       n




                                                                       a

                                                                       n


                                                           gr n
                                                                     at




                                                                    gr
                                                          gr n


                                                                     n
                                                                     r




                                                                    e

                                                                  th




                                                                 w
                                                               de
                                                                le




                                                                 n
                                                         A nt




                                                              ng
                                               th u c
                                                            i tu




                                                            ti o
                                                              w




                                                              u


                                                            u




                                                          of
                                                         no




                                                         ed




                                                         ed




                                                          re
                                                           s




                                                         ed




                                                        ed




                                                        ga
                                                         st




                                                      St


                                                       k
                                                      In




                                                      R




                                                      R



                                                      R
                                               K




                                                     R




                                                    i ti
                                                    R




                                                   is
                                                    e




                                               M
                                            a.




                                               c.



                                               d.



                                               e.




                                               h.




                                               k.


                                               R
                                                f.




                                               i.



                                               j.
Strategic focus 1: Water as a lever to econom ic developm ent
Development of a multi-purpose
regulation structure
Restoration of a multi-purpose
regulation structure
Development of a hydroelectric pow er
plant
Restoration of a hydroelectric pow er
plant
Development of an irrigated sector
Restoration of an irrigated sector
Development of rain-fed agriculture
Development of dry season agriculture
Development of sustainable fishing
management
Development / Restoration of pastoral
hydraulic facilities
Measures concerning pastoral
management and transhumance of
livestock
Development of eco-tourism linked to
w ater
Development of transport
Development of the drinking w ater
supply
Strategic focus 2: Preservation of the ecosystem s in the Basin
Improvement of streamflow netw orks
Decision-making tools
Flood-protection dykes
Forest management measures
Reforestation, agroforestry, promotion
of renew able energy sources other
than w ood
Protection of river banks and ponds
Measures to reduce soil erosion and
silting
Enhancement measures concerning
invasive species
Management measures for protected
areas
Measures to raise aw areness to w ater-
borne diseases
Development of adaptation strategies
Strategic focus 3: Innovative, sustainable funding
Studies and development of funding
mechanisms
Strategic focus 4: Co-operation w ith the States and partners
Rendering the NBA management tools
operational
Distribution and implementation of the
Water Charter
Strategic focus 5: Organisational perform ance
Tools and procedures for monitoring &
assessing implementation of the
strategic documents
Measures to enhance capabilities




                                                   d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique


                      Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
3. Climate Resilience Investment Plan aiming to strengthen climate resilience in the Niger Basin                                      21



3. CLIMATE RESILIENCE INVESTMENT PLAN AIMING TO
   STRENGTHEN CLIMATE RESILIENCE IN THE NIGER BASIN


3.1            PRESENTATION AND ARCHITECTURE
The CRIP consists of a selection of measures, chosen with regard to the first 9 criteria defined in
section 2.2.1. The selection will be narrowed down when the funding is mobilised by matching the
measures to the last criterion, concerning the economic feasibility of the projects (criterion 10).
Justification of their selection is described in detail in Appendix E.

The CRIP is intended to be an upgradable document into which measures can be integrated in the
future, according to the same selection process.

The ability of the institutions in the Niger Basin to address issues transcending sectors, such as
climate change, both at local and national level, and at the level of the Basin, is critical to the
achievement and robustness of the results expected by implementing the CRIP. For this reason,
the institutional measures for strengthening the capacity-building measures and the knowledge
strengthening measures have been isolated in a package of "Knowledge and Institutions"
measures. Its implementation is presented as a priority in order to guarantee that the second package
of measures in the CRIP will be fully effective.

It should be noted that the measures of the Operational Plan included in the "Knowledge and
Institutions" package mainly concern the NBA. They are supplemented by measures targeting the
national and local institutions resulting from the NAPA/NAP‟s. Additional measures to strengthen the
Member States at national level may be identified during the consultations and possibly integrated in
order for the conditions for implementation of the measures in the second CRIP package to be met both
at regional and at national and local levels

The CRIP mainly contains adaptation measures, and also mitigation measures as collateral benefits
resulting from the adaptation measures. It is thus organised as follows:
 Package of Knowledge and Institutions measures
  1. Knowledge. Collection and generation of climatic and hydrological information. Weather-
     forecasting tools and decision-making tools
  2. Assessment of vulnerability. Communication education and awareness-raising
  3. Integration of climate change adaptation into the capabilities, bodies and management
     instruments of the national and regional institutions of the Basin
 Package of sectorial measures contributing to strengthening resilience of the populations
  and ecosystems of the basin to the impacts of climate change identified in the Niger Basin
  (criterion 1):
  4. Measures targeting vulnerability to water stress
  5. Measures targeting vulnerability to flooding
  6. Measures targeting vulnerability to soil degradation
  7. Measures targeting vulnerability to degradation of the grazing land
  8. Measures targeting vulnerability to degradation of the ecosystems
  9. Measures targeting vulnerability to deterioration of the water quality
  10. Measures targeting vulnerability linked to the rising sea-level
  11. Measures strengthening resilience (e.g. generation of jobs, revenues, etc.)

In its current version (23 November 2015), The Investment plan for the Enhancement of Resilience to
Climate Change in the Niger Basin contains 246 measures, distributed as follows:



d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
22          3. Climate Resilience Investment Plan aiming to strengthen climate resilience in the Niger Basin


                Table 3-1 : Breakdown of CRIP actions based on the type of adaptation measure

       Types of measures contributing to climate resilience building                                                         Number of actions
     Package of “Knowledge and Institutions”                                                                                                [54]
     1 - Knowledge. Collection and generation of climatic and hydrological
     information. Weather-forecasting tools and decision-making tools
                                                                                                                                             26

     2 - Assessment of vulnerability. Communication and awareness-raising                                                                     9
     3 - Integration of climate change adaptation into the capabilities, bodies and
     management instruments of the national and regional institutions of the Basin
                                                                                                                                             19

     Package of sectorial measures contributing to enhancing the
     resilience of the populations and ecosystems of the basin to the                                                                      [192]
     impacts of climate change identified in the NB
     4 - Measures targeting vulnerability to water stress                                                                                    77
     5 – Measures targeting vulnerability to flooding                                                                                         7
     6 – Measures targeting vulnerability to soil degradation                                                                                30
     7 - Measures targeting vulnerability to degradation of the grazing land                                                                  8
     8 - Measures targeting vulnerability to degradation of the ecosystems                                                                   47
     9 - Measures targeting vulnerability to deterioration of the water quality                                                               5
     10 - Measures targeting vulnerability linked to the rising sea-level                                                                     1
     11 – Measures strengthening resilience (e.g. generation of jobs, revenues,                                                              17
         etc.

The following two tables set out the measures selected in the two packages in the CRIP, after
the selection process described in section 2. The measures are organized according to their nature
with regard to adaptation / resilience to climate change. The measures in the "Knowledge and
Institutions" package are those validating criterion No.1. The sub-categories corresponding to sub-
categories 1.1, 1.2 and 1.3. The measures in the second package are those that fall under criterion
No.1. The sub-categories are also identical.

It should be noted that certain measures may belong to several categories of adaptation measures. In
this case, they have been allocated to the category for which the contribution is the most significant. The
two columns on the right indicate the values of criteria No.2 (Contribution to resilience) and No.10
(Stage of preparation of the project). The meaning of the values taken by these two criteria is given in
Appendix E. These criteria may be used to prioritise measures.

Some of the measures of the CRIP resulting from NAPA/NAP‟s or national contributions may concern
areas that are partially outside the Niger Basin, such as the national territory or administrative areas
(municipalities, regions, etc.). These measures are included in the CRIP in proportion to the portions of
the Basin concerned.

All the detailed information (cost, values of the assessment criteria, etc.) about all the measures
analysed is given in Appendix E.

A summary of the measures per country is also given in Appendix F.




                                          d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique


                   Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
3. Climate Resilience Investment Plan aiming to strengthen climate resilience in the Niger Basin                                                                                                                               23




3.2            SELECTED ACTIONS
SELECTED ACTIONS IN THE CLIMATE RESILIENCE INVESTMENT PLAN FOR NIGER BASIN – KNOWLEDGE AND INSTITUTIONS PACKAGE

                                                                                                                                      Reference document                                           Prioritization options
                                                                                                                                                             Overall action      Funding
                                                       Action title                                                                     and beneficiary
                                                                                                                                                              cost (USD)         sources         Contribution    Preparation
                                                                                                                                            country
                                                                                                                                                                                                 to resilience      stage
 1 – Knowledge. Collection and generation of climatic and hydrological information. Weather-forecasting tools and decision-making tools
                                                                                                                                      National
                                                                                                                                      communication                            Identification
 Development of a data bank relating to climate change                                                                                                             761 483                            3              2
                                                                                                                                      concerning climate                         on-going
                                                                                                                                      change - Benin
                                                                                                                                      National
 Enhancement of capabilities with regard to climate observation in the Benin                                                          communication                            Identification
                                                                                                                                                                  3 892 023                           3              2
 section of the Niger basin                                                                                                           concerning climate                         on-going
                                                                                                                                      change - Benin
 Setting up of a climate hazard forecasting and early warning system for food
                                                                              NAPA Benin                                                                          8 190 000 70% identified -          3              2
 safety in 4 vulnerable agro-ecological zones
 Development of a sound national Water Information System (WIS)                                                                       NC PAGIRE Burkina                        Identification
                                                                                                                                                                16 464 951                            3              2
                                                                                                                                      Faso                                       on-going
 Development of research activities in water management, more particularly                                                            NC PAGIRE Burkina                        Identification
                                                                                                                                                                  5 245 771                           3              2
 in the context of adaptation to climate change                                                                                       Faso                                       on-going
 Reduction of vulnerability to climate change by enhancing measures for                                                                                                        Identification
                                                                                                                                      NAPA Burkina Faso           7 446 000                           3              2
 prevention and management of food crises in the Oursi and Boulsa zones.                                                                                                         on-going
 Equipment and improvement of knowledge concerning the quality of the
                                                                                                                                                                              60% identified -
 water resources (Materials and equipment, Improvement of knowledge of                                                                PO_R2 Burkina Faso           707 563                            3              2
                                                                                                                                                                                PIDACC
 the quality of the water resources)
 Setting up a system for observation, information management and warning                                                                                                       Identification
                                                                                                                                      PNACC Cameroon              2 220 000                           3              2
 with regard to climate hazards in Cameroon                                                                                                                                      on-going
 Develop models for the allocation of the water resources of river basin                                                                                                       Identification
                                                                                                                                      NC - PND Ivory Coast        1 184 529                           3              2
 agencies                                                                                                                                                                        on-going
                                                                                                                                                                              60% identified -
 Development of adaptation and water resource management tools                                                                        PO_R2 Ivory Coast            452 101                            3              2
                                                                                                                                                                                PIDACC

d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
24                                                                      3. Climate Resilience Investment Plan aiming to strengthen climate resilience in the Niger Basin


                                                                                Reference document                                                                          Prioritization options
                                                                                                            Overall action                     Funding
                                   Action title                                   and beneficiary
                                                                                                             cost (USD)                        sources                   Contribution             Preparation
                                                                                      country
                                                                                                                                                                         to resilience               stage
Development of an early warning system to safeguard agricultural                                                                            Identification
                                                                                NAPA Guinea                              150 000                                                  3                        2
productivity                                                                                                                                  on-going
Improvement of knowledge of water resources and enhancement of the                                                                          Identification
                                                                                PO_R2 Guinea                             756 303                                                  3                        2
hydro-meteorological and hydrogeological data collection system                                                                               on-going
Study for the development of a communication strategy and setting up of an
                                                                                                                                            Identification
Information System for the integrated management of the resources of the        NC PNSFN Mali                            465 351                                                  2                        2
                                                                                                                                              on-going
Niger River Basin
                                                                                                                                            Identification
Study of the design of the observatory of the Niger River in Mali               NC PNSFN Mali                            126 914                                                  3                        2
                                                                                                                                              on-going
Support for knowledge of the quality of the water resources and acquisition                                                               60% identified -
                                                                                PO_R2 Mali                           4 042 017                                                    3                        2
of meteorological equipment                                                                                                                 PIDACC
Strengthening of the existing pollution control team and creation and                                                                     60% identified -
                                                                                PO_R2 Niger                              282 353                                                  3                        2
equipping of 4 new stations                                                                                                                 PIDACC
                                                                                                                                            Identification
Monitoring of the application of the minimum low water flows.                   PO_R2 Nigeria                        1 764 706                                                    3                        2
                                                                                                                                              on-going
                                                                                                                                            Identification
Development of tools for the modelling of hydrological forecasts                PO_R2 Nigeria                        1 176 471                                                    3                        2
                                                                                                                                              on-going
                                                                                                                                            Identification
Support for the functioning of Niger-HYCOS                                      PO_R2 Nigeria                        1 324 370                                                    3                        2
                                                                                                                                              on-going
                                                                                                                                            Identification
Modelling of hydraulic variation                                                PO_R2 Nigeria                        1 201 681                                                    3                        2
                                                                                                                                              on-going
Useful research work for the future models / Research work to integrate, in
future models, scenarios dealing with the increase in temperature in order to                                                               Identification
                                                                              PO_R2 Nigeria                          1 774 790                                                    3                        2
calculate the need in water of the plants and the evaporation of the                                                                          on-going
damming lakes
Improvement of the quality of seasonal forecasting and its integration in the                                                               Identification
                                                                                NAPA Chad                            1 700 000                                                    3                        2
strategy for monitoring vulnerability.                                                                                                        on-going
Observatoire National sur les Changements Climatiques (ONCC) / National                                                                     Identification
                                                                                NAPA Chad                            1 600 000                                                    3                        2
Observatory for Climate Change                                                                                                                on-going
                                                                                Component of CIWA                                         50% identified -
Hydraulic modelling of the inner delta of the Niger                                                                  1 400 000                                                    3                        2
                                                                                project                                                      CIWA
Rendering the decision-making tools operational                                 PO_R4 SE-ABN                         2 917 647 60% identified -                                   3                        2


                                                                                                 d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

               Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
3. Climate Resilience Investment Plan aiming to strengthen climate resilience in the Niger Basin                                                                                                                             25


                                                                                                                                      Reference document                                         Prioritization options
                                                                                                                                                           Overall action      Funding
                                                       Action title                                                                     and beneficiary
                                                                                                                                                            cost (USD)         sources         Contribution    Preparation
                                                                                                                                            country
                                                                                                                                                                                               to resilience      stage
                                                                                                                                                                               PIDACC
                                                                                                                                                                             Identification
 Monitoring water resources in the Niger Basin                                                                                        PO_R2 SE-ABN            10 729 412                            3              2
                                                                                                                                                                               on-going
 2 - Assessment of vulnerability. Communication and awareness-raising
 Adaptation of the national gender policy and women‟s vulnerability to climate                                                                                               Identification
                                                                               PNACC Cameroon                                                                   2 220 000                           3              2
 change                                                                                                                                                                        on-going
 Raising the awareness of the population, professionals, administration and
                                                                                                                                                                             Identification
 decision-makers to the effects of climate change and the measures to be                                                              PNACC Cameroon            2 220 000                           3              2
                                                                                                                                                                               on-going
 taken
 Education, professional training and enhancement of capabilities concerning                                                                                                 Identification
                                                                             PNACC Cameroon                                                                     5 550 000                           3              2
 climate change                                                                                                                                                                on-going
                                                                                                                                                                             Identification
 "One School, 5 hectares of forest" project                                                                                           PO_R2 Ivory Coast         3 721 008                           3              6
                                                                                                                                                                               on-going
                                                                                                                                                                             Identification
 Reforestation project in schools                                                                                                     PO_R2 Niger                339 496                            3              2
                                                                                                                                                                               on-going
 Reduction of the vulnerability of populations to climate change /                                                                                                           Identification
                                                                                                                                      NAPA Chad                 2 000 000                           3              2
 Management of climate-related hazards and adaptation to climate change                                                                                                        on-going
 Improvement of information, education and communication concerning                                                                                                          Identification
                                                                                                                                      NAPA Chad                 1 100 000                           3              2
 adaptation to climate change                                                                                                                                                  on-going
                                                                                                                                                                             Identification
 Inventory and general mapping of the ecosystems of the basin                                                                         PO_R2 SE-ABN           108 494 118                            3              2
                                                                                                                                                                               on-going
                                                                                                                                                                             Identification
 Development of external communication                                                                                                PO_R5 SE-ABN              3 705 042                           3              2
                                                                                                                                                                               on-going
 3 - Integration of climate change adaptation into the capabilities, bodies and management instruments of the national and regional institutions of the Basin
 Development of the water development and management scheme for the                                                                                                          Identification
                                                                                                                                      PO_R2 Benin                621 849                            1              2
 national part of the Niger Basin                                                                                                                                              on-going
                                                                                                                                                                            60% identified -
 Development of a good practice guide                                                                                                 PO_R2 Benin                598 319                            1              2
                                                                                                                                                                              PIDACC
                                                                                                                                                                            100% identified
 Development of strategies for adaptation to climate change                                                                           PO_R2 Benin                608 403                            1              2
                                                                                                                                                                              - PIDACC
 Inclusion of climate hazards when updating the Land Use Plan                                                                         PNACC Cameroon            3 330 000    Identification         1              2


d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
26                                                                      3. Climate Resilience Investment Plan aiming to strengthen climate resilience in the Niger Basin


                                                                                Reference document                                                                          Prioritization options
                                                                                                            Overall action                     Funding
                                 Action title                                     and beneficiary
                                                                                                             cost (USD)                        sources                   Contribution             Preparation
                                                                                      country
                                                                                                                                                                         to resilience               stage
                                                                                                                                               on-going
Protection of the resources and ecosystems in the national part of the Niger                                                                Identification
                                                                                PO_R2 Cameroon                       8 438 655                                                    1                        2
Basin                                                                                                                                         on-going
Strengthening the shared management of natural resources in the national                                                                    Identification
                                                                                PO_R2 Cameroon                       1 260 504                                                    1                        2
part of the Niger Basin                                                                                                                       on-going
                                                                                                                                          60% identified -
Enhancement of communities' ability to adapt                                    PO_R2 Ivory Coast                        352 941                                                  1                        2
                                                                                                                                            PIDACC
                                                                                                                                            Identification
Enhancement of the ability to adapt and intervene                               PO_R2 Ivory Coast                    2 110 924                                                    1                        2
                                                                                                                                              on-going
Support for the development of collaborative management of the Tinkisso,                                                                  50% identified -
                                                                                PO_R2 Guinea                             425 210                                                  1                        2
Niger- Tinkisso and Sankarani - Fié Ramsar sites                                                                                            PIDACC
                                                                                                                                          60% identified -
Adaptation to climate change (flooding)                                         PO_R2 Guinea                         1 179 832                                                    1                        2
                                                                                                                                            PIDACC
Training activities for those involved in the management of the water           NC PNSFN Mali                                               Identification
                                                                                                                         162 450                                                  1                        2
resources in the Basin                                                                                                                        on-going
Project for the Management and Sustainable Use of Natural Resources and                                                                     Identification
                                                                                PO_R2 Niger                              912 605                                                  1                        2
Adaptation to Climate Change                                                                                                                  on-going
                                                                                                                                          60% identified -
Strengthening of community capacity for adaptation (flooding)                   PO_R2 Niger                              991 597                                                  1                        2
                                                                                                                                            PIDACC
Enhancement of the shared management of the water resources in the                                                                          Identification
                                                                                PO_R2 Niger                          2 174 790                                                    1                        2
national part of the Niger Basin                                                                                                              on-going
Strengthening the Shared management of water resources in the Basin                                                                       60% identified -
                                                                                PO_R2 Nigeria                            226 891                                                  1                        2
(Inventory and dissemination of good practices in protecting ecosystems)                                                                    PIDACC
Strengthening of community capacity for adaptation to climate change
(Inventory and dissemination of good practices in restoring degraded                                                                      60% identified -
                                                                                PO_R2 Nigeria                            277 311                                                  1                        2
ecosystems; Inventory and dissemination of good practices in protecting                                                                     PIDACC
ecosystems)
Capitalisation and dissemination of good practices for the restoration of                                                                 60% identified -
                                                                                PO_R2 SE-ABN                       11 532 773                                                     1                        2
degraded ecosystems                                                                                                                         PIDACC
                                                                                                                                            Identification
Distribution and application of the Water Charter to all States                 PO_R4 SE-ABN                             134 454                                                  1                        2
                                                                                                                                              on-going
Development of the gender policy (finalise the policy and implement it)         PO_R5 SE-ABN                             153 782            Identification                        1                        2

                                                                                                 d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

               Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
3. Climate Resilience Investment Plan aiming to strengthen climate resilience in the Niger Basin                                                                                                                               27


                                                                                                                                      Reference document                                           Prioritization options
                                                                                                                                                            Overall action       Funding
                                                       Action title                                                                     and beneficiary
                                                                                                                                                             cost (USD)          sources         Contribution    Preparation
                                                                                                                                            country
                                                                                                                                                                                                 to resilience      stage
                                                                                                                                                                                 on-going

CIWA: Cooperation in International Waters in Africa                                                                                             NAP: National Adaptation Plan
NC: National Contribution                                                                                                                       PNACC: National Programme for Adaptation to Climate Change
DIN: Inner Delta of the Niger                                                                                                                   PNSFN: National Programme to Safeguard the Niger River
ONCC: National Observatory for Climate Change                                                                                                   PO: NBA Operational Plan
NAPA: National Adaptation Programmes of Action                                                                                                  SE/ABN: Executive Secretariat of the NBA
PIDACC: Programme for Integrated Development and Adaptation to Climate Change in the                                                            SIE: Water Information System
Niger Basin




d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
28                                                                      3. Climate Resilience Investment Plan aiming to strengthen climate resilience in the Niger Basin



SELECTED ACTIONS IN THE CLIMATE RESILIENCE INVESTMENT PLAN FOR NIGER BASIN – SECOND PACKAGE

                                                                                                                                                                                           Prioritization options
                                                                                  Reference document and               Overall action                     Funding
                                   Action title                                                                                                                                     Contribution to                 Preparation
                                                                                    beneficiary country                 cost (USD)                        sources
                                                                                                                                                                                      resilience                       stage
4 - Measures targeting vulnerability to water stress
                                                                                 National communication on                                             Identification
Adaptation of the farming calendars to the new climate context                                                                  2 538 276                                                       3                            2
                                                                                 climate change Benin                                                    on-going
Mobilisation of surface water in order to adapt to climate change in the most                                                                          Identification
                                                                                 NAPA Benin                                     2 875 000                                                       3                            2
vulnerable municipalities of the departments in the Centre and the North                                                                                 on-going
Rehabilitation and agricultural diversification of twenty agro-pastoral reservoirs                                                                  10% identified -
                                                                                   PO_R1 Benin                                  7 515 966                                                       3                            2
in Benin                                                                                                                                               PIDACC
                                                                                                                                                    10% identified -
Construction of ten (10) multi-purpose dams                                      PO_R1 Benin                                  35 647 059                                                        3                            2
                                                                                                                                                       PIDACC
Rehabilitation and diversification of 5 small dams at Gamagou, Gah,
                                                                                                                                                      56% identified
Guessou, Sombi, Kérékou, Wara and Zougou Pantrossi in Superior Alibori           PO_R1_Benin                                    1 500 000                                                       3                            4
                                                                                                                                                        PIDACC
region
Safeguarding of cereal production by the promotion of supplementary                                                                                    Identification
                                                                                 NAPA Burkina Faso                                 408 660                                                      3                            2
irrigation in the provinces of Oudalan and Nammemtenga.                                                                                                  on-going
                                                                                                                                                       Identification
Development and management of the waterhole at Oursi                             NAPA Burkina Faso                                 275 000                                                      3                            2
                                                                                                                                                         on-going
Development of irrigated crops in the provinces of Gourma, Namemtenga,                                                                                 Identification
                                                                                 NAPA Burkina Faso                                 443 300                                                      3                            2
Tapoa and Sanmatenga.                                                                                                                                    on-going
Safeguarding of agricultural production by the use of appropriate technological                                                                        Identification
                                                                                NAPA Burkina Faso                                  297 924                                                      3                            2
packages in the South-West and East regions.                                                                                                             on-going
Rehabilitation of the Baskouré dam and preparation of 60 hectares of                                                                                30% identified -
                                                                                 PO_R1 Burkina Faso                             1 452 101                                                       3                            5
lowlands in the municipalities of Baskouré, Diabo and Fada                                                                                             PIDACC
Construction of the Coalla dam (5 Mm3) in the province of Gnagna (East) and                                                                         50% identified -
                                                                                 PO_R1 Burkina Faso                             5 749 580                                                       3                            5
preparation of 122 ha of irrigated land                                                                                                                PIDACC
Rehabilitation of the dam and 14 ha of irrigated utilised agricultural land                                                                         30% identified -
                                                                                 PO_R1 Burkina Faso                             1 363 025                                                       3                            5
equipped with 50 wells at Dabesma (Gnagna, East)                                                                                                       PIDACC
Rehabilitation of the dam and creation of 192 ha of irrigated land downstream                                                                          Identification
                                                                                 PO_R1 Burkina Faso                             3 290 756                                                       3                            5
of the Sidi-KompIenga dam (Gnagna, East)                                                                                                                 on-going
Creation of 241 ha of irrigated land at the SIRBA dam (Gnagna, East)             PO_R1 Burkina Faso                             3 448 739              Identification                           3                            5


                                                                                                 d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

                Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
3. Climate Resilience Investment Plan aiming to strengthen climate resilience in the Niger Basin                                                                                                                              29


                                                                                                                                                                                                       Prioritization options
                                                                                                                                      Reference document and   Overall action      Funding
                                                         Action title                                                                                                                              Contribution to   Preparation
                                                                                                                                        beneficiary country     cost (USD)         sources
                                                                                                                                                                                                     resilience         stage
                                                                                                                                                                                   on-going
 Rehabilitation of the dam and creation of 11 ha of irrigated utilised agricultural
                                                                                                                                                                                40% identified -
 land and preparation of 100 ha of horticultural land at Tanga (Kouritenga,                                                           PO_R1 Burkina Faso            1 885 714                            3                5
                                                                                                                                                                                   PIDACC
 Centre-East) equipped with 50 wells
                                                                                                                                                                                40% identified -
 Rehabilitation of the Kiemna dam                                                                                                     PO_R1 Burkina Faso             334 454                             3                4
                                                                                                                                                                                   PIDACC
                                                                                                                                                                                20% identified -
 Rehabilitation of the Bani dam                                                                                                       PO_R1 Burkina Faso             768 252                             3                5
                                                                                                                                                                                   PIDACC
                                                                                                                                                                                40% identified -
 Rehabilitation of the Touro dam                                                                                                      PO_R1 Burkina Faso            1 568 067                            3                5
                                                                                                                                                                                   PIDACC
                                                                                                                                                                                40% identified -
 Rehabilitation of the Boudieri dam                                                                                                   PO_R1 Burkina Faso            1 351 261                            3                5
                                                                                                                                                                                   PIDACC
 Completion of the construction of the Bambakari dam (163 Mm3) in the                                                                                                           20% identified -
                                                                                                                                      PO_R1 Burkina Faso           31 751 261                            3                5
 province of Déno (Sahel) and preparation of 300ha of irrigated land                                                                                                               PIDACC
                                                                                                                                                                                0% identified -
 Development of the waterhole in Dori                                                                                                 PO_R1 Burkina Faso           86 301 389                            3                2
                                                                                                                                                                                  PIDACC
 Enhancement and safeguarding of access to water resources and wastewater                                                                                                        Identification
                                                                          PNACC Cameroon                                                                            8 880 000                            3                2
 treatment in a context of climate change                                                                                                                                          on-going
 Development of integrated farming which is resilient to the effects of climate                                                                                                  Identification
                                                                                                                                      PNACC Cameroon                8 880 000                            3                2
 change                                                                                                                                                                            on-going
 Construction of hydro-agricultural dams, development and utilisation of the                                                                                                    10% identified -
                                                                                                                                      PO_R1 Cameroon                2 813 445                            3                2
 Garoua area upstream (Bocklé, Garoua III, Bénoué department)                                                                                                                      PIDACC
                                                                                                                                                                                 Identification
 Development and utilisation of the Lagdo II area                                                                                     PO_R1 Cameroon               74 386 555                            3                4
                                                                                                                                                                                   on-going
                                                                                                                                                                                 Identification
 Development and utilisation of the Faro-Bénoué confluence area                                                                       PO_R1 Cameroon               21 581 513                            3                4
                                                                                                                                                                                   on-going
                                                                                                                                                                                 Identification
 Development of smallholders irrigation schemes                                                                                       PO_R1 Cameroon               62 512 605                            3                4
                                                                                                                                                                                   on-going
                                                                                                                                                                                 Identification
 Development of the west Garoua area                                                                                                  PO_R1 Cameroon               13 361 345                            3                4
                                                                                                                                                                                   on-going
                                                                                                                                                                                10% identified -
 Development of small individual areas                                                                                                PO_R1 Cameroon                7 517 647                            3                4
                                                                                                                                                                                   PIDACC


d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
30                                                                      3. Climate Resilience Investment Plan aiming to strengthen climate resilience in the Niger Basin


                                                                                                                                                                                           Prioritization options
                                                                                  Reference document and               Overall action                     Funding
                                      Action title                                                                                                                                  Contribution to                 Preparation
                                                                                    beneficiary country                 cost (USD)                        sources
                                                                                                                                                                                      resilience                       stage
                                                                                                                                                    20% identified -
Construction of multipurpose dams                                                PO_R1 Cameroon                                 4 872 269                                                       3                            2
                                                                                                                                                       PIDACC
Development of multi-purpose hydroagricultural infrastructures in the                                                                               50% identified -
                                                                                 PO_R1 Cameroon                                 1 100 840                                                       3                            2
municipality of Garoua                                                                                                                                 PIDACC
                                                                                                                                                       Identification
Rehabilitation of 84 reservoirs in the region of Bagoue and Kabadougou           PO_R1 Ivory Coast                            56 003 361                                                        3                            2
                                                                                                                                                         on-going
Low-cost development of 10,000 ha of plains in Kabadougou and Folon                                                                                 60% identified -
                                                                                 PO_R1 Ivory Coast                              3 215 126                                                       3                            2
(north-west)                                                                                                                                           PIDACC
                                                                                                                                          100% identified
Project for the construction of a dam and hydroagricultural development at                                                                - PIDACC 55%,
                                                                                 PO_R1 Ivory Coast                              2 952 941                                                       3                            2
KOUBAN 80ha                                                                                                                                 BOAD 30% ,
                                                                                                                                              Etat 15%
                                                                                                                                                    70% identified -
Project for the construction of a dam and hydroagricultural development at
                                                                                 PO_R1 Ivory Coast                              3 524 370            PIDACC 55%,                                3                            2
Katiendé 22ha
                                                                                                                                                       Etat 15%
                                                                                                                                                    70% identified -
Project for the construction of a dam and hydroagricultural development at
                                                                                 PO_R1 Ivory Coast                              5 835 294            PIDACC 55%,                                3                            2
Dimbasso. 182 ha
                                                                                                                                                       Etat 15%
                                                                                                                                        90% identified -
                                                                                                                                         3 bailleurs à
Low-cost development of 20,000 ha of Bagoué floodplains                          PO_R1 Ivory Coast                          106 198 319                                                         3                            2
                                                                                                                                        30% chacun +
                                                                                                                                          Etat 10%
                                                                                                                                                       Identification
Construction of multi-purpose mini-dams                                          NAPA Guinea                                       600 000                                                      3                            2
                                                                                                                                                         on-going
                                                                                                                                                       Identification
Construction of hillside reservoirs                                              NAPA Guinea                                       180 000                                                      3                            2
                                                                                                                                                         on-going
                                                                                                                                                       Identification
Construction of improved wells                                                   NAPA Guinea                                       250 000                                                      3                            2
                                                                                                                                                         on-going
                                                                                                                                                       Identification
Dissemination of rainwater harvesting basins                                     NAPA Guinea                                       280 000                                                      3                            2
                                                                                                                                                         on-going
                                                                                                                                                       Identification
Development of irrigated rice farming in Middle and Upper Guinea                 NAPA Guinea                                       300 000                                                      3                            2
                                                                                                                                                         on-going
Exploitation of indigenous knowledge and positive practices                      NAPA Guinea                                       300 000             Identification                           3                            2


                                                                                                 d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

                Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
3. Climate Resilience Investment Plan aiming to strengthen climate resilience in the Niger Basin                                                                                                                              31


                                                                                                                                                                                                       Prioritization options
                                                                                                                                      Reference document and   Overall action      Funding
                                                         Action title                                                                                                                              Contribution to   Preparation
                                                                                                                                        beneficiary country     cost (USD)         sources
                                                                                                                                                                                                     resilience         stage
                                                                                                                                                                                   on-going
                                                                                                                                                                                 Identification
 Promotion of breeding small ruminants                                                                                                NAPA Guinea                    325 000                             3                2
                                                                                                                                                                                   on-going
 Promotion of bricks made of compacted earth with the aim of reducing the                                                                                                        Identification
                                                                                                                                      NAPA Guinea                    600 000                             3                2
 environmental impact of fired bricks                                                                                                                                              on-going
                                                                                                                                                                                 Identification
 Intensification of pearl millet farming in the northern area of Guinea                                                               NAPA Guinea                    350 000                             3                2
                                                                                                                                                                                   on-going
 Fomi safeguard policies elaboration                                                                                                  PO_R1 Guinea                  2 000 000 50% identified -           3                3
 Rehabilitation of dams and construction of reservoirs for irrigation and fish
                                                                                                                                                                                60% identified -
 farming at Kankan, Kouroussa, Mandiana, Faranah, Dinguiraye, Kérouané                                                                PO_R1 Guinea                  9 132 773                            3                4
                                                                                                                                                                                   PIDACC
 and Kissidougou.
 Programme for the development of agriculture which is resilient to climate
                                                                                                                                      NC Fast start Mali           94 000 000 40% identified -           3                2
 change.
                                                                                                                                                                                 Identification
 Programme for the development of irrigation in the Bani and Sankarani basin                                                          NC PNSFN Mali              205 346 539                             3                2
                                                                                                                                                                                   on-going
 Programme for harvesting and storing rainwater                                                                                       NC Fast start Mali           62 800 000 50% identified -           3                2
 Feasibility study of small developments in the tops of the sub-watersheds of                                                                                                    Identification
                                                                                                                                      NC PNSFN Mali                  813 941                             3                2
 the upper stretches of the Niger and Bani rivers for environmental restoration                                                                                                    on-going
                                                                                                                                                                                60% identified -
 Rehabilitation and equipping of village irrigation areas in the region of Gao                                                        PO_R1 Mali                    5 588 235                            3                2
                                                                                                                                                                                   PIDACC
                                                                                                                                                                                 Identification
 Support for the production of seeds of agricultural origin                                                                           PO_R1 Mali                    2 974 790                            2                2
                                                                                                                                                                                   on-going
                                                                                                                                                                                60% identified -
 Project to support the development of agriculture in the Douentza area                                                               PO_R1 Mali                   14 159 664                            3                4
                                                                                                                                                                                   PIDACC
                                                                                                                                                                                 Identification
 National Horticultural Support Project                                                                                               PO_R1 Mali                    6 105 882                            3                4
                                                                                                                                                                                   on-going
                                                                                                                                                                                 Identification
 Rehabilitation of the irrigated area of Tara 101 ha                                                                                  PO_R1 Niger                   1 278 992                            3                2
                                                                                                                                                                                   on-going
                                                                                                                                                                                60% identified -
 Rehabilitation of the irrigated area of Galmi 250 ha                                                                                 PO_R1 Niger                   2 823 529                            3                2
                                                                                                                                                                                   PIDACC
                                                                                                                                                                                60% identified -
 Construction of a new reservoir dam at Aboka                                                                                         PO_R1 Niger                   1 194 958                            3                3
                                                                                                                                                                                   PIDACC

d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
32                                                                    3. Climate Resilience Investment Plan aiming to strengthen climate resilience in the Niger Basin


                                                                                                                                                                                           Prioritization options
                                                                                 Reference document and                Overall action                     Funding
                                   Action title                                                                                                                                     Contribution to                 Preparation
                                                                                   beneficiary country                  cost (USD)                        sources
                                                                                                                                                                                      resilience                       stage
                                                                                                                                                       Identification
Construction of the Kaoura Abdou hydroagricultural dam at Badaguichiri           PO_R1 Niger                                  17 442 017                                                        3                            5
                                                                                                                                                         on-going
                                                                                                                                                       Identification
Creation of an irrigated area and rehabilitation of the dyke at Gatawani Dolé    PO_R1 Niger                                  12 774 790                                                        3                            2
                                                                                                                                                         on-going
Construction of two (2) weirs for floodplain crop production (Gorouol, DolBel,                                                                      60% identified -
                                                                                 PO_R1 Niger                                    2 605 042                                                       3                            2
Terra)                                                                                                                                                 PIDACC
Rehabilitation of Kainji dam (Including Units 7, 8, 9, 10 et 11)                                                                                       Identification
                                                                                 PO_R1 Nigeria                              136 800 000                                                         3                            2
                                                                                                                                                         on-going
Irrigation development inTada Shonga (Kwara State)                                                                                                     Identification
                                                                                 PO_R1 Nigeria                                  1 845 378                                                       3                            2
                                                                                                                                                         on-going
Construction of multipurpose dams, irrigation schemes and support measures                                                                            0% identified -
                                                                                 PO_R1 Nigeria                              243 858 824                                                         3                            2
to adapt to climate change                                                                                                                              PIDACC
Development of water points for cattle and development of transhumance                                                                              10% identified -
                                                                                 PO_R1 Nigeria                                  5 092 437                                                       3                            2
pathways                                                                                                                                               PIDACC
Strengthening the Shared management of water resources in the Basin
                                                                                                                                                    60% identified -
(Construction of weirs, and erosion control and runoff water catchment           PO_R2 Nigeria                                     225 210                                                      1                            2
                                                                                                                                                       PIDACC
infrastructures; Quantitative management of water resources)
                                                                                                                                                       Identification
Mobilisation of surface water for agriculture and to supply cattle.              NAPA Chad                                      1 800 000                                                       3                            2
                                                                                                                                                         on-going
Diversification and intensification of crop production in the Sudanian and                                                                             Identification
                                                                                 NAPA Chad                                      1 200 000                                                       3                            2
Sahelian areas of Chad                                                                                                                                   on-going
                                                                                                                                                       Identification
Improvement and dissemination of crop calendars                                  NAPA Chad                                      1 000 000                                                       3                            2
                                                                                                                                                         on-going
                                                                                                                                                    10% identified -
Development of the rice-growing area of Voli (Gounou Gaya). 1,020 ha             PO_R1 Chad                                   15 630 252                                                        3                            5
                                                                                                                                                       PIDACC
                                                                                                                                                       Identification
Hydro-agricultural development at Fianga. 5,000 ha                               PO_R1 Chad                                     2 823 529                                                       3                            4
                                                                                                                                                         on-going
                                                                                                                                                       Identification
Djarao, Domo and Léo hydro-agricultural development. 10,000 ha                   PO_R1 Chad                                 169 371 429                                                         3                            4
                                                                                                                                                         on-going
                                                                                                                                                       Identification
Hydro-agricultural development at Ghétahlé -Tréné. 5,000 ha                      PO_R1 Chad                                     1 164 706                                                       3                            4
                                                                                                                                                         on-going
Development of an area for floodplain crop production in the region of Mayo      PO_R1 Chad                                        741 176             Identification                           3                            2


                                                                                                 d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

                Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
3. Climate Resilience Investment Plan aiming to strengthen climate resilience in the Niger Basin                                                                                                                              33


                                                                                                                                                                                                       Prioritization options
                                                                                                                                      Reference document and   Overall action      Funding
                                                         Action title                                                                                                                              Contribution to   Preparation
                                                                                                                                        beneficiary country     cost (USD)         sources
                                                                                                                                                                                                     resilience         stage
 Kebbi Est (at Tikem). 600 ha                                                                                                                                                      on-going
 Development of the waterhole at Torrock for crops and to provide drinking                                                                                                      30% identified -
                                                                                                                                      PO_R1 Chad                    1 048 739                            3                2
 water for cattle                                                                                                                                                                  PIDACC
                                                                                                                                                                                0% identified -
 Rural, Pastoral and Transhumance Infrastructure project.                                                                             PO_R1 Chad                   17 616 807                            3                2
                                                                                                                                                                                  PIDACC
 5 – Measures targeting vulnerability to flooding
                                                                                                                                                                                0% identified -
 Construction of flood-protection dykes                                                                                               PO_R2 Benin                  50 732 773                            3                2
                                                                                                                                                                                  PIDACC
                                                                                                                                                                                 Identification
 Flood protection                                                                                                                     PO_R2 Ivory Coast             1 307 563                            3                2
                                                                                                                                                                                   on-going
 The project for the development and recovery of the banks of the Niger River
                                                                                                                                      NC PNSFN Mali                  846 092 20% identified -            2                2
 in the District of Bamako
 Feasibility study for the reshaping of the Niger Rriver in the towns of Mopti                                                                                                   Identification
                                                                                                                                      NC PNSFN Mali                 1 692 184                            1                2
 and Bamako                                                                                                                                                                        on-going
                                                                                                                                                                                60% identified -
 Construction of structures to fight flooding in the region of Gao                                                                    PO_R2 Mali                    2 124 370                            3                2
                                                                                                                                                                                   PIDACC
 Construction of flood protection dikes around Niamey irrigation scheme and                                                                                                     60% identified -
                                                                                                                                      PO_R1 Niger                   1 793 277                            3                2
 other related infrastructure                                                                                                                                                      PIDACC
                                                                                                                                                                                10% identified -
 Flood management Project                                                                                                             PO_R2 Nigeria                 4 954 622                            3                2
                                                                                                                                                                                   PIDACC
 6 – Measures targeting vulnerability to soil degradation
                                                                                                                                                                                0% identified -
 Anti-erosion and anti-silting measures, continued                                                                                    PO_R2 Benin                   7 075 630                            3                2
                                                                                                                                                                                  PIDACC
 Improve water resource protection against siltation and invasive species                                                             CN PAGIRE Burkina Faso                     Identification
                                                                                                                                                                   16 837 232                            3                2
                                                                                                                                                                                   on-going
                                                                                                                                                                                50% identified -
 Restoration of land and anti-erosion measures                                                                                        PO_R2 Burkina Faso            7 078 992                            3                2
                                                                                                                                                                                   PIDACC
 Stabilisation of 2,500 ha of dunes in the provinces of Oudalan, Séno and                                                                                                        Identification
                                                                                                                                      PO_R2 Burkina Faso            2 831 933                            3                2
 Yagha                                                                                                                                                                             on-going
 Recovery of 6,191 ha of degraded land in Séno and Oudalan (restoration of                                                                                                      10% identified -
                                                                                                                                      PO_R2 Burkina Faso            3 828 571                            3                2
 land (Restoration of land, studies)                                                                                                                                               UEMOA


d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
34                                                                      3. Climate Resilience Investment Plan aiming to strengthen climate resilience in the Niger Basin


                                                                                                                                                                                              Prioritization options
                                                                                    Reference document and                Overall action                     Funding
                                  Action title                                                                                                                                         Contribution to                 Preparation
                                                                                      beneficiary country                  cost (USD)                        sources
                                                                                                                                                                                         resilience                       stage
Conservation and participatory management of sub-watersheds (support for
                                                                                                                                                          Identification
protection, studies and enhancement of capacities)                                  PO_R2 Cameroon                               12 169 748                                                        3                            2
                                                                                                                                                            on-going

                                                                                                                                                          Identification
Development of the Mayo–Louti catchment area (restoration of land, studies)         PO_R2 Cameroon                                 3 257 143                                                       3                            5
                                                                                                                                                            on-going
Restore degraded land through the promotion of agroforestry and community                                                                                 Identification
                                                                                    NC - AGIR Ivory Coast                          8 577 681                                                       3                            2
reforestation                                                                                                                                               on-going
Protection of the basin (Departments of Odienné, Boundiali, Madinani,
                                                                                                                                                          Identification
Minignan and Tengréla) / Treatment of degraded land for the protection of the       PO_R2 Ivory Coast                              1 931 092                                                       3                            2
                                                                                                                                                            on-going
banks
Promotion and development of reforestation in the North of the country (wood        PO_R2 Ivory Coast                                                  10% identified -
                                                                                                                                   1 495 798                                                       3                            2
energy)                                                                                                                                                   PIDACC
Restoration and protection of the tributaries of the Niger River by reforestation                                                                      60% identified -
                                                                                    PO_R2 Ivory Coast                              1 297 479                                                       3                            2
campaigns and anti-erosion and anti-silting measures                                                                                                      PIDACC
                                                                                                                                                          Identification
Fight against the impacts of gold-mining on the environment and health              PO_R2 Ivory Coast                                 349 580                                                      3                            2
                                                                                                                                                            on-going
                                                                                                                                                       60% identified -
Restoration of the banks and development of agroforestry                            PO_R2 Guinea                                   1 368 067                                                       3                            2
                                                                                                                                                          PIDACC
                                                                                                                                                       60% identified -
Reforestation of 300 ha on the banks of waterholes                                  PO_R2 Guinea                                      354 622                                                      3                            2
                                                                                                                                                          PIDACC
Protection of spring heads and banks (sub-watersheds of the Niandan,                                                                                   60% identified -
                                                                                    PO_R2 Guinea                                      695 798                                                      3                            2
Tinkisso, Milo)                                                                                                                                           PIDACC
36- Topographical and photographic survey by LIDAR laser procedure of dam                                                                                 Identification
                                                                                    NC PNSFN Mali                                     473 812                                                      1                            2
reservoirs (Sélingué, Markala, Talo, Djenné)                                                                                                                on-going
                                                                                                                                                          Identification
"Green Wall" experimental project                                                   PO_R2 Mali                                     9 910 924                                                       3                            2
                                                                                                                                                            on-going
Protection of banks by planting and transplanting bourgou, and measures                                                                                60% identified -
                                                                                    PO_R2 Mali                                     8 258 824                                                       3                            2
against invasive plants                                                                                                                                   PIDACC
                                                                                                                                                       60% identified -
Anti-erosion and anti-silting measures, and sustainable forest management           PO_R2 Mali                                     9 981 513                                                       3                            2
                                                                                                                                                          PIDACC
                                                                                                                                                        100% identified
Development of agroforestry and sustainable management of soil fertility            PO_R2 Niger                                  34 584 689                                                        3                            4
                                                                                                                                                              -


                                                                                                    d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

               Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
3. Climate Resilience Investment Plan aiming to strengthen climate resilience in the Niger Basin                                                                                                                              35


                                                                                                                                                                                                       Prioritization options
                                                                                                                                      Reference document and   Overall action      Funding
                                                         Action title                                                                                                                              Contribution to   Preparation
                                                                                                                                        beneficiary country     cost (USD)         sources
                                                                                                                                                                                                     resilience         stage
 Development and planting of village forests in the Tillabéry regions, Téra, Say,                                                                                               60% identified -
                                                                                  PO_R2 Niger                                                                       1 344 538                            3                2
 Torodi and Makalondi municipalities (20,000 ha)                                                                                                                                   PIDACC
                                                                                                                                                                                100% identified
 Support for the improvement of soil fertility, restoration of degraded land                                                          PO_R2 Niger                  37 417 575                            3                4
                                                                                                                                                                                      -
 Stabilisation of dunes in the regions of Tillabéry and Dosso (Kandadji area,                                                                                                   60% identified -
                                                                                                                                      PO_R2 Niger                   1 026 891                            3                2
 Dallol, Maouri and Foga area, Ouallam area) (3,000 ha)                                                                                                                            PIDACC
 Soil and water conservation in the regions of Tillabéry, Dosso and Tahoua;
                                                                                                                                                                                60% identified -
 Kandadji, Maouri, Foga areas; Ouallam, Kollo, Konni, Madaoua and Bouza                                                               PO_R2 Niger                   1 285 714                            3                2
                                                                                                                                                                                   PIDACC
 area (15,000 ha)
                                                                                                                                                                                 Identification
 Integrated project to stabilise the dunes and combat poverty (Namaro)                                                                PO_R2 Niger                    472 269                             3                2
                                                                                                                                                                                   on-going
 Bioligical and mechanical treatment of koris in Tillabery and Tahoua region                                                          PO_R2 Niger                               60% identified -
                                                                                                                                                                    2 594 958                            3                2
 (15 000m3)                                                                                                                                                                        PIDACC
                                                                                                                                                                                60% identified -
 Restoration of fallow land and promotion of agroforestry (10,000 ha)                                                                 PO_R2 Niger                   1 680 672                            3                2
                                                                                                                                                                                   PIDACC
                                                                                                                                                                                 Identification
 Erosion, flood and siltation control in Nigeria.                                                                                     PO_R2 Nigeria                20 292 437                            3                2
                                                                                                                                                                                   on-going
 Rehabilitation of degraded agricultural land                                                                                         PO_R2 Nigeria                              Identification
                                                                                                                                                                    1 253 782                            3                2
                                                                                                                                                                                   on-going
 Construction of defensive structures and restoration of land for the                                                                                                            Identification
                                                                                                                                      NAPA Chad                     1 300 000                            3                2
 development of agricultural activities                                                                                                                                            on-going
 7 - Measures targeting vulnerability to degradation of the grazing land
                                                                                                                                      Bukina Faso Climate                        Identification
 Bukina Faso National Observatory on Pastoralism (ONPB)                                                                                                             3 294 682                            3                2
                                                                                                                                      Investment Projects                          on-going
 Forage production and stockpiling of emergency supplies for cattle in the                                                                                                       Identification
                                                                                                                                      NAPA Burkina Faso              330 000                             3                2
 Burkina Faso area of the Sahel                                                                                                                                                    on-going
                                                                                                                                                                                 Identification
 Safeguarding pastoral areas in the regions of the Sahel and the East.                                                                NAPA Burkina Faso              300 000                             3                2
                                                                                                                                                                                   on-going
 Reduction of the vulnerability of the livestock sector to the effects of climate                                                                                                Identification
                                                                                                                                      PNACC Cameroon                5 550 000                            3                2
 change (REVEECC))                                                                                                                                                                 on-going
 Support for management of the pastoral area and prevention of conflicts in the                                                                                                 60% identified -
                                                                                PO_R1 Ivory Coast                                                                   1 863 866                            3                2
 northern area                                                                                                                                                                     PIDACC


d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
36                                                                    3. Climate Resilience Investment Plan aiming to strengthen climate resilience in the Niger Basin


                                                                                                                                                                                           Prioritization options
                                                                                 Reference document and                Overall action                     Funding
                                  Action title                                                                                                                                      Contribution to                 Preparation
                                                                                   beneficiary country                  cost (USD)                        sources
                                                                                                                                                                                      resilience                       stage
Programme of pastoral development resilient to climate change;                   NC Fast start Mali                         109 900 000 50% identified -                                        3                            2
Support for vulnerable groups for cattle and sheep fattening in the regions of                                                                      60% identified -
                                                                                 PO_R1 Mali                                     3 915 966                                                       3                            2
Gao, Timbuktu                                                                                                                                          PIDACC
                                                                                                                                                       Identification
Improvement of intercommunity grazing areas                                      NAPA Chad                                      1 500 000                                                       3                            2
                                                                                                                                                         on-going
8 - Measures targeting vulnerability to degradation of the ecosystems
Adaptation of households to climate change by the promotion of renewable
                                                                                                                                                       Identification
energies and efficient economical hearths and pressure cookers in areas          NAPA Benin                                     2 106 600                                                       3                            2
                                                                                                                                                         on-going
vulnerable to climate change and where the land is severely degraded
Promotion of wildlife and habitat management by local communities in the                                                                               Identification
                                                                                 NAPA Burkina Faso                                 810 000                                                      2                            2
region of Mouhoun                                                                                                                                        on-going
Promotion of energy-saving equipment (improved stoves, M'Bora stew pot)
                                                                                                                                                       Identification
and renewable energy technologies (pressure cooker, water heater and solar       NAPA Burkina Faso                              1 230 000                                                       3                            2
                                                                                                                                                         on-going
dryers, etc.)
Development, rational management of natural training and use of non-wood                                                                               Identification
                                                                                 NAPA Burkina Faso                                 700 000                                                      3                            2
forest products (NWFP) in the East region of Burkina Faso                                                                                                on-going
                                                                                                                                                    10% identified -
Forest development in the provinces of Oudalan and Séno                          PO_R2 Burkina Faso                             1 712 605                                                       3                            2
                                                                                                                                                       UEMOA
                                                                                                                                                       Identification
Reduction of the vulnerability of forests to climate change in Cameroon          PNACC Cameroon                                 8 880 000                                                       3                            2
                                                                                                                                                         on-going
                                                                                                                                                    20% identified -
Support for fishermen and fish-farmers around the Lagdo dam                      PO_R1 Cameroon                                 4 752 941                                                       2                            5
                                                                                                                                                       PIDACC
Provision for the fight against aquatic invasive species in Cameroon, Ivory                                                                         60% identified -
                                                                                 PO_R1 Cameroun                                 4 192 347                                                       3                            2
Coast and Nigeria (30 000 ha + 5000 ha + 2500 m3)                                                                                                      PIDACC
Project to support communities in the savannah area for protection against       NC - Management of
                                                                                                                                                       Identification
desertification and the loss of the means of subsistence of the local            community forests Ivory                        1 710 327                                                       3                            2
                                                                                                                                                         on-going
communities.                                                                     Coast
Rehabilitation of the classified forest of BOUNDIALI in the north of Ivory Coast
                                                                                 NC - SODEFOR Ivory                                                    Identification
with the participation of the neighbouring populations (as for                                                                  1 718 098                                                       3                            2
                                                                                 Coast                                                                   on-going
PO_R22208_CI_15)
Rehabilitation of the classified forest of FENGOLO - PALE in the north of Ivory
                                                                                NC - SODEFOR Ivory                                                     Identification
Coast with the participation of the neighbouring populations (as for                                                            1 065 560                                                       3                            2
                                                                                Coast                                                                    on-going
PO_R22208_CI_15)

                                                                                                 d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

               Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
3. Climate Resilience Investment Plan aiming to strengthen climate resilience in the Niger Basin                                                                                                                              37


                                                                                                                                                                                                       Prioritization options
                                                                                                                                      Reference document and   Overall action      Funding
                                                         Action title                                                                                                                              Contribution to   Preparation
                                                                                                                                        beneficiary country     cost (USD)         sources
                                                                                                                                                                                                     resilience         stage
                                                                                                                                                                                 Identification
 Performance of work to restore the forests in the rural sector                                                                       NC - DCDF Ivory Coast         1 300 000                            3                2
                                                                                                                                                                                   on-going
 Project to plant useful forest trees in the communities of the regions of Poro,                                                                                                 Identification
                                                                                                                                      NC - PND Ivory Coast          1 297 905                            3                2
 Tchologo and Bagoué                                                                                                                                                               on-going
                                                                                                                                                                                 Identification
 Restoration project for degraded forests in the rural sector                                                                         NC - PND Ivory Coast          1 086 213                            3                2
                                                                                                                                                                                   on-going
                                                                                                                                                                                 Identification
 Support the fight against bushfires                                                                                                  NC - AGIR Ivory Coast         3 578 969                            3                2
                                                                                                                                                                                   on-going
                                                                                                                                                                                60% identified -
 Creation of a fish farm in Minignan                                                                                                  PO_R1 Ivory Coast              206 723                             2                4
                                                                                                                                                                                   PIDACC
 Support for the development of fishing activities around dams (Boundiali,                                                                                                      60% identified -
                                                                                                                                      PO_R1 Ivory Coast             2 942 857                            2                3
 Minignan and Odienné)                                                                                                                                                             PIDACC
 Development of fisheries infrastructure Aménagement des infrastructures de                                                           PO_R1 Ivory Coast                         60% identified -
                                                                                                                                                                    1 030 252                            2                2
 pêche                                                                                                                                                                             PIDACC
                                                                                                                                                                                 Identification
 Promotion of fire management and prohibited access                                                                                   NAPA Guinea                    300 000                             3                2
                                                                                                                                                                                   on-going
                                                                                                                                                                                 Identification
 Support for the implementation of community forest management plans                                                                  NAPA Guinea                    600 000                             3                2
                                                                                                                                                                                   on-going
 Creation of cane rat ranches in order to reduce bushfires and improve living                                                                                                    Identification
                                                                                                                                      NAPA Guinea                    300 000                             3                2
 conditions for rural populations                                                                                                                                                  on-going
 Promotion of the use of solar energy to dry fish with the aim of reducing the                                                                                                   Identification
                                                                                                                                      NAPA Guinea                    300 000                             3                2
 use of wood for smoking                                                                                                                                                           on-going
                                                                                                                                                                                60% identified -
 Construction of nursery ponds to rear fry                                                                                            PO_R1 Guinea                   282 353                             2                3
                                                                                                                                                                                   PIDACC
                                                                                                                                                                                60% identified -
 Construction of fish ponds in Guinea                                                                                                 PO_R1 Guinea                   759 664                             2                3
                                                                                                                                                                                   PIDACC
                                                                                                                                                                                60% identified -
 Implementation of the Kankan wildlife reserve management plan                                                                        PO_R2 Guinea                  2 100 840                            2                2
                                                                                                                                                                                   PIDACC
 Preservation of the ecosystems and conservation of biodiversity (Ramsar -                                                                                                      60% identified -
                                                                                                                                      PO_R2 Guinea                   932 773                             3                2
 Niger, Niandan –Milo, Niger-Mafou,)                                                                                                                                               PIDACC
 Intensive reforestation programme to rebuild the forest ecosystems in Mali                                                           NC Fast start Mali         188 800 000 30% identified -            3                2
 The Economic and Environmental Rehabilitation project for the Niger River                                                            NC PNSFN Mali                60 918 627 90% identified -           3                2

d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
38                                                                       3. Climate Resilience Investment Plan aiming to strengthen climate resilience in the Niger Basin


                                                                                                                                                                                            Prioritization options
                                                                                   Reference document and               Overall action                     Funding
                                   Action title                                                                                                                                      Contribution to                 Preparation
                                                                                     beneficiary country                 cost (USD)                        sources
                                                                                                                                                                                       resilience                       stage
                                                                                                                                                     60% identified -
Project to develop fish farming in floating cages and in ponds                    PO_R1 Mali                                     3 073 950                                                       2                            5
                                                                                                                                                        PIDACC
Firewood production project and installation of a wood market in the region of                                                                          Identification
                                                                                  PO_R2 Mali                                        810 000                                                      3                            2
Gao and Timbuktu                                                                                                                                          on-going
Project for development, management of natural resources and promotion of                                                                               Identification
                                                                                  PO_R2 Niger                                    6 052 101                                                       3                            2
Moringa oleifera (Tajaé, Malbaza and Tsernaoua)                                                                                                           on-going
Sustainable management of the forest resources and promotion of alternative
                                                                                  PO_R2 Niger                                126 242 017 30% identified -                                        3                            4
energy sources
Support for the development of the fishing and fish-farming sector                PO_R1 Niger                                    9 425 210 20% identified -                                      2                            2
                                                                                                                                                      100% identified
Support for fish-farming and training of fishermen                                PO_R1 Niger                                    5 280 672                                                       2                            2
                                                                                                                                                            -
                                                                                                                                                      100% identified
Development of 300 ha of ponds overrun with Typha australis (Dosso region)        PO_R1 Niger                                    1 136 134                                                       3                            2
                                                                                                                                                            -
                                                                                                                                                        Identification
Development and use of the valley of Goroubi (Tamou and Torodi)                   PO_R1 Niger                                    3 040 336                                                       3                            2
                                                                                                                                                          on-going
                                                                                                                                                     60% identified -
Rehabilitation of the classified forest of Guesselbodi (2,000 ha)                 PO_R2 Niger                                  11 023 691                                                        3                            4
                                                                                                                                                        PIDACC
Development and adaptation of fisheries to climate change                         PO_R1 Niger                                                         100% identified
                                                                                                                               13 021 357                                                        2                            2
                                                                                                                                                            -
Rehabilitation of a nursery pond in Moli and construction of a nursery pond in    PO_R1 Niger                                                        60% identified -
                                                                                                                                 1 003 361                                                       2                            2
Madarounfa                                                                                                                                              PIDACC
                                                                                                                                                        Identification
Develop some protected zones                                                      PO_R2 Nigeria                                  2 598 319                                                       3                            2
                                                                                                                                                          on-going
                                                                                                                                                        Identification
Conservation and management of the middle of Niger area                           PO_R2 Nigeria                                     566 387                                                      3                            2
                                                                                                                                                          on-going
                                                                                                                                                        Identification
Socio-economic utilisation of invasive aquatic plant species                      PO_R2 Nigeria                              151 490 756                                                         3                            2
                                                                                                                                                          on-going
Capitalization of the fight against the water hyacinth and the proliferation of                                                                         Identification
                                                                                  PO_R2 Nigeria                                  1 258 824                                                       3                            2
sida cordifolia                                                                                                                                           on-going
Delimitating the zones for the conservation (forests, protected zones) /                                                                                Identification
                                                                                  PO_R2 Nigeria                                     593 277                                                      3                            2
Identification of sites                                                                                                                                   on-going
Fight against bush fire                                                           PO_R2 Nigeria                                     176 471             Identification                           3                            2

                                                                                                  d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

                Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
3. Climate Resilience Investment Plan aiming to strengthen climate resilience in the Niger Basin                                                                                                                                 39


                                                                                                                                                                                                          Prioritization options
                                                                                                                                      Reference document and      Overall action      Funding
                                                         Action title                                                                                                                                 Contribution to   Preparation
                                                                                                                                        beneficiary country        cost (USD)         sources
                                                                                                                                                                                                        resilience         stage
                                                                                                                                                                                      on-going
 Conservation measures of Forest galeries on secondary rivers                                                                         PO_R2 Nigeria                                 Identification
                                                                                                                                                                       1 297 479                            3                2
                                                                                                                                                                                      on-going
 Support to fisheries development                                                                                                     PO_R1 Nigeria                                10% identified -
                                                                                                                                                                       2 171 429                            2                2
                                                                                                                                                                                      PIDACC
 9 - Measures targeting vulnerability to deterioration of the water quality and health
 Protection of children under 5 and pregnant women against malaria in the                                                                                                           Identification
                                                                                                                                      NAPA Benin                       1 112 500                            3                2
 areas most vulnerable to climate change                                                                                                                                              on-going
                                                                                                                                                                                    Identification
 Mark out and display protection areas around the main water resources                                                                NC - PND Ivory Coast             1 015 310                            3                2
                                                                                                                                                                                      on-going
                                                                                                                                                                                    Identification
Rendering surface water drinkable using Hydropur©                                                                                     NAPA Guinea                       320 000                             3                2
                                                                                                                                                                                      on-going
                                                                                                                                                                                    Identification
 Pollution warning station on the Niger River                                                                                         NC PNSFN Mali                     177 679                             2                2
                                                                                                                                                                                      on-going
                                                                                                                                                                                    Identification
 Global study of pollution of the waters of the Niger River in Upper Niger in Mali NC PNSFN Mali                                                                        255 520                             2                2
                                                                                                                                                                                      on-going
 10 – Measures targeting vulnerability linked to the rising sea-level
                                                                                                                                                                                    Identification
 Conservation and management of the coastal delta zone of the Niger river                                                             PO_R2 Nigeria                    1 090 756                            3                2
                                                                                                                                                                                      on-going
 11 – Measures strengthening resilience (e.g. generation of jobs, revenues, etc.)
 Development of improved wood carbonisation techniques and promotion of                                                               National communication on                     Identification
                                                                                                                                                                       4 061 242                            1                2
 economical stoves in order to reduce deforestation                                                                                   climate change Benin                            on-going
                                                                                                                                      Projets d‟investissements                     Identification
 Climate insurance project for farmers (PACE)                                                                                                                         22 438 361                            3                2
                                                                                                                                      Climat Burkina Faso                             on-going
                                                                                                                                      Projets d‟investissements                     Identification
 Project to set up three areas for the intensification of animal production (ZIPA)                                                                                    41 143 764                            3                2
                                                                                                                                      Climat Burkina Faso                             on-going
 Creation of a palm grove covering 100 ha along the Gourouol in the province                                                                                                        Identification
                                                                                                                                      PO_R1 Burkina Faso               1 741 176                            1                5
 of Oudalan                                                                                                                                                                           on-going
                                                                                                                                                                                    Identification
 Diversification of the energy offer in a context of climate change                                                                   PNACC Cameroun                  22 200 000                            3                2
                                                                                                                                                                                      on-going
 Reduction of the effects of climate change on the fisheries sector                                                                   PNACC Cameroun                   3 330 000    Identification          3                2


d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
40                                                                    3. Climate Resilience Investment Plan aiming to strengthen climate resilience in the Niger Basin


                                                                                                                                                                                           Prioritization options
                                                                                 Reference document and                Overall action                     Funding
                                  Action title                                                                                                                                      Contribution to                 Preparation
                                                                                   beneficiary country                  cost (USD)                        sources
                                                                                                                                                                                      resilience                       stage
                                                                                                                                                          on-going
Enhance the resilience of vulnerable populations by restoring degraded land                                                                            Identification
                                                                                 NC - PND Ivory Coast                           8 579 373                                                       3                            2
(agroforestry and community reforestation)                                                                                                               on-going
                                                                                                                                                       Identification
Support to the development of community and private Anacard tree planting        NAPA Guinea                                       600 000                                                      3                            2
                                                                                                                                                         on-going
                                                                                                                                                       Identification
Promotion of market gardening                                                    NAPA Guinea                                       250 000                                                      3                            2
                                                                                                                                                         on-going
                                                                                                                                                     100% identified
Integrated Management of Natural Resources Programme                             CN PNSFN Mali                                  1 951 500                                                       3                            2
                                                                                                                                                           -
Fish-farming development programme                                               NC Fast start Mali                           31 000 000 60% identified -                                       3                            2
Integrated national project for development and adaptation to climate changes
                                                                              CN PNIDAC                                       72 000 000 10% identified -                                       3                            5
in the Niger Basin
                                                                                                                                                       Identification
Support for the potato sector in Mali                                            PO_R1 Mali                                        344 538                                                      2                            4
                                                                                                                                                         on-going
Economic promotion of agricultural and forest products in Mali                   PO_R1 Mali                                                            Identification
                                                                                                                                2 579 832                                                       1                            2
                                                                                                                                                         on-going
Rehabilitation of 300 km between Labezanga and Dolé (Gaya)                       PO_R1 Niger                                                        60% identified -
                                                                                                                                1 085 714                                                       1                            2
                                                                                                                                                       PIDACC
Construction of 30 landing stages between Labezanga and Dolé (Labezanga,         PO_R1 Niger
                                                                                                                                                    60% identified -
Ayorou, Tillabéry, Gothuey, Niamey, Kollo, Gaya, Dolé), et Konni,                                                               1 302 521                                                       1                            2
                                                                                                                                                       PIDACC
Madarounfa, Abalak
Development of Resilience of the population and the Ecosystem in the Basin
                                                                                                                                                    60% identified -
(Conservation of biodiversity/Forest management; Preservation of biodiversity    PO_R2 Nigeria                                  4 139 496                                                       3                            2
                                                                                                                                                       PIDACC
/ Management of the fauna reserve)


                                                                                            NPA: National Adaptation Plan
AGIR : Global Alliance for Resilience                                                       PNACC: National Programme for Adaptation to Climate Change
CIWA: Cooperation in International Waters in Africa                                         PND: National Development Plan
NC: National Contribution                                                                   PNSFN: National Programme to Safeguard the Niger River
DCDF: Land Registry and Forestry Development Department (Côte d’Ivoire)                     PO: NBA Operational Plan
DIN: Inner Delta of the Niger                                                               SE/ABN: Executive Secretariat of the NBA
ONCC: National Observatory for Climate Change                                               SIE: Water Information System
NAPA: National Adaptation Programmes of Action                                              SODEFOR: Forestry Development Corporation of Côte d’Ivoire
PIDACC: Programme for Integrated Development and Adaptation to Climate Change in the
Niger Basin

                                                                                                 d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

                Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
3. Climate Resilience Investment Plan aiming to strengthen climate resilience in the Niger Basin 41



3.3            CRIP EXPECTED RESULTS AND IMPACTS - MONITORING AND EVALUATION

EXPECTED RESULTS AND MONITORING OF IMPLEMENTATION

This plan recognizes the need for the NBA to develop a robust monitoring and evaluation (M&E)
program to support accountability and learning as it passes from its current design phase to the
implementation phase in the months ahead, Such a program will include : a results framework to
identify the intended impacts and outcomes of the plan as a whole and the individual
interventions (including the logical cause-and-effect relationship between the interventions‟ inputs
and activities and these results) ; and indicators to serve as progress markers toward the intended
results outlined in the results framework.

First, NBA will work with countries and stakeholders to develop an agreed upon results framework
and the associated indicators. Below is a list of potential results indicators aiming at assessing
intended impacts and outcomes of the plan. The countries and the stakeholders could use it as
a starting point for ultimately settling on the most relevant aggregate indicators for each of the
selection criteria.

                                                      Table 3-2 : CRIP performance indicators

                            Performance indicators                                                         Nature of the corresponding measures
  The number of beneficiaries (direct/indirect) affected                                              All
  The number of climate, hydrological or hydrogeological                                              Measures to enhance knowledge of the climate
  stations installed or rehabilitated.                                                                / hydrological hazard (category 1 of the CRIP)
  The number of decision-making tools developed
                                                                                                      Measures to enhance knowledge of the climate
  (forecasting, early warning, hydraulic modeling /
                                                                                                      / hydrological hazard (category 1 of the CRIP)
  allocation)
                                                                                                      Communication and awareness-raising
  The number of people made aware of CC
                                                                                                      measures (category 2 of the CRIP)
                                                                                                      Measures to enhance capabilities (category 3
  The number of people trained in adaptation to CC
                                                                                                      of the CRIP)
  Overall regulation volume                                                                           Capacity to adapt to water stress
                                                                                                      Hydro-agricultural developments (categories 4
  Newly-irrigated or rehabilitated areas (ha)
                                                                                                      and 11 of the CRIP)
                                                                                                      Increase in agricultural, livestock and fish
  Tonnage of agricultural, livestock and fish production.
                                                                                                      production
  Number of drinking water distribution / wastewater                                                  Measures to combat deterioration of the water
  networks or associated infrastructure                                                               quality (category 6 of the CRIP)
                                                                                                      Measures to combat degradation of the grazing
  Transhumance corridors set up (km)
                                                                                                      land (category 8 of the CRIP)
                                                                                                      Pastoral hydraulic infrastructures (categories 4
  Number of pastoral water sources
                                                                                                      and 8 of the CRIP)
  Number of flood-protection measures (dykes, storage                                                 Hydraulic structures, dredging activities, etc.
  structures, etc.)                                                                                   (categories 5 and 7 of the CRIP)
                                                                                                      Measures to protect the ecosystems of the NB,
  Protected / rehabilitated / reforested areas (forests,                                              to combat erosion, silting, deterioration of the
  protected species, springs, etc.) (ha)                                                              water quality (categories 6, 7, 8 and 9 of the
                                                                                                      CRIP)
  Length of the river maintained/rehabilitated for                                                    Measures to combat silting and enhance
  navigation (km)                                                                                     resilience (categories 6 and 11 of the CRIP)
                                                                                                      Measures to protect coastal areas (category 10
  Length of coast protected (km)
                                                                                                      of the CRIP)
                                                                                                      Measures to develop fish-farming (category 11
  Number of fishermen installed / assisted.
                                                                                                      of the CRIP)
                                                                                                      Hydroelectric developments (categories 4, 5
  MW/GW installed or rehabilitated
                                                                                                      and 11 of the CRIP)
  Number of measures taking Gender into account                                                       All


d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
42 3. Climate Resilience Investment Plan aiming to strengthen climate resilience in the Niger Basin

Outcome indicators could not be estimated at this stage, due to a lack of detailed information on
some of the CRIP actions. In order to have a first overview of the expected results and the
distribution of the CRIP actions at this stage of its development, the following maps (Figure 3-1)
were developed:
 They show the breakdown of sectoral interventions, from the Second Package, and the amount
  involved in the national portions of each sub-basin;
 The map 3-1 concerns the actions to develop socio-economic infrastructure, from categories 4,
  5, 10 and 11. The ratio of the amount invested for the CRIP actions on the population size of
  each sub-region is proposed as a first approach of estimating the beneficiaries of the CRIP.
  This mapping highlights the wide distribution of investment throughout the basin and
  emphasizes the shared benefits of the CRIP;
 The map 3-2 gathers the actions for the protection and conservation of ecosystems and the
  environment, from categories 6, 7, 8 and 9. The ratio of the amount invested for the CRIP
  actions on land area of each sub-region is proposed as a first approach of estimating the
  beneficiary impacts of the CRIP on the basin ecosystems. This mapping illustrates the
  distribution of financing by sub-basin and national areas, especially into places of low economic
  development rather than only to areas of higher population density, as is often the case;
 The actions of the package "Knowledge and Institutions" refer to the entire basin and have not
  been shown;
 The amounts correspond to the implementation and financing strategy, presented below,
  respectively in Sections 3.4 and 4.

These maps highlight that the sectoral interventions of the CRIP do not just focus on traditional
economic growth areas, around major cities of the basin, as is often the case, but they will also
impact the most remote rural areas which directly suffer the impacts of climate change. The CRIP
will strengthen the resilience of the population to climate change by improving the shared
prosperity in the basin.




                              d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

              Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
3. Climate Resilience Investment Plan aiming to strengthen climate resilience in the Niger Basin 43


          Figure 3-1: Distribution of the CRIP actions contribution to socio-economic infrastructure
                                        development in the Niger basin




 Figure 3-2: Distribution of the CRIP actions contributing to ecosystem conservation and resources
                                     protection in the Niger basin




d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
44 3. Climate Resilience Investment Plan aiming to strengthen climate resilience in the Niger Basin


ASSESSMENT PROGRAMME

Beyond this, however, the program will also include evaluation, which is a separate analysis that
draws upon the results framework and indicators, but also involves additional independent data
collection and analysis. Evaluation typically examines why and how results have been achieved,
what has worked well and not worked well, and what kind of improvements to design and
implementation could improve results. Including an impact evaluation mechanism in the
implementation of this plan improves the empirical understanding around approaches and practices
that are most successful at building resilience in the Niger Basin. Incorporating this evidence-base
into the Program‟s learning cycle will thus help NBA build the necessary capacity in the region
(both at national and local levels) for M&E of climate resilience investments amongst the
stakeholders




                              d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

              Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
3. Climate Resilience Investment Plan aiming to strengthen climate resilience in the Niger Basin 45


3.4            IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGY

3.4.1              Programmation
To insure consistency with the Operationnal Plan of the NBA, the CRIP has been integrated into
the 3-year plans 2016-2018, 2019-2021 and 2022-2024 aiming at implementing the OP. To do so,
NBA develped an implementation strategy that is detailed in Appendix J.

This implementation strategy is based on the prioritization of the CRIP actions. The CRIP actions
were assigned to the 3-year plans according to the level of emergency, as precised by the
countries, to their contribution to resilience strengthening and to their readiness level (the two latter
parameters are detailed in the last 2 columns of the tables of actions in section 3.2). For instance,
the activities related to the PIDACC were assigned to the first 3-year plan.

On this basis, the CRIP actions have been scheduled in coordination with the OP actions of NBA
(see Appendix H). This physical and financial scheduling is synthetized in the table shown in
section 4.2.


3.4.2              Gender equality
The need to address gender in adaptation to climate change is widely recognized. In many parts of
the world, women and men experience and respond to climate impacts differently. They are also
involved in climate change solutions in differing ways depending on their roles in society and in
their communities. Recognizing and integrating gender considerations in resilience-building is
paramount to ensuring effective outcomes.

In the Niger Basin, women are primarily responsible for food production, household water supply,
energy production for heating and cooking, childcare, and sharing traditional knowledge. These
areas of daily life are complicated and even impaired by a rapidly and unpredictably changing
climate. In rural communities, women use and manage natural resources that also at risk to the
impacts of climate change. And yet, women often lack access to financial and technical support,
emergency response systems, and other support systems needed to cope with those impacts.

Although they are disproportionately affected, women also play a crucial role in building resilience
to climate change. They have many crucial skills and relationships that are needed to adapt to
changing environmental realities. As the heart of their communities, they are often responsible for
knowledge dissemination, development of coping strategies, and implementation of community-
based solutions. Moreover, women‟s knowledge, networks, and strategies to deal with climate
variability are best enabled and supported when women are represented in relevant decision-
making at all levels.

The NBA and its member countries plan to implement CRIP activities in a gender informed way –
both to reduce vulnerability of women to the effects of climate change and to harness the unique
role and skills of women to build climate resilience. Countries foresee gender considerations
playing an important role in the design, decision-making, stakeholder engagement, and
implementation phases of relevant CRIP activities. Specifically, gender will be mainstreamed into
activities such as capacity building, communication, project formulation, studies, and assessment.
Notably, a number of country projects are specifically designed to strengthen women‟s role in
adaptation measures related to water management and food production. One country will develop
their national gender policy by considering women‟s vulnerability to climate change with support
from the CRIP, and the NBA will also develop its own gender policy in order to support coherent
implementation of all CRIP actions.




d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
46                                                            4. Funding of the Climate Resilience Investment Plan




4. FUNDING OF THE CLIMATE RESILIENCE INVESTMENT
   PLAN


4.1     POSITIONING WITH REGARD TO OTHER ADAPTATION
        PROGRAMMES

It does not compete with other national or regional investment programmes. It aims to
mobilise additional sources of investment, specific to adaptation to climate change, for the
implementation of measures taken from the OP, the NAPAs, the NAP ‟s and national contributions
to strengthening resilience to climate change in the Niger Basin. It incorporates the adaptation
measures of the various projects of the NBA (PIDAACC/ADB, P-DREDGE/WB, P-GIRE2/AFD,
etc).

Moreover, the CRIP is consistent and compatible with the various national initiatives (INDC,
national adaptation plans in particular) and regional initiatives in connection with adaptation to
climate change.

The CRIP is thus positioned as an investment plan encompassing/harmonizing all the
adaptation measures planned in the NB. Each of the projects of the NBA or the national or
regional action programmes included in the CRIP constitutes a lever for implementation of the
measures they drive. As such, being fully incorporated into the CRIP, the PIDAACC, an NBA
adaptation project supported by the ADB, has a central place. The ADB is thus a valued
partner of this initiative.

The Integrated Programme for Agricultural Development and Adaptation to Climate Change in the
Niger Basin (PIDAACC/NB) aims to contribute to improving the life of the populations and their
resilience to the effects of climate change by the sustainable management of the natural resources.
Its preparation is funded by the African Development Bank (ADB) and follows on from the Silting
Control Programme in the Niger Basin (SCP/BN), co-funded by the ADB. It includes 38 measures,
distributed between 3 components: (i) Integrated Development of Water Resources, (ii)
Development of the Resilience of the Populations and Ecosystems and (ii) Coordination and
management of the Programme. The PIDAACC/BN will enable the Investment Programme (IP) to
be made operational and the implementation of the NBA Operational Plan (OP) by 2021, through
the measures it drives.

4.2     COST OF THE CLIMATE RESILIENCE INVESTMENT PLAN
The overall amount of the Climate Resilience Investment Plan in its current version, i.e. a selection
of measures, based on the OP, NAPAs, NAPs and national contributions, screened using the first 8
criteria defined in section 2.2.1, is approximately 3,111,000,000 USD (3.11 billion USD). The costs
have been estimated based on the information contained in the description sheets for the projects
provided by the countries and the NBA. The tables below summarize the cost of the CRIP per type
of adaptation measure and per country.

NB: It should be noted that some measures may belong to several categories of adaptation
measures. In this case, they have been allocated to the category for which the contribution is the
most significant. The figures given in the table below should therefore be interpreted in perspective.
For example, the multi-usage infrastructures adopted in the CRIP have been classed in category 4
"Vulnerability linked to water stress", which partly explains the high amount associated with this
category. However, these structures also significantly contribute to flood protection and therefore
also fall under category 5 but the amount of the activity has not been counted in this category.




                              d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

              Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
4. Funding of the Climate Resilience Investment Plan                                                                                                   47


Moreover, the Plan does not attempt to parce out incremental costs of adaptation activities. Rather,
it consders the full amount of each investment as its contribution to resilience-building in the Niger
Basin. It is recognized, though, that some financing mechanisms could request more nuanced
analyses of the additionality of adaptation costs to justify funding certain projects contained in the
Plan; something that the implementing partners will work to provide when required.

        Table 4-1: Cost of the Climate Resilience Investment Plan per type of adaptation measure

                                                                                                                                      Overall cost of the
       Types of measures contributing to climate                                                                                      measures chosen
                                                                                                       Number of actions
                  resilience building                                                                                                  in the CRIP pre-
                                                                                                                                        selection ($US)
  Governance and Knowledge package                                                                                   [54]                    [242,000,000]
  1 - Knowledge. Collection and generation of climatic and
  hydrological information. Weather-forecasting tools and                                                              26                     78,000,000
  decision-making tools
  2 - Assessment of vulnerability. Communication and
  awareness-raising
                                                                                                                        9                    129,000,000

  3 - Integration of climate change adaptation into the
  capabilities, bodies and management instruments of the                                                               19                     35,000,000
  national and regional institutions of the Basin
  Package of sectorial measures contributing to
  enhancing the resilience of the populations and
                                                                                                                    [192]                  [2,867,000,000]
  ecosystems of the basin to the impacts of
  climate change identified in the NB
  4 - Measures targeting vulnerability to water stress                                                                 77                    1,619,000,000

  6 – Measures targeting vulnerability to flooding                                                                      7                      63,000,000

  6 – Measures targeting vulnerability to soil degradation                                                             30                     201,000,000
  7 - Measures targeting vulnerability to degradation of the                                                            8                     127,000,000
  grazing land
  8 - Measures targeting vulnerability to degradation of the                                                           47                     636,000,000
  ecosystems
  9 - Measures targeting vulnerability to deterioration of                                                              5                       3,000,000
  the water quality
  10 - Measures targeting vulnerability linked to the rising                                                            1                       1,000,000
  sea-level
  11 – Measures strengthening resilience (e.g. generation                                                              17                     219,000,000
       of jobs, revenues, etc

Details of the costs per project are given in the detailed list of measures (sections 3.2) and
Appendix F.

The CRIP does not constitute a fixed breakdown of resources between the countries. The total cost
per country reflects only the number of projects that were identified and considered consistent with
the resilience criteria defined in the CRIP. Actual financing of the plan will depend on the interest of
financing entities and specific country priorities.

Financial scheduling of the CRIP based on the prioritization of the actions

NBA developed a strategy to implement the CRIP, based on the prioritization of the actions (see
section 3.4) and on their breakdown in the three 3-year plans of the OP. This turns into a financial
programming of the CRIP actions. The programming of each CRIP action is detailed in the tables
presented in Appendices G and H, and summarized in the following synthesis table.



d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
48                                                                              4. Funding of the Climate Resilience Investment Plan


     Table 4-2 : Financial programming of the CRIP actions based on the 3-year plans of the OP.

           Type of adaptation actions                         PO - PT1                       PO - PT2                       PO - PT3                         TOTAL

1 - Knowledge. Collection and generation of
climatic and hydrological information. Weather-        43%        33 600 000         30%           23 700 000       27%          20 700 000        100%            78 000 000
forecasting tools and decision-making tools
2 - Assessment of vulnerability. Communication
                                                       21%        26 700 000         32%           41 600 000       47%          61 100 000        100%          129 400 000
and awareness-raising
3 - Integration of climate change adaptation into
the capabilities, bodies and management
                                                       37%        13 200 000         48%           16 900 000       15%           5 400 000        100%            35 500 000
instruments of the national and regional
institutions of the Basin
Package 1                                              30%        73 500 000        34%           82 200 000        36%         87 200 000        100%          242 900 000

4 - Measures targeting vulnerability to water stress   24%       395 800 000         51%         828 700 000        24%        394 300 000         100%        1 618 800 000

5 – Measures targeting vulnerability to flooding       24%        15 400 000         76%           48 100 000        0%                     0      100%            63 500 000
6 – Measures targeting vulnerability to soil
                                                       18%        35 200 000         80%         160 000 000         3%           5 900 000        100%          201 100 000
degradation
7 - Measures targeting vulnerability to degradation
                                                       36%        46 200 000         34%           43 700 000       29%          36 800 000        100%          126 700 000
of the grazing land
8 - Measures targeting vulnerability to degradation
                                                       31%       194 200 000         55%         349 900 000        14%          91 800 000        100%          635 900 000
of the ecosystems
9 - Measures targeting vulnerability to
                                                       93%          2 700 000        7%               200 000        0%                     0      100%             2 900 000
deterioration of the water quality
10 - Measures targeting vulnerability linked to the
                                                       55%            600 000        45%              500 000        0%                     0      100%             1 100 000
rising sea-level
11 – Measures strengthening resilience (e.g.
                                                       24%        52 300 000         31%           68 200 000       45%          98 300 000        100%          218 800 000
generation of jobs, revenues, etc
Package 2                                              26%      742 400 000         52%        1 499 300 000        22%        627 100 000        100%        2 868 800 000
TOTAL                                                  26%      815 900 000         51%        1 581 500 000        23%        714 300 000        100%        3 111 700 000




                                                d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

                       Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
4. Funding of the Climate Resilience Investment Plan                                                                                                              49


4.3            FUNDING PLAN
The CRIP aims to encompass and harmonize all the adaptation measures planned in the NB .
Each of the projects of the NBA or the national or regional action programmes included in the CRIP
and for which funding is identified constitutes a lever for implementation of the measures they
drive. The CRIP can therefore already draw on the projects and action programmes which are due
to be implemented imminently (e.g. PIDAACC).

4.3.1              Current state of identified funding sources
On the scale of the overall CRIP document

According to the information it has been possible to collect at the time of this report preparation,
618 million USD have already been identified, which represents 20% of the overall amount. The
financing sources identified for each of the measures are specified in the tables in section 3.2.
    Table 4-3: Level of identification of funding for the measures selected in the Climate Resilience
                                                                                    3
                     Investment Plan aggregated by type of adaptation measures

                                                                                                                                                          Percentage of
                                                                                     Overall cost of the                        Share of cost for         the over cost
   Types of measures contributing to climate                                         measures chosen in                         which a funding            covered by
              resilience building                                                       the CRIP pre-                           source has been             identified
                                                                                       selection ($US)                           identified ($US)            funding
                                                                                                                                                             sources
  Governance and Knowledge package                                                                 [242,000,000]                         [20,500,000]        [8.5%]
  1 - Knowledge. Collection and generation of
  climatic and hydrological information.
  Weather-forecasting tools and decision-
                                                                                                     78,000,000                          11,200,000          14.4%
  making tools
  2 - Assessment of vulnerability.
  Communication and awareness-raising
                                                                                                   129,000,000                                        0       0.0%
  3 - Integration of climate change adaptation
  into the capabilities, bodies and management
  instruments of the national and regional
                                                                                                     35,000,000                           9,300,000          26.6%
  institutions of the Basin
  Other measures contributing to
  strengthening resilience of the populations
  and ecosystems of the basin to the                                                      [2,869,000,000]                             [598,200,000]          [20.8%]
  impacts of climate change identified in the
  Niger Basin (criterion 1):
  4 - Measures targeting vulnerability to water
                                                                                                  1,619,000 000                          222,600,000         13.7%
  stress
  7 – Measures targeting vulnerability to
                                                                                                        63,000,000                         3,600,000          5.7%
    flooding
  6 – Measures targeting vulnerability to soil
                                                                                                     201,000,000                          93,100,000         46.3%
  degradation
  7 - Measures targeting vulnerability to
                                                                                                     127,000,000                          58,100,000         45.7%
  degradation of the grazing land
  8 - Measures targeting vulnerability                                       to
                                                                                                     636,000,000                         191,100,000         30.0%
  degradation of the ecosystems
  9 - Measures targeting vulnerability to
                                                                                                          3,000,000                                   0       0.0%
  deterioration of the water quality
  10 - Measures targeting vulnerability linked to
                                                                                                          1,000,000                                   0       0.0%
  the rising sea-level
  11 – Measures strengthening resilience (e.g.
                                                                                                     219,000,000                          29,700,000         13.6%
      generation of jobs, revenues, etc
  TOTAL                                                                                         [3,109,000,000]                         [617,800,000]        [19.9%]


d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
50                                                              4. Funding of the Climate Resilience Investment Plan


With regard to the measures for which funding has not been identified, the World Bank and the
ADB have begun consultations with the Technical and Financial Partners to mobilize
supplementary resources for this initiative. The process is ongoing. A table summarising the
distribution of the commitments of the various donors and partners for the financing of the CRIP will
be drafted based on the interest and commitments expressed after the consultations.

On the scale of each of the 3-year plans of the OP implementing the CRIP

The following table illustrates the fundraising efforts that will be necessary to insure the
sustainability and efficiency of the CRIP. It shows the level of already identified funding and their
breakdown in the 3-year implementation plans.

Moreover, the table presents the possible – yet to be confirmed – contribution of the countries to
the CRIP. It is assumed that this contribution would reach at least 10% of each action cost. This
contribution has been considered as identified funding (see fundraising strategy in the next
section). In addition, the direct beneficiaries will also be asked to contribute financially or in kind, to
the implementation of the actions that directly concern them, except for the most important
infrastructure. At the time of this report preparation, and based on this assupmtion, 28% of the
overall amount of the CRIP actions assigned to the first 3-year implementation plan is already
identified.

 Table 4-4 : Breakdown of the identified and to be identified funding sources for the CRIP actions
                            according to the 3-year plans of the OP.
                                                                    PO - PT1                     PO - PT2                    PO - PT3
                                                                                                                                                            TOTAL
                                                                   2016-2018                    2019-2021                   2022-2024
                         millions USD                            815 800 000                 1 581 400 000                 714 400 000                3 111 600 000
Overall cost             % the overall cost of the
                         CRIP
                                                                       26.2%                        50.8%                       23.0%                         100%
                         millions USD                            230 600 000                   509 900 000                 189 400 000                  929 900 000
Identified amount        % the overall cost of the
                         CRIP
                                                                        7.4%                        16.4%                        6.1%                        29.9%
                         millions USD                            585 200 000                 1 071 500 000                 525 000 000                2 181 700 000
Amount to be raised      % the overall cost of the
                         CRIP
                                                                       18.8%                        34.4%                       16.9%                        70.1%



4.3.2      Fundraising strategy
The Investment Plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change includes 246 actions
for a total amount of 3.11 billion USD. The identified financing represents about 20%. Thus, 80% of
the cost of the CRIP, which is 2.492 billion USD is still to be mobilized for its implementation.

Targeted financing sources include:
 Counterpart contributions of both NBA Member Countries and actions‟ beneficiaries;
 Adaptation financing funds;
 The Green Climate Fund;
 FEM;
 Multilateral donors in link or not with a climate initiative (WB, AfDB, etc.);
 Bilateral donors in link or not with a climate initiative (EU, USAID, GIZ, KfW, FDA, BADEA, etc.);
 Regional financial institutions in link or not with a climate initiative (BOAD, WAEMU, CEMAC).




                                d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

               Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
4. Funding of the Climate Resilience Investment Plan                                                                                  51


The strategy for mobilizing the above-mentioned financing is set forth as follows:


FINANCIAL INVOLVEMENT OF NBA MEMBER COUNTRIES AND THE BENEFICIARIES
OF THE ACTIONS IN IMPLEMENTING THE CRIP

NBA Member Countries, engaged in a shared vision for a sustainable development of the basin
since 2002, and acknowledging the big challenge which the strengthening of the resilience of
populations, infrastructures, ecosystems and institutions to climate change particularly represents,
own the CRIP.

The collectively commit themselves to:
 Embark on advocacy on the Investment Plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate
  Change in the Niger Basin (CRIP) in order to mobilize Technical and Financial Partners;
 Mobilize national counterpart contributions for financing the actions of the Investment Plan for
  the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin (CRIP) for up to 10% of
  the cost of the investments planned. For this, budgetary entries will be made as from the 2016
  fiscal year in Member Countries‟ respective budgets;
 Finalize country and community consultations on the feasibility of innovative and sustainable
  financing mechanisms for which we have Decision No.5 of the 9th and 10th NBA Summits of
  Heads of State and Government on the implementation of the mechanisms for an autonomous
  and sustainable financing of NBA, with the involvement of the private sector;

In order to ensure beneficiaries‟ ownership of the realizations, and the sustainability of investments,
the direct beneficiaries of the CRIP actions will bring their counterpart contributions which vary
between 5% and 10% of the costs, depending on the actions; that percentage will be defined
during the financial programming of each action.

In addition, the direct beneficiaries will also be asked to contribute financially or in kind, to the
implementation of the actions that directly concern them, except for the most important
infrastructure.


CONTRIBUTION OF THE DEVELOPMENT BANKS SUPPORTING THE CRIP (WB,
AFDB)
 The advocacy and sensitization of TFPs will be intensified before COP21 in order to mobilize
  them and to bring them to decide on the level of their involvement in the financing of the CRIP.
  For this, the World Bank, Lead Member of NBA TFPs, and the African Development Bank
  (AfDB), Lead Member of PIDACC/NB Partners, will support NBA and Member Countries in
  CRIP promotion and implementation.
 NBA and Member States will officially solicit the two Development Banks so that they announce
  their contribution by the COP21. This should create a domino effect for bringing other partners
  by concretely taking part in the financing of the CRIP.


CONTRIBUTION OF OTHER TECHNICAL AND FINANCIAL PARTNERS (TFPS)
 NBA will send official requests about CRIP to every other TFPs and will invite them at the CRIP
  presentation at COP21;
 The World Bank and NBA, with the support of a Champion, will intensify advocacy and
  sensitization towards partners before COP21 by visiting, if need be, their headquarters to
  ensure the successful presentation of CRIP to CoP21. The advocacy will continue during and
  after COP21;
 A meeting of PIDACC partners will be held in February 2016, with the support of AfDB/AWF and
  ICA, for mobilizing PIDACC financing, a priority program of the CRIP;
 Regional programme sheets will be developed, in relation with Member Countries, for
  submission to donors and climate funds (GCF, FEM, etc).

d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
52                                                           4. Funding of the Climate Resilience Investment Plan


FUNDRAISING TOOLS FOR THE CRIP
 A fundraising working group will be established and managed by NBA from January 2016 ;
 NBA, with the support of the World Bank and the African Development Bank, will establish a
  Fiduciary Fund for strengthening resilience to climate change in the Niger Basin, which will
  constitutes a sustainable funding tool;
 National and regional resilience programs/projects will be developed and implemented over the
  period 2016-2024.




                             d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

             Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
5. Next stages of the process                                                                                                         53




5. NEXT STAGES OF THE PROCESS

 Presentation of the CRIP at the Climate Conference in Paris (COP 21), during a high level panel
  discussion organized at the Africa Pavillon on 2 December 2015.
 Funds mobilization ;
 Implementation.




d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
Appendixes                                                                                                                            55




                                                              APPENDIXES




d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
56                                                                                                                                 Appendixes




           Appendix A : Definitions




                    d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

     Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
Appendixes                                                                                                                            57




DEFINITION OF CLIMATE RISK

Climate risk can be broken down into the climate hazard itself and the vulnerability of the system in
question (population, ecosystem, infrastructure, institution). See Figure A-1 below.

Climate change: A change in climate conditions which can be characterised (e.g. using statistical
tests) by shifts in average and/or property variability modifications and which persist over a long
period of time, typically decades or more. Climate change can be a result of anything from natural
internal processes (natural variability) to external forces or persistent anthropogenic changes to the
composition of the atmosphere or how land is used.

Vulnerability: Vulnerability to climate change is the degree to which geophysical, biological and
socio-economic systems are susceptible to, and unable to cope with, adverse impacts of climate
change (see ; Füssel and Klein, 2006). The term „vulnerability‟ may therefore refer to the vulnerable
system itself, e.g., low-lying islands or coastal cities; the impact to this system, e.g., flooding of
coastal cities and agricultural lands or forced migration; or the mechanism causing these impacts,
e.g., disintegration of the West Antarctic ice sheet.

Exposure: The presence of people means of subsistence, resources and environmental services,
elements of infrastructure or economic, social or cultural assets in an area which is susceptible to
damage.

Sensitivity: The degree to which a system is either positively or negatively influenced by climate
variability or climate change. Effects in this sense may be direct (e.g. changes to agricultural yield
owing to changes in average values for temperature amplitude or variability) or indirect (e.g.
damage caused by the increased frequency of coastal flooding due to the sea level rising).  

Adaptive capacity: The ability of a system, institution, human being or any other organism to
mitigate adverse effects or adapt to the consequences of or capitalise on the beneficial effects of
climate change.

   Figure A-1 : Diagram defining the climate risk and possible strategies to strengthen resilience to
                                           climate change.




Key: The various types of climate change resilience-building measures.  Measures aimed at reducing
climate hazard sensibility,  measures aimed at reducing climate hazard vulnerability,  measures aimed at
building adaptive capacity to climate hazards.

Source: Inspired by Gitz V. & Meybeck A., 2012. Risks, vulnerabilities and resilience in a context of climate
change. FAO.

d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
58                                                                                                                                           Appendixes


DEFINING ADAPTATION AND RESILIENCE

Mitigation: Human actions aimed at reducing the anthropogenic impact on climate forcing; this
approach consists of reducing the sources of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions or expanding GHG
storage. An approach aimed at stabilising greenhouse gas (GHG) concentrations in the
atmosphere to levels which could prevent any dangerous anthropogenic interference with the
climate system by promoting efforts to reduce or limit GHG emissions or improve GHG
sequestration.

Adaptation: In human systems this refers to an approach involving the adjustment of the current or
expected climate, as well as the consequences thereof, so as to mitigate harmful effects and
harness beneficial effects. In natural systems this refers to an approach involving the adjustment of
the current climate as well as the consequences thereof; human intervention may facilitate
adaptation for the expected climate.

Note: Mitigation measures can limit climate change, whereas the goal of adaptation measures is
the reduction of the vulnerability of natural and socio-economic systems, thereby combating climate
change at lower cost.

Resilience: The capacity a system and its various components presents with respect to
anticipating, absorbing and/or withstanding the effects of hazards or to quickly and effectively
recover from said hazards, including via protective measures, resulting in the rehabilitation and
improvement of basic structures and operations (see Figure 2-1).

Note: Climate change resilience building for watersheds is an approach which encompasses
adaptation and is part of the broader development of the river basin. Climate change is therefore
viewed as a constraint (amongst other things) affecting development. This notably includes 'no
regret' measures.

Maladaptation: The risk of implementing measures which may ultimately harm
populations/ecosystems, i.e. measures which may be beneficial in the short term or at the local
level but may also affect vulnerability or the ability to adapt to climate change over the long term or
other spatial scale.

Some adaptation strategies may increase the vulnerability of other ecosystems, sectors or
populations where (i) they increase greenhouse gas emissions, (ii) they disproportionately have an
impact on more vulnerable areas, (iii) opportunity costs prove too high, (iv) they reduce incentives
for adaptation or (v) where they lead to pathways which limit the choices available to future
generations. These five risks for maladaptation provide a basis which can be used to analyse any
possible adverse effects arising from adaptation measures (Barnett & O'Neill, 2009).

The various types of adaptation measures

The United Nations Economic Commission for Europe has defined the various options in terms of
projects available based on expected climate benefits (United Nations & the EEC, 2009):
 Win-win options (measures which are shown to be highly cost-effective and which minimise
  climate risk and offer further advantages). These often refer to activities dealing with the effects
  of climate change and/or meeting other social and environmental objectives, e.g. efficient use
  of water, particularly hot water (reduces demand for water as well as GHG emissions).
 No regret options (measures which are known to be cost-effective and useful, regardless of the
  magnitude of climate change). These are measures which are warranted due to current climate
  conditions and which are compatible with projected climate change, e.g. the promotion of good
  soil management practices to limit the risks of diffuse pollution.
 Low regret options (measures with low cost-effectiveness, but significant benefits which depend
   on future climate change), e.g. an oversized drainage network.
 Flexible adaptation options (measures which are designed to be modified in future), e.g.
  designing a reservoir such that the size could be increased in future.


                              d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

              Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
Appendixes                                                                                                                            59


Sources:
 IPCC Fifth Assessment Report: Climate Change 2014
 IPCC, SREX, 2012. Disaster and extreme weather event risk management to meet the needs of
   climate change adaptation.
 IPCC Fourth Assessment Report: Climate Change 2007




d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
60                                                                                                                                      Appendixes




     Appendix B : Design process of NBA’s
              planning documents




                         d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

         Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
Appendixes                                                                                                                            61



So as to better align future measures to be proposed within the scope of the Niger Basin Authority
(NBA) Operational Plans (OPs) and/or Strategic Action Plans (SAPs), it is important to firstly
highlight the co-ordination required from the various elements involved with the NBA programmatic
framework (see the illustration below).

In 2002, NBA Member States decided to draft a Shared Vision which would consist of making the
Niger River Basin 'an area of sustainable development with respect to the integrated management
of water resources and related ecosystems so as to improve the quality of life and offer prosperity
for the surrounding populations'.

Afterwards, during the 8th Heads of State and Government Summit held on 30 April 2008 in
Niamey, Niger, the Member States adopted a Sustainable Development Action Programme
(SDAP) for 2027, an Investment Programme (IP) for 2008-2027 and a Water Charter.

The SDAP is a strategic reference document which defines and offers guidelines on the integrated
and shared development process for NBA Member States.

The IP, which is the budgetary implementation document for the SDAP, consists of three (3) main
priority development components: (i) the development of socio-economic infrastructures, (ii) the
protection of resources and ecosystems and (iii) capacity building for and the involvement of key
players for the Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM) scheme.

The IP is spread out over several five-year plans: (i) the Five-year Priority Plan (FPP) for 2008-
2012, (ii) the Second Five-year Plan for 2013-2017, (iii) the Third Five-year Plan for 2018-2022 and
the Fourth Five-year Plan for 2023-2027.

In November 2012 the NBA drafted a ten-year Strategic Plan (SP) for 2013-2022.

This SP defined five strategic areas of action: (i) water as an economic development lever, (ii) the
preservation of basin ecosystems, (iii) innovative and sustainable financing, (iv) co-operation with
fellow Member States and partners and (v) organisational performance.

The operationalization process for this strategic plan consisted in a series of national and regional
workshops held in 2013 and 2014 with the goal of identifying priority actions and projects for
Member States (indexed in the form of project information sheets) per IP and SDAP measures and
NBA strategic plan guidelines as well as agreeing on which priority actions and projects
implemented in the Niger River Basin should be monitored by the NBA over the next ten years. The
NBA Operational Plan for 2016-2024 consists of the physical and financial programming for these
priority actions and projects. This document is currently being validated by NBA authorities.




d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
62                                                                                                                                 Appendixes




 Appendix C : Climate projections and
impacts on the water cycle in the Niger
              River Basin




                    d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

     Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
Appendixes                                                                                                                            63



Sources:
 A global perspective on African climate, Giannini et al. 2008
 Evaluation des risques climatiques pour le Bassin du Fleuve Niger (Assessing climate risk for
  the Niger River Basin), ABN-BM, 2013
 Climate Change, Water and Conflict in the Niger River Basin, USAID, 2011


THE KEY ROLE OF CLIMATE VARIABILITY IN THE NRB

Illustration showing spatial and temporal variability in terms of rainfall (upper part) and Niger river
flows (lower part).




 Source: Evaluation des risques climatiques pour le Bassin du Fleuve Niger (Assessing climate risk
                             for the Niger River Basin), ABN-BM, 2013




d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
64                                                                                                                                          Appendixes


A LARGE DEGREE OF UNCERTAINTY REGARDING HOW RAINFALL ASPECTS WOULD BE
AFFECTED BY CLIMATE CHANGE




Source: Evaluation des risques climatiques pour le Bassin du Fleuve Niger (Assessing climate risk
                            for the Niger River Basin), ABN-BM, 2013

 A high degree of uncertainty is currently present in for Niger River Basin climate projections,
  particularly with regard to rainfall.


CLIMATE AND HYDROLOGICAL HAZARDS CONTEMPLATED

There are two aspects to the development of climate variables within the context of climate change:
 extreme weather phenomena;
 shifts in mean values (e.g. migration of isohyets, disturbance of rainfall patterns).

With climate projections being quite uncertain for some parameters (particularly rainfall), it is
difficult to assess likely climate and hydrological impacts in terms of the nature of these impacts,
their intensity, frequency and spatial variability.

Taking a generic inventory of climate and hydrological impacts has been proposed (see Table 1-1),
with this list being used to draw up a cause and effect flow chart (Figure 1-1) afterwards. This chart
is then broken down for each sector for the purposes of identifying the specific second-order
impacts.




                               d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

               Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
Appendixes                                                                                                                                                   65




                                       Table C-1: Possible effects of climate change in the NRB

Parameters                                Possible development of climate                                                   Climate hazards/impact
                                          parameters based on projections                                                   contemplated
Temperature                               Mean annual temperatures rising from                                              Impact on evapotranspiration
                                          1°C to 3°C
                                          Heat waves                                                                        Severe heat

                                                                                                                            Contributes to the growth of
                                                                                                                            invasive species (such as
                                                                                                                            crickets, water hyacinths) or
                                                                                                                            epidemics

                                                                                                                            Fosters conditions leading to
                                                                                                                            fires/wildfires
Evapotranspiration                        Rise in evapotranspiration as a
                                          consequence of temperature rise
Rainfall                                  Average rainfall: uncertainty regarding                                           Drought: Lower average flow
                                          isohyet development and rainfall pattern                                          rates, reduced groundwater
                                          variability, changes to seasonality/crop                                          recharge,
                                          calendar and other disturbances.                                                   less of the resource available
                                          Negative outcome: lower average                                                   on average
                                          rainfall.
                                          Positive outcome: high average rainfall.                                          More frequent instances of
                                                                                                                            severe drought: Lower flow
                                          Extreme weather events: uncertainty,                                              rates at low water, rains fall later
                                          more frequent and more severe rainfall?                                           each year,
                                                                                                                             seasonal resource shortages
                                                                                                                            become more frequent and
                                                                                                                            intense

                                                                                                                            Severe rainfall
                                                                                                                             Acceleration of soil erosion
Other      climate                        Increased CO2 concentration
parameters
                                                         Source: SPCR & NAPAs & ABN-BM 2013




d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
66                                                                                                                                           Appendixes



     Figure C-2: Development of climate and hydrological elements as a result of climate change -
                                     cause and effect flow chart




                                                                  Source: BRLi




                                d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

                Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
Appendixes                                                                                                                            67




    Appendix D : Sectoral impacts of
climate change in the Niger River Basin




d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
68                                                                                                                                            Appendixes




SECTOR-SPECIFIC IMPACTS

Sources:
 Evaluation des risques climatiques pour le Bassin du Fleuve Niger (Assessing climate risk for
  the Niger River Basin), ABN-BM, 2013
 Climate change, water and conflict in the Niger River Basin, USAID, 2011
 AGHRYMET study, 2010
 NAPA studies

A background of great uncertainty in terms of the nature, intensity, spatial variability and
timing of climate change impact in the Niger River Basin.

ECOSYSTEMS

Increased sand encroachment.

Vegetation cover reduced.

Deterioration of biodiversity.

Remarkable ecosystem in the NID --> role in local population subsistence and key impact
downstream




                                 d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

               Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
Appendixes                                                                                                                            69


AGRICULTURE

Lower crop yield as a result of increasing temperatures (maize, millet, sorghum: -5% per +1°C, -
10% per +2°C, up to -15-25% per +3°C per CILSS/AGRHYMET 2007 and 2009 studies; even
greater drop for cereals per an FAO study; for rice: this is more complex as there is a beneficial
short term effect from an increase in CO2 concentration, although over the long term yield
decreases, per Keita 2009, Sarr 2007).

Increased number of disasters/infections (disease, pests)

Agricultural season shortened: changes to crop calendars

Soil erosion and salinization

Salinization of underground water resources (owing to reduced recharge, salt barriers)

Increased demand for irrigation water

[Surface area for flooding reduced in the NID if flow rates are reduced.]

        Reduced crop yield.

        Deterioration of food safety (low crop production vs rapidly growing populations)




d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
70                                                                                                                                          Appendixes


LIVESTOCK

Lower availability of watering points.

Reduced production in pastures / reduced availability of feed [this is particularly related to the lower
amount of flooded land in the NID in the event flow rates drop].

Increased mortality rates (parasites, disease, droughts)

      Reduced animal production and human migration to more favourable areas.

      Deterioration of food safety (low crop production and rapidly growing populations)




                               d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

               Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
Appendixes                                                                                                                            71


DRINKING WATER SUPPLY

Reduced resource availability at water points.




HYDROPOWER

Erosion increases sedimentation levels and may reduce dam storage/production capacity.




d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
72                                                                                                                                         Appendixes


FISHING

Lower water levels or disappearance of water points.




NAVIGATION
[Reduced numbers of days per year waterways are navigable in the event of reduced flow rates]
Erosion increases sand encroachment and sedimentation, which may reduce navigability.




                              d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

              Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
Appendixes                                                                                                                            73


HEALTH – SECURITY/SAFETY

More frequent and severe flooding.

Lower water quality during low water periods (as well as during flood periods - pollution as a result
of sewage).

Diseases, parasites.




d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
74                                                                                                                                 Appendixes




Appendix E : Selection methodology of
the actions to be incorporated into the
  Climate Resilience Investment Plan




                    d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

     Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
Appendixes                                                                                                                                                   75




METHODOLOGY USED TO COMPARE PROJECTS WITH CRITERIA

Criteria                                                                                                               Ranking
Criterion 1 - Improved awareness with respect to hazards,                                                              0/1/2/3
progress made with respect to assessing vulnerabilities,
integration of climate change adaptation in public policies.
Criterion 2 - Strengthening resilience                                                                                 0/1/2/3
Criterion 3 - Contributing to the management and sustainable                                                           0/1
development of the Niger River Basin (NRB)
Criterion 4 - Preventing maladaptation                                                                                 0/1
Criterion 5 - Management and development of NRB water                                                                  0/1
resources in line with protective measures
Criterion 6 - Compatibility with main planning documents and                                                           0/1
agreements relative to the NRB
Criterion 7 - Country ownership                                                                                        0/1
Criterion 8 - Project preparation stage                                                                                N/A: no information, 1: ideas in
                                                                                                                       place, identification under way,
                                                                                                                       2: identification carried out, 3:
                                                                                                                       feasibility studies under way, 4:
                                                                                                                       feasibility studies carried out, 5:
                                                                                                                       APS/APD, EIES carried out, 6:
                                                                                                                       detailed design prepared or
                                                                                                                       implementation (planning).
Criterion 9 - Financing level identified                                                                               /
Criterion 10 - Economic feasibility                                                                                    /

For criterion 8, Project Preparation Stage, the goal here is harmonisation with the project
preparation stage assessment system used in the NBA OP.

For criteria to be marked as '0/1/2/3', assessment in this respect is as follows:
 0: this measure has no connection to climate change resilience building or adaptation.
 1: this measure has an indirect connection with climate change resilience building or adaptation.
 2: the main objective for the measure is not climate change adaptation or resilience building
   although it would greatly contribute to the foregoing (as a co-benefit).
 3: this measure is directly related to climate change resilience building or adaptation.

For criteria to be marked as '0/1':
 '0' means the criterion has not been met,
 whilst '1' means the criterion has been met.


CRITERION 6 DEFINITION. MALADAPTATION.

Criterion definition: Broader integration over a longer period of time and under contrasting possible
scenarios for any future changes, bearing in mind interactions between sectors and financing.

The goal of this criterion is preventing measures being selected, particularly major developments
such as multiple use structure work and irrigated perimeters, which could result in 'maladaptation'.

Works should provide significant benefits in terms of adaptation:




d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
76                                                                                                                                           Appendixes


 Structural works capable of storing volumes of water during times when the resource is
  abundant and then releasing it during drier periods ('regulation') for the purpose of meeting
  needs which otherwise would not be met. These works should therefore be able to reduce
  instances where the availability of water resources is lower than normal as well as the
  deterioration of ecosystems and the water quality at low water marks. Works should likewise
  assume a protective function against flooding by reducing water levels, thereby reducing the
  vulnerability of populations downstream of the risk. Lastly works should be able to provide
  benefits for mitigation via hydropower generation.
 Irrigated perimeters are used to bring water to crops during periods where this resource is not
   available. They therefore reduce vulnerability caused by low water resource availability and
   may constitute, where certain conditions have been met - e.g. the type of crops being grown,
   the overall agro-economic context they are used in, financial beneficiaries etc. - a food safety
   improvement tool.

These types of works tend to generate more economic activity and revenue.

However irrigated perimeters may also induce effects which prove inhibitive to climate change
adaptation (maladaptation):
 Structural works reservoirs may allow large volumes of water to evaporate. With the amount that
  has evaporated into the atmosphere, there is not enough for the intended use downstream.
  Lastly these works, whenever floods are levelled off, are susceptible to flash flood waves in wet
  zones located downstream and which could have a negative impact on ecosystems and
  economic activities which depend on said ecosystems (e.g. the Inner Delta or Coastal Delta).
 Irrigated perimeters induce losses when water is transferred from its place of removal to the
   place of application for crops. The flow rate may also end up competing with other intended
   uses downstream which would be more relevant with respect to climate change adaptation.

In order to assess, at least as an initial approach, the performance level of works with respect to
adaptation, an indicator should be set which allows for the comparison of positive and negative
effects:

For multiple use reservoirs, we would propose using the following indicators:




For irrigated perimeters:




For adaptation it would be desirable for the measures being put forward:
 not to reduce the overall water balance;
 not to induce poor or low valuation of water resources.

These indicators could therefore be used to identify measures which could generate maladaptation.



                              d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

              Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
Appendixes                                                                                                                            77


Subsidiarity and overall vision for the watershed

Additionally the values of these indicators for two or more similar works could be compared for the
purposes of prioritising implementation.




d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
    Appendix F : Documents and
contributions used for the selection of
             the actions




                     d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

     Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
Appendixes                                                                                                                            79


This table details the documents and contributions provided by the countries and which were used
for the selection of actions in the CRIP. The minutes of the national consultations held in August
2015 for the development of the CRIP can be provided by the project team at NBA or WB.
                                             PLANNING DOCUMENTS AND NATIONAL CONTRIBUTIONS USED FOR THE SELECTION OF
         COUNTRY
                                                                    THE ACTIONS IN THE CRIP
                                                              NAPA (2007) PNA (2015), PAGIRE, SDAGE Mouhoun, Climate change
                                                               investment plan (contribution submitted in September 2015)
      Burkina Faso                                            National report of the consultation workshop held for the developement
                                                               of the Operational Plan (NBA, 2013-2014)
                                                              Addition information transmitted on 16 September 2015
                                                              NAPA (2008)
                                                              National report of the consultation workshop held for the developement
             Benin                                             of the Operational Plan (NBA, 2013-2014)
                                                        
                                                                   nde
                                                               2         National Communication of Benin about Climate Change
                                                              Addition information transmitted on 19 September 2015
                                                              National report of the consultation workshop held for the developement
                                                               of the Operational Plan (NBA, 2013-2014)
                                                              Minutes of the national consultation held in August 2015 for the
         Cameroon                                              development of the CRIP
                                                              PNACC (2015)
                                                              Addition information transmitted on 13 September 2015
                                                              National report of the consultation workshop held for the developement
                                                               of the Operational Plan (NBA, 2013-2014)
                                                              Minutes of the national consultation held in August 2015 for the
                                                               development of the CRIP (including PND et AGIR)
       Côte d‟Ivoire                                          Support to local communities
                                                              Savanes de Boundiali SODEFOR NBA Project
                                                              Forest rehabilitation project in FENGOLO PALE SODEFOR
                                                              Project of forest rehabilitation in rural areas
                                                              Addition information transmitted on 16 September 2015
                                                              NAPA (2007), with update of actions currently under implementation
                                                              National report of the consultation workshop held for the developement
                                                               of the Operational Plan (NBA, 2013-2014)
                                                              Minutes of the national consultation held in August 2015 for the
           Guinea                                              development of the CRIP
                                                              National contribution (1 action)
                                                              2 planning documents (PQDSE, DSRP)
                                                              Addition information transmitted on 16 September 2015
                                                              NAPA (2007)
                                                              National report of the consultation workshop held for the developement
                                                               of the Operational Plan (NBA, 2013-2014)
                                                              National Programme to Safeguard the Niger River
                                                              Minutes of the national consultation held in August 2015 for the
              Mali                                             development of the CRIP
                                                              National contribution
                                                              National strategy for adaptation to climate change
                                                              PNIDACC (2014)
                                                              Addition information transmitted on 16 September 2015
                                                              NAPA/NAP (2006)
             Niger                                            National report of the consultation workshop held for the developement
                                                               of the Operational Plan (NBA, 2013-2014)


d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
                    PLANNING DOCUMENTS AND NATIONAL CONTRIBUTIONS USED FOR THE SELECTION OF
COUNTRY
                                           THE ACTIONS IN THE CRIP
                                  Minutes of the national consultation held in August 2015 for the
                                   development of the CRIP
                                  Addition information transmitted on 16 September 2015
                                  National contribution (July 2015)
                                  National report of the consultation workshop held for the developement
                                   of the Operational Plan (NBA, 2013-2014)
                                  Suggestion of detailed activities (August 2015)
Nigeria                           Minutes of the national consultation held in August 2015 for the
                                   development of the CRIP
                                  Comparison table between Nigeria priorities and actions selected in the
                                   PO.
                                  Addition information transmitted on 16 September 2015
                                  NAPA (2010)
                                  National report of the consultation workshop held for the developement
 Chad
                                   of the Operational Plan (NBA, 2013-2014)
                                  Addition information transmitted on 13 September 2015
                                  National report of the consultation workshop held for the developement
                                   of the Operational Plan (NBA, 2013-2014)
ES-NBA                            CIWA/WB Project Information Document
                                  PIDACC/BN concept note and preparation report
                                  Addition information transmitted on 16 September 2015




                          d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

          Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
Appendixes                                                                                                                            81




 Appendix G : Selected actions classified
               by country




d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
     82                                                                                                                                                                                                        Appendixes




     BENIN
                                                                           Reference                                                        Overall                                       Financial scheduling and
                                                                         document and       Contribution Preparation                        action               Funding                      Implementation
N°                                       Action title
                                                                          beneficiary       to resilience   stage                            cost                sources                PO-PT1             PO-PT2             PO-PT3
                                                                            country                                                         (USD)                                        2016-18            2019-21           2022-24

                         Protection of children under 5 and pregnant
                                                                                                                                                              Identification
PANA_BN_4                women against malaria in the areas most       NAPA Benin                 3                        2              1 112 500
                                                                                                                                                                on-going
                                                                                                                                                                                         100%                 0%                 0%
                         vulnerable to climate change
                                                                       National
                         Development of a data bank relating to        communication                                                                          Identification
CN_BN_1
                         climate change                                concerning climate
                                                                                                  3                        2                  761 483
                                                                                                                                                                on-going
                                                                                                                                                                                          93%                 7%                 0%
                                                                       change Benin
                         Setting up of a climate hazard forecasting
                                                                                                                                                                   70%
PANA_BN_1                and early warning system for food safety in   NAPA Benin                 3                        2              8 190 000
                                                                                                                                                                identified -
                                                                                                                                                                                          72%                28%                 0%
                         4 vulnerable agro-ecological zones
                                                                       National
                         Adaptation of the farming calendars to the    communication                                                                          Identification
CN_BN_2
                         new climate context                           concerning climate
                                                                                                  3                        2              2 538 276
                                                                                                                                                                on-going
                                                                                                                                                                                          65%                35%                 0%
                                                                       change Benin
                         Development of improved wood                  National
                         carbonisation techniques and promotion of     communication                                                                          Identification
CN_BN_3
                         economical stoves in order to reduce          concerning climate
                                                                                                  1                        2              4 061 242
                                                                                                                                                                on-going
                                                                                                                                                                                          65%                35%                 0%
                         deforestation                                 change Benin
                                                                       National
                         Enhancement of capabilities with regard to
                                                                       communication                                                                          Identification
CN_BN_5                  climate observation in the Benin section of
                                                                       concerning climate
                                                                                                  3                        2              3 892 023
                                                                                                                                                                on-going
                                                                                                                                                                                          59%                41%                 0%
                         the Niger basin
                                                                       change Benin
                                                                                                                                                                   60%
PO_R2251_BEN_18          Development of a good practice guide          PO_R2 Benin                1                        2                  598 319           identified -              54%                46%                 0%
                                                                                                                                                                 PIDACC
                         Mobilisation of surface water in order to                                                                                            Identification
PANA_BN_3                adapt to climate change in the most          NAPA Benin                  3                        2              2 875 000
                                                                                                                                                                on-going
                                                                                                                                                                                          49%                39%                12%
                         vulnerable municipalities of the departments


                                                                                                  d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

                  Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
     Appendixes                                                                                                                                                                                                          83



                                                                                                                               Reference                               Overall                       Financial scheduling and
                                                                                                                             document and   Contribution Preparation   action        Funding             Implementation
N°                                                                     Action title
                                                                                                                              beneficiary   to resilience   stage       cost         sources        PO-PT1    PO-PT2    PO-PT3
                                                                                                                                country                                (USD)                        2016-18   2019-21   2022-24
                                            in the Centre and the North
                                            Adaptation of households to climate change
                                            by the promotion of renewable energies and
                                            efficient economical hearths and pressure                                                                                              Identification
PANA_BN_2
                                            cookers in areas vulnerable to climate
                                                                                       NAPA Benin                                                3            2        2 106 600
                                                                                                                                                                                     on-going
                                                                                                                                                                                                    43%       57%        0%
                                            change and where the land is severely
                                            degraded
                                                                                                                                                                                      100%
                                            Development of strategies for adaptation to
PO_R2131_Ben_19
                                            climate change
                                                                                                                         PO_R2 Benin             1            2         608 403     identified -    36%       64%        0%
                                                                                                                                                                                     PIDACC
                                                                                                                                                                                       0%
                                            Anti-erosion and anti-silting measures,
PO_R22202_BEN_12_22_23
                                            continued
                                                                                                                         PO_R2 Benin             3            2        7 075 630    identified -    30%       70%        0%
                                                                                                                                                                                     PIDACC
                                                                                                                                                                                       0%
                                                                                                                                                                         50 732
PO_R2312_BEN_11                             Construction of flood-protection dykes                                       PO_R2 Benin             3            2
                                                                                                                                                                            773
                                                                                                                                                                                    identified -    16%       84%        0%
                                                                                                                                                                                     PIDACC
                                            Rehabilitation and diversification of 5 small
                                                                                                                                                                                       56%
                                            dams at Gamagou, Gah Guessou, Sombi
PO_R12102_BEN_05
                                            Kérékou, Wara and Zougou Pantrossi in
                                                                                                                         PO_R1_Bénin             3            4        1 500 000    identifié -      5%       72%       23%
                                                                                                                                                                                     PIDACC
                                            Upper Alibori region.
                                                                                                                                                                                       10%
                                            Rehabilitation and agricultural diversification
PO_R12101_BEN_05
                                            of twenty agro-pastoral reservoirs in Benin
                                                                                            PO_R1 Benin                                          3            2        7 515 966    identified -     5%       72%       23%
                                                                                                                                                                                     PIDACC
                                                                                                                                                                                       10%
                                                                                                                                                                         35 647
PO_R11203_BEN_06                            Construction of ten (10) multi-purpose dams PO_R1 Benin                                              3            2
                                                                                                                                                                            059
                                                                                                                                                                                    identified -     3%       29%       68%
                                                                                                                                                                                     PIDACC
                                            Development of the water development and
                                                                                                                                                                                   Identification
PO_R21208_BEN_10                            management scheme for the national part of PO_R2 Benin                                               1            2         621 849
                                                                                                                                                                                     on-going
                                                                                                                                                                                                     0%       100%       0%
                                            the Niger Basin




     d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

     Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
       84                                                                                                                                                                                                          Appendixes



       BURKINA FASO
                                                                           Reference                                                                                                   Financial scheduling and
                                                                                                                      Overall                                                              Implementation
                                                                         document and      Contribution Preparation                                           Funding
N°                                        Action title                                                              action cost
                                                                          beneficiary      to resilience   stage                                              sources                PO-PT1             PO-PT2             PO-PT3
                                                                                                                      (USD)
                                                                            country                                                                                                   2016-18           2019-21            2022-24

                         Rehabilitation of the dam and creation of 192
                                                                         PO_R1 Burkina                                                                     Identification
PO_R12105_BF_08          ha of irrigated land downstream of the Sidi-                            3                   5                 3 290 756                                       99%                 1%                 0%
                                                                         Faso                                                                                on-going
                         KompIenga dam (Gnagna, East)
                         Development of irrigated crops in the
                                                                         NAPA Burkina                                                                      Identification
PNA_BF_7                 provinces of Gourma, Namemtenga, Tapoa                                  3                   2                    443 300                                      98%                 2%                 0%
                                                                         Faso                                                                                on-going
                         and Sanmatenga.
                    Rehabilitation of the dam and 14 ha of                                                                                                      30%
                                                                         PO_R1 Burkina
PO_R12104_BF_06__07 irrigated utilised agricultural land equipped                                3                   5                 1 363 025             identified -              97%                 3%                 0%
                                                                         Faso
                    with 50 wells at Dabesma (Gnagna, East)                                                                                                   PIDACC
                         Development and management of the               NAPA Burkina                                                                      Identification
PNA_BF_3                                                                                         3                   2                    275 000                                      96%                 4%                 0%
                         waterhole at Oursi                              Faso                                                                                on-going
                         Safeguarding pastoral areas in the regions of NAPA Burkina                                                                        Identification
PNA_BF_8                                                                                         3                   2                    300 000                                      94%                 6%                 0%
                         the Sahel and the East.                       Faso                                                                                  on-going
                         Safeguarding of agricultural production by
                         the use of appropriate technological            NAPA Burkina                                                                      Identification
PNA_BF_9                                                                                         3                   2                    297 924                                      85%                15%                 0%
                         packages in the South-West and East             Faso                                                                                on-going
                         regions.
                         Construction of the Coalla dam (5 Mm3) in                                                                                              50%
                                                                         PO_R1 Burkina
PO_R12126_BF_04_05       the province of Gnagna (East) and                                       3                   5                 5 749 580             identified -              82%                18%                 0%
                                                                         Faso
                         preparation of 122 ha of irrigated land                                                                                              PIDACC
                    Completion of the construction of the
                                                                                                                                                                20%
                    Bambakari dam (163 Mm3) in the province of PO_R1 Burkina
PO_R12125_BF_01__02                                                                              3                   5               31 751 261              identified -              72%                28%                 0%
                    Déno (Sahel) and preparation of 300ha of   Faso
                                                                                                                                                              PIDACC
                    irrigated land
                         Promotion of energy-saving equipment
                         (improved stoves, M'Bora stew pot) and          NAPA Burkina                                                                      Identification
PNA_BF_12                                                                                        3                   2                 1 230 000                                       68%                32%                 0%
                         renewable energy technologies (pressure         Faso                                                                                on-going
                         cooker, water heater and solar dryers, etc.)
PO_R2113_BF_18           Forest development in the provinces of          PO_R2 Burkina           3                   2                 1 712 605                  10%                  54%                46%                 0%


                                                                                                      d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

                      Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
     Appendixes                                                                                                                                                                                                              85



                                                                                                                        Reference                                                                   Financial scheduling and
                                                                                                                                                                      Overall                           Implementation
                                                                                                                      document and         Contribution Preparation                 Funding
N°                                                               Action title                                                                                       action cost
                                                                                                                       beneficiary         to resilience   stage                    sources        PO-PT1    PO-PT2    PO-PT3
                                                                                                                                                                      (USD)
                                                                                                                         country                                                                   2016-18   2019-21   2022-24
                                     Oudalan and Séno                                                               Faso                                                           identified -
                                                                                                                                                                                    UEMOA
                                     Development, rational management of
                                     natural training and use of non-wood forest                                    NAPA Burkina                                                  Identification
PNA_BF_5                                                                                                                                        3            2          700 000                     52%       48%       0%
                                     products (NWFP) in the East region of                                          Faso                                                            on-going
                                     Burkina Faso
                                                                                                                                                                                      0%
                                                                                                                    PO_R1 Burkina
PO_R12205_BF_29                      Development of the waterhole in Dori                                                                       3            2       86 301 389    identified -     51%       49%       0%
                                                                                                                    Faso
                                                                                                                                                                                    PIDACC
                                     Reduction of vulnerability to climate change
                                     by enhancing measures for prevention and                                       NAPA Burkina                                                  Identification
PNA_BF_1                                                                                                                                        3            2        7 446 000                     49%       28%       23%
                                     management of food crises in the Oursi and                                     Faso                                                            on-going
                                     Boulsa zones.
                                                                                                                                                                                      40%
                                                                                                                    PO_R1 Burkina
PO_R12107_BF_20                      Rehabilitation of the Kiemna dam                                                                           3            4          334 454    identified -     47%       53%       0%
                                                                                                                    Faso
                                                                                                                                                                                    PIDACC
                                                                                                                                                                                      20%
                                                                                                                    PO_R1 Burkina
PO_R12108_BF_21                      Rehabilitation of the Bani dam                                                                             3            5          768 252    identified -     46%       54%       0%
                                                                                                                    Faso
                                                                                                                                                                                    PIDACC
                                                                                                                                                                                      40%
                                                                                                                    PO_R1 Burkina
PO_R12111_BF_24                      Rehabilitation of the Boudieri dam                                                                         3            5        1 351 261    identified -     42%       58%       0%
                                                                                                                    Faso
                                                                                                                                                                                    PIDACC
                                     Creation of 241 ha of irrigated land at the                                    PO_R1 Burkina                                                 Identification
PO_R12127_BF_09                                                                                                                                 3            5        3 448 739                     42%       58%       0%
                                     SIRBA dam (Gnagna, East)                                                       Faso                                                            on-going
                                                                                                                                                                                      40%
                                                                                                                    PO_R1 Burkina
PO_R12109_BF_22                      Rehabilitation of the Touro dam                                                                            3            5        1 568 067    identified -     41%       59%       0%
                                                                                                                    Faso
                                                                                                                                                                                    PIDACC
                                     Development of research activities in water
                                                                                  NC PAGIRE                                                                                       Identification
CN_BF_4_PAGIRE3.2                    management, more particularly in the context                                                               3            2        5 245 771                     40%       30%       30%
                                                                                  Burkina Faso                                                                                      on-going
                                     of adaptation to climate change


     d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

     Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
       86                                                                                                                                                                                                          Appendixes



                                                                           Reference                                                                                                   Financial scheduling and
                                                                                                                      Overall                                                              Implementation
                                                                         document and      Contribution Preparation                                           Funding
N°                                        Action title                                                              action cost
                                                                          beneficiary      to resilience   stage                                              sources                PO-PT1             PO-PT2             PO-PT3
                                                                                                                      (USD)
                                                                            country                                                                                                   2016-18           2019-21            2022-24

                         Stabilisation of 2,500 ha of dunes in the      PO_R2 Burkina                                                                      Identification
PO_R22237_BF_15                                                                                  3                   2                 2 831 933                                       38%                62%                 0%
                         provinces of Oudalan, Séno and Yagha           Faso                                                                                 on-going
                                                                                                                                                                50%
                         Restoration of land and anti-erosion           PO_R2 Burkina
PO_R22212_BF_15                                                                                  3                   2                 7 078 992             identified -              36%                64%                 0%
                         measures                                       Faso
                                                                                                                                                              PIDACC
                         Recovery of 6,191 ha of degraded land in                                                                                               10%
                                                                        PO_R2 Burkina
PO_R22204_BF_17          Séno and Oudalan (restoration of land                                   3                   2                 3 828 571             identified -              33%                67%                 0%
                                                                        Faso
                         (Restoration of land, studies)                                                                                                       UEMOA
                         Safeguarding of cereal production by the
                                                                        NAPA Burkina                                                                       Identification
PNA_BF_2                 promotion of supplementary irrigation in the                            3                   2                    408 660                                      33%                66%                 0%
                                                                        Faso                                                                                 on-going
                         provinces of Oudalan and Nammemtenga.
                         Promotion of wildlife and habitat
                                                                        NAPA Burkina                                                                       Identification
PNA_BF_10                management by local communities in the                                  2                   2                    810 000                                      24%                76%                 0%
                                                                        Faso                                                                                 on-going
                         region of Mouhoun
                    Rehabilitation of the dam and creation of 11
                    ha of irrigated utilised agricultural land and                                                                                              40%
                                                                        PO_R1 Burkina
PO_R12106_BF_10__11 preparation of 100 ha of horticultural land at                               3                   5                 1 885 714             identified -              24%                76%                 0%
                                                                        Faso
                    Tanga (Kouritenga, Centre-East) equipped                                                                                                  PIDACC
                    with 50 wells
                         Improve water resource protection against      NC PAGIRE                                                                          Identification
CN_BF_5_PAGIRE4.2                                                                                3                   2               16 837 232                                        21%                44%                35%
                         siltation and invasive species                 Burkina Faso                                                                         on-going
                         Forage production and stockpiling of
                                                                        NAPA Burkina                                                                       Identification
PNA_BF_4                 emergency supplies for cattle in the Burkina                            3                   2                    330 000                                     100%                 0%                 0%
                                                                        Faso                                                                                 on-going
                         Faso area of the Sahel
                    Rehabilitation of the Baskouré dam and                                                                                                      30%
                                                                        PO_R1 Burkina
PO_R12103_BF_03__28 preparation of 60 hectares of lowlands in the                                3                   5                 1 452 101             identified -             100%                 0%                 0%
                                                                        Faso
                    municipalities of Baskouré, Diabo and Fada                                                                                                PIDACC
                         Creation of a palm grove covering 100 ha
                                                                        PO_R1 Burkina                                                                      Identification
PO_R1251_BF_13           along the Gourouol in the province of                                   1                   5                 1 741 176                                        0%                44%                56%
                                                                        Faso                                                                                 on-going
                         Oudalan


                                                                                                      d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

                      Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
     Appendixes                                                                                                                                                                                                              87



                                                                                                                        Reference                                                                   Financial scheduling and
                                                                                                                                                                      Overall                           Implementation
                                                                                                                      document and         Contribution Preparation                 Funding
N°                                                               Action title                                                                                       action cost
                                                                                                                       beneficiary         to resilience   stage                    sources        PO-PT1    PO-PT2    PO-PT3
                                                                                                                                                                      (USD)
                                                                                                                         country                                                                   2016-18   2019-21   2022-24

                                     Equipment and improvement of knowledge
                                     concerning the quality of the water resources                                                                                                    60%
                                                                                                                    PO_R2 Burkina
PO_R21201_BF__34                     (Materials and equipment, Improvement of                                                                   3            2          707 563    identified -     0%       100%       0%
                                                                                                                    Faso
                                     knowledge of the quality of the water                                                                                                          PIDACC
                                     resources)
                                     Bukina Faso National Observatory on                                            PNA Burkina                                                   Identification
CN_BF_3                              Pastoralism (ONPB)                                                             Faso
                                                                                                                                                3            2        3 294 682
                                                                                                                                                                                    on-going
                                                                                                                                                                                                    N/A       N/A      100%

                                     Climate insurance project for farmers                                          PNA Burkina                                                   Identification
CN_BF_4                                                                                                             Faso
                                                                                                                                                3            2       22 438 361
                                                                                                                                                                                    on-going
                                                                                                                                                                                                    N/A       N/A      100%
                                     (PACE)
                                     Project to set up three areas for the
                                                                                                                    PNA Burkina                                                   Identification
CN_BF_5                              intensification of animal production                                           Faso
                                                                                                                                                3            2       41 143 764
                                                                                                                                                                                    on-going
                                                                                                                                                                                                    N/A       N/A      100%
                                     (ZIPA)
                                     Development of a sound national Water                                          NC PAGIRE                                                     Identification
CN_BF_3_PAGIRE3.1                                                                                                                               3            2       16 464 951                     N/A       N/A      100%
                                     Information System (WIS)                                                       Burkina Faso                                                    on-going




     d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

     Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
     88                                                                                                                                                                                                         Appendixes



     CAMEROON
                                                                         Reference                                                 Overall                                         Financial scheduling and
                                                                       document and    Contribution Preparation                    action                Funding                       Implementation
N°                                      Action title
                                                                        beneficiary    to resilience   stage                        cost                 sources                PO-PT1              PO-PT2             PO-PT3
                                                                          country                                                  (USD)                                         2016-18            2019-21             2022-24

                          Enhancement and safeguarding of
                          access to water resources and                                                                                               Identification
PNACC_CAM_13                                                          PNACC Cameroon          3                   2               8 880 000                                       88%                 12%                 0%
                          wastewater treatment in a context of                                                                                          on-going
                          climate change
                          Setting up a system for observation,
                          information management and warning                                                                                          Identification
PNACC_CAM_1                                                           PNACC Cameroon          3                   2               2 220 000                                       72%                 28%                 0%
                          with regard to climate hazards in                                                                                             on-going
                          Cameroon
                          Adaptation of the national gender
                                                                                                                                                      Identification
PNACC_CAM_10              policy and their vulnerability to climate   PNACC Cameroon          3                   2               2 220 000                                       72%                 28%                 0%
                                                                                                                                                        on-going
                          change
                          Raising the awareness of the
                          population, professionals,
                                                                                                                                                      Identification
PNACC_CAM_4               administration and decision-makers to       PNACC Cameroon          3                   2               2 220 000                                       72%                 28%                 0%
                                                                                                                                                        on-going
                          the effects of climate change and the
                          measures to be taken
                          Inclusion of climate hazards when                                                                                           Identification
PNACC_CAM_3                                                           PNACC Cameroon          1                   2               3 330 000                                       68%                 32%                 0%
                          updating the Land Use Plan                                                                                                    on-going
                          Reduction of the vulnerability of the
                                                                                                                                                      Identification
PNACC_CAM_17              livestock sector to the effects of          PNACC Cameroon          3                   2               5 550 000                                       65%                 35%                 0%
                                                                                                                                                        on-going
                          climate change (REVEECC))
                          Reduction of the effects of climate                                                                                         Identification
PNACC_CAM_18                                                          PNACC Cameroon          3                   2               3 330 000                                       65%                 35%                 0%
                          change on the fisheries sector                                                                                                on-going
                          Reduction of the vulnerability of
                                                                                                                                                      Identification
PNACC_CAM_19              forests to climate change in                PNACC Cameroon          3                   2               8 880 000                                       65%                 35%                 0%
                                                                                                                                                        on-going
                          Cameroon
                          Strengthening the shared
                                                                                                                                                      Identification
PO_R21215_CAM_17          management of natural resources in          PO_R2 Cameroon          1                   2               1 260 504                                       54%                 46%                 0%
                                                                                                                                                        on-going
                          the national part of the Niger Basin
PNACC_CAM_16              Development of integrated farming           PNACC Cameroon          3                   2               8 880 000 Identification                        51%                 49%                 0%


                                                                                                   d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

                   Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
     Appendixes                                                                                                                                                                                                                89



                                                                                                                      Reference                                       Overall                       Financial scheduling and
                                                                                                                    document and           Contribution Preparation   action        Funding             Implementation
N°                                                                 Action title
                                                                                                                     beneficiary           to resilience   stage       cost         sources        PO-PT1    PO-PT2    PO-PT3
                                                                                                                       country                                        (USD)                        2016-18   2019-21   2022-24
                                             which is resilient to the effects of                                                                                                   on-going
                                             climate change
                                             Protection of the resources and
                                                                                                                                                                                  Identification
PO_R2211_CAM_16                              ecosystems in the national part of the                              PO_R2 Cameroon                 1            2        8 438 655                     27%       73%       0%
                                                                                                                                                                                    on-going
                                             Niger Basin
                                                                                                                                                                                      20%
                                             Support for fishermen and fish-
PO_R12304_CAM_08                                                                                                 PO_R1 Cameroon                 2            5        4 752 941    identified -     21%       79%       0%
                                             farmers around the Lagdo dam
                                                                                                                                                                                    PIDACC
                                             Education, professional training and
                                                                                                                                                                                  Identification
PNACC_CAM_6                                  enhancement of capabilities                                         PNACC Cameroon                 3            2        5 550 000                     19%       45%       36%
                                                                                                                                                                                    on-going
                                             concerning climate change
                                             Diversification of the energy offer in a                                                                                   22 200 Identification
PNACC_CAM_12                                                                                                     PNACC Cameroon                 3            2                                      17%       45%       38%
                                             context of climate change                                                                                                     000   on-going
                                             Development of the Mayo–Louti
                                                                                                                                                                                  Identification
PO_R22205_CAM_9                              catchment area (restoration of land,                                PO_R2 Cameroon                 3            5        3 257 143                     7%        93%       0%
                                                                                                                                                                                    on-going
                                             studies)
                                             Conservation and participatory
                                             management of sub-watersheds                                                                                               12 169 Identification
PO_R22206_CAM_13                                                                                                 PO_R2 Cameroon                 3            2                                      7%        93%       0%
                                             (support for protection, studies and                                                                                          748   on-going
                                             enhancement of capacities)
PO_R1241_CAM_14                              Provision for the fight against aquatic                             PO_R1 Cameroon
                                                                                                                                                                                      60%
                                             invasive species in Cameroon, Ivory
                                                                                                                                                3            2        4 192 347    identified -     7%        56%       37%
                                             Coast and Nigeria (30 000 ha + 5000
                                                                                                                                                                                    PIDACC
                                             ha + 2500 m3)
                                             Construction of hydro-agricultural
                                                                                                                                                                                      10%
                                             dams, development and utilisation of
PO_R12129_CAM_02                                                                                                 PO_R1 Cameroon                 3            2        2 813 445    identified -     5%        95%       0%
                                             the Garoua area upstream (Bocklé,
                                                                                                                                                                                    PIDACC
                                             Garoua III, Bénoué department)
                                             Development and utilisation of the                                                                                         74 386 Identification
PO_R12130_CAM_03                                                                                                 PO_R1 Cameroon                 3            4                                      5%        95%       0%
                                             Lagdo II area                                                                                                                 555   on-going



     d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

     Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
     90                                                                                                                                                                                                         Appendixes



                                                                      Reference                                                    Overall                                         Financial scheduling and
                                                                    document and       Contribution Preparation                    action                Funding                       Implementation
N°                                      Action title
                                                                     beneficiary       to resilience   stage                        cost                 sources                PO-PT1              PO-PT2             PO-PT3
                                                                       country                                                     (USD)                                         2016-18            2019-21             2022-24

                          Development and utilisation of the                                                                           21 581 Identification
PO_R12131_CAM_04                                                  PO_R1 Cameroon              3                   4                                                                5%                 95%                 0%
                          Faro-Bénoué confluence area                                                                                     513   on-going
                                                                                                                                       13 361 Identification
PO_R12133_CAM_06          Development of the west Garoua area     PO_R1 Cameroon              3                   4                                                                5%                 95%                 0%
                                                                                                                                          345   on-going
                                                                                                                                                           10%
PO_R12134_CAM_07          Development of small individual areas   PO_R1 Cameroon              3                   4               7 517 647             identified -               5%                 95%                 0%
                                                                                                                                                         PIDACC
                          Development of smallholders irrigation                                                                       62 512 Identification
PO_R12132_CAM_05                                                 PO_R1 Cameroon               3                   4                                                                5%                 57%                38%
                          schemes                                                                                                         605   on-going
PO_R12136_CAM_12          Construction of multipurpose dams       PO_R1 Cameroon                                                                           20%
                                                                                              3                   2               4 872 269             identified -               2%                 69%                29%
                                                                                                                                                         PIDACC




                                                                                                   d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

                   Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
      Appendixes                                                                                                                                                                                                          91



      IVORY COAST
                                                                                                                                 Reference                                                                   Financial scheduling and
                                                                                                                                                                               Overall                           Implementation
                                                                                                                               document and       Contribution Preparation                   Funding
N°                                                                    Action title                                                                                           action cost
                                                                                                                                beneficiary       to resilience   stage                      sources        PO-PT1    PO-PT2    PO-PT3
                                                                                                                                                                               (USD)
                                                                                                                                  country                                                                   2016-18   2019-21    2022-24

                                                                                                                                                                                           60% identified
PO_R12305_CI_01                       Creation of a fish farm in Minignan                                                   PO_R1 Ivory Coast          2            4            206 723                    100%        0%        0%
                                                                                                                                                                                             - PIDACC
                                      Development of adaptation and water resource                                                                                                         60% identified
PO_R2316_CI_28                                                                                                              PO_R2 Ivory Coast          3            2            452 101                     94%        6%        0%
                                      management tools                                                                                                                                       - PIDACC
                                      Mark out and display protection areas around the                                      NC - PND Ivory                                                 Identification
CN_CI_6                                                                                                                                                3            2          1 015 310                     91%        9%        0%
                                      main water resources                                                                  Coast                                                            on-going
                                      Performance of work to restore the forests in the                                     NC - DCDF Ivory                                                Identification
CN_CI_12_DCDF                                                                                                                                          3            2          1 300 000                     90%       10%        0%
                                      rural sector                                                                          Coast                                                            on-going
                                      Restoration project for degraded forests in the                                       NC - PND Ivory                                                 Identification
CN_CI_4                                                                                                                                                3            2          1 086 213                     90%       10%        0%
                                      rural sector                                                                          Coast                                                            on-going
                                      Project to support communities in the savannah
                                                                                                                            NC - Management
                                      area for protection against desertification and the                                                                                                  Identification
CN_CI_1                                                                                                                     of community               3            2          1 710 327                     83%       17%        0%
                                      loss of the means of subsistence of the local                                                                                                          on-going
                                                                                                                            forests Ivory Coast
                                      communities.
                                      Project to plant useful forest trees in the
                                                                                                                            NC - PND Ivory                                                 Identification
CN_CI_2                               communities of the regions of Poro, Tchologo                                                                     3            2          1 297 905                     78%       22%        0%
                                                                                                                            Coast                                                            on-going
                                      and Bagoué
                                      Develop models for the allocation of the water                                        NC - PND Ivory                                                 Identification
CN_CI_7                                                                                                                                                3            2          1 184 529                     71%       26%        3%
                                      resources of river basin agencies                                                     Coast                                                            on-going
                                      Rehabilitation of 84 reservoirs in the region of                                                                                                     50% identified
PO_R12113_CI_20                                                                                                             PO_R1 Ivory Coast          3            2          1 100 840                     62%       38%        0%
                                      Bagoue and Kabadougou                                                                                                                                  - PIDACC
PO_R12307_CI_24                       Development of fisheries infrastructure                                               PO_R1 Ivory Coast                                              60% identified
                                                                                                                                                       2            2          1 030 252                     62%       38%        0%
                                      Aménagement des infrastructures de pêche                                                                                                               - PIDACC
                                                                                                                            NC - AGIR Ivory                                                Identification
CN_CI_9                               Support the fight against bushfires                                                                              3            2          3 578 969                     55%       45%        0%
                                                                                                                            Coast                                                            on-going
                                      Fight against the impacts of gold-mining on the                                                                                                      Identification
PO_R22211_CI_22                                                                                                             PO_R2 Ivory Coast          3            2            349 580                     54%       46%        0%
                                      environment and health                                                                                                                                 on-going



      d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

      Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
      92                                                                                                                                                                                                       Appendixes



                                                                            Reference                                                                                                                 Financial scheduling and
                                                                                                                                              Overall                                                     Implementation
                                                                          document and       Contribution Preparation                                                    Funding
N°                                      Action title                                                                                        action cost
                                                                           beneficiary       to resilience   stage                                                       sources                   PO-PT1               PO-PT2          PO-PT3
                                                                                                                                              (USD)
                                                                             country                                                                                                               2016-18              2019-21         2022-24

                                                                                                                                                                     60% identified
PO_R2315_CI_27       Enhancement of communities' ability to adapt        PO_R2 Ivory Coast         1                        2                       352 941                                          54%                  46%            0%
                                                                                                                                                                       - PIDACC
                     Enhance the resilience of vulnerable populations
                                                                         NC - PND Ivory                                                                               Identification
CN_CI_3              by restoring degraded land (agroforestry and                                  3                        2                    8 579 373                                           52%                  48%            0%
                                                                         Coast                                                                                          on-going
                     community reforestation)
                     Restore degraded land through the promotion of      NC - AGIR Ivory                                                                              Identification
CN_CI_8                                                                                            3                        2                    8 577 681                                           52%                  48%            0%
                     agroforestry and community reforestation            Coast                                                                                          on-going
                     Projet de construction de barrage et                                                                                                            60% identified
PO_R12140_CI_06                                                          PO_R1 Ivory Coast         3                        2                    3 215 126                                            5%                  58%            37%
                     d‟aménagement hydroagricole à BAYA 22ha                                                                                                           - PIDACC
                     Restoration and protection of the tributaries of the
                                                                                                                                                                     60% identified
PO_R22210_CI_21      Niger River by reforestation campaigns and anti- PO_R2 Ivory Coast            3                        2                    1 297 479                                           46%                  54%            0%
                                                                                                                                                                       - PIDACC
                     erosion and anti-silting measures
                     Support for management of the pastoral area and                                                                                                 60% identified
PO_R12206_CI_03                                                      PO_R1 Ivory Coast             3                        2                    1 863 866                                           43%                  57%            0%
                     prevention of conflicts in the northern area                                                                                                      - PIDACC
                     Support for the development of fishing activities                                                                                               60% identified
PO_R12306_CI_02                                                          PO_R1 Ivory Coast         2                        3                    2 942 857                                           43%                  57%            0%
                     around dams (Boundiali, Minignan and Odienné)                                                                                                     - PIDACC
                                                                                                                                                                      Identification
PO_R2314_CI_26       Flood protection                                    PO_R2 Ivory Coast         3                        2                    1 307 563                                           42%                  58%            0%
                                                                                                                                                                        on-going
                     Protection of the basin (Departments of Odienné,
                     Boundiali, Madinani, Minignan and Tengréla) /                                                                                                    Identification
PO_R22207_CI_14                                                          PO_R2 Ivory Coast         3                        2                    1 931 092                                           39%                  61%            0%
                     Treatment of degraded land for the protection of                                                                                                   on-going
                     the banks
                                                                                                                                                                      Identification
PO_R22209_CI_18      "One School, 5 hectares of forest" project          PO_R2 Ivory Coast         3                        6                    3 721 008                                           37%                  63%            0%
                                                                                                                                                                        on-going
                     Enhancement of the ability to adapt and                                                                                                          Identification
PO_R2311_CI_29                                                           PO_R2 Ivory Coast         1                        2                    2 110 924                                           33%                  67%            0%
                     intervene                                                                                                                                          on-going
                     Low-cost development of 10,000 ha of plains in                                                                                                   Identification
PO_R12139_CI_05                                                          PO_R1 Ivory Coast         3                        2                  56 003 361                                             2%                  59%            39%
                     Kabadougou and Folon (north-west)                                                                                                                  on-going
PO_R12144_CI_10      Low-cost development of 20,000 ha of Bagoué         PO_R1 Ivory Coast         3                        2                106 198 319 90% identified                               2%                  59%            39%

                                                                                                  d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

                  Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
       Appendixes                                                                                                                                                                                                        93



                                                                                                                                  Reference                                                                 Financial scheduling and
                                                                                                                                                                              Overall                           Implementation
                                                                                                                                document and     Contribution Preparation                   Funding
N°                                                                     Action title                                                                                         action cost
                                                                                                                                 beneficiary     to resilience   stage                      sources        PO-PT1    PO-PT2    PO-PT3
                                                                                                                                                                              (USD)
                                                                                                                                   country                                                                 2016-18   2019-21    2022-24
                                       floodplains                                                                                                                                        - Etat 10%, 3
                                                                                                                                                                                            bailleurs à
                                                                                                                                                                                          30% chacun
                                                                                                                                                                                              100%
                                                                                                                                                                                            identified -
                                       Project for the construction of a dam and                                                                                                             PIDACC
PO_R12141_CI_07                                                                                                              PO_R1 Ivory Coast        3            2          2 952 941                     18%       82%        0%
                                       hydroagricultural development at KOUBAN 80ha                                                                                                        56%, BOAD
                                                                                                                                                                                            30% , Etat
                                                                                                                                                                                               15%
                                                                                                                                                                                          70% identified
                                       Project for the construction of a dam and                                                                                                            - PIDACC
PO_R12142_CI_08                                                                                                              PO_R1 Ivory Coast        3            2          3 524 370                     18%       82%        0%
                                       hydroagricultural development at Katiendé 22ha                                                                                                       56%, Etat
                                                                                                                                                                                               15%
                                                                                                                                                                                        70% identified
                                       Project for the construction of a dam and
                                                                                                                                                                                          - PIDACC
PO_R12143_CI_09                        hydroagricultural development at Dimbasso. 182                                        PO_R1 Ivory Coast        3            2          5 835 294                     18%       82%        0%
                                                                                                                                                                                          56%, Etat
                                       ha
                                                                                                                                                                                             15%
PO_R22208_CI_15                        Promotion and development of reforestation in                                         PO_R2 Ivory Coast                                            10% identified
                                                                                                                                                      3            2          1 495 798                     0%        100%       0%
                                       the North of the country (wood energy)                                                                                                               - PIDACC
                   Rehabilitation of the classified forest of
                   BOUNDIALI in the north of Ivory Coast with the                                                            NC - SODEFOR                                                 Identification
CN_CI_10_SODEFOR_1                                                                                                                                    3            2          1 718 098                     N/A        N/A      100%
                   participation of the neighbouring populations (as                                                         Ivory Coast                                                    on-going
                   for PO_R22208_CI_15)
                   Rehabilitation of the classified forest of
                   FENGOLO - PALE in the north of Ivory Coast                                                                NC - SODEFOR                                                 Identification
CN_CI_11_SODEFOR_2                                                                                                                                    3            2          1 065 560                     N/A        N/A      100%
                   with the participation of the neighbouring                                                                Ivory Coast                                                    on-going
                   populations (as for PO_R22208_CI_15)




       d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

       Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
       94                                                                                                                                                                                                         Appendixes



       GUINEA
                                                                                                                                 Overall                                            Financial scheduling and
                                                                         Reference                                                                                                      Implementation
                                                                                         Contribution Preparation                action                 Funding
N°                                  Action title                       document and
                                                                                         to resilience   stage                    cost                  sources                 PO-PT1               PO-PT2              PO-PT3
                                                                     beneficiary country
                                                                                                                                 (USD)                                           2016-18             2019-21             2022-24

                                                                                                                                                     Identification
PANA_GN_18          Construction of improved wells                   NAPA Guinea              3                 2                  250 000                                        100%                  0%                  0%
                                                                                                                                                       on-going
                    Dissemination of rainwater harvesting                                                                                            Identification
PANA_GN_20                                                           NAPA Guinea              3                 2                  280 000                                        100%                  0%                  0%
                    basins                                                                                                                             on-going
                    Development of irrigated rice farming in                                                                                         Identification
PANA_GN_22                                                           NAPA Guinea              3                 2                  300 000                                        100%                  0%                  0%
                    Middle and Upper Guinea                                                                                                            on-going
                                                                                                                                                     Identification
PANA_GN_23          Promotion of breeding small ruminants            NAPA Guinea              3                 2                  325 000                                        100%                  0%                  0%
                                                                                                                                                       on-going
                                                                                                                                                     Identification
PANA_GN_24          Promotion of market gardening                    NAPA Guinea              3                 2                  250 000                                        100%                  0%                  0%
                                                                                                                                                       on-going
                    Creation of cane rat ranches in order to
                                                                                                                                                     Identification
PANA_GN_25          reduce bushfires and improve living              NAPA Guinea              3                 2                  300 000                                        100%                  0%                  0%
                                                                                                                                                       on-going
                    conditions for rural populations
                    Exploitation of indigenous knowledge and                                                                                         Identification
PANA_GN_3                                                            NAPA Guinea              3                 2                  300 000                                        100%                  0%                  0%
                    positive practices                                                                                                                 on-going
                    Promotion of the use of solar energy to dry
                                                                                                                                                     Identification
PANA_GN_6           fish with the aim of reducing the use of    NAPA Guinea                   3                 2                  300 000                                        100%                  0%                  0%
                                                                                                                                                       on-going
                    wood for smoking
                    Promotion of bricks made of compacted
                                                                                                                                                     Identification
PANA_GN_7           earth with the aim of reducing the               NAPA Guinea              3                 2                  600 000                                        100%                  0%                  0%
                                                                                                                                                       on-going
                    environmental impact of fired bricks
                    Intensification of pearl millet farming in the                                                                                   Identification
PANA_GN_8                                                            NAPA Guinea              3                 2                  350 000                                        100%                  0%                  0%
                    northern area of Guinea                                                                                                            on-going
                    Improvement of knowledge of water
                    resources and enhancement of the                                                                                                 Identification
PO_R21203_GUI_18                                                     PO_R2 Guinea             3                 2                  756 303                                        100%                  0%                  0%
                    hydrometeorological and hydrogeological                                                                                            on-going
                    data collection system
PO_R22214_GUI_17 Reforestation of 300 ha on the banks of             PO_R2 Guinea             3                 2                  354 622                  60%                   100%                  0%                  0%


                                                                                                     d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

                     Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
       Appendixes                                                                                                                                                                                                  95



                                                                                                                                                          Overall                       Financial scheduling and
                                                                                                               Reference                                                                    Implementation
                                                                                                                               Contribution Preparation   action        Funding
N°                                                        Action title                                       document and
                                                                                                                               to resilience   stage       cost         sources        PO-PT1    PO-PT2    PO-PT3
                                                                                                           beneficiary country
                                                                                                                                                          (USD)                        2016-18   2019-21   2022-24
                                waterholes                                                                                                                             identified -
                                                                                                                                                                        PIDACC
                                Support for the implementation of                                                                                                     Identification
PANA_GN_2                                                                                                  NAPA Guinea                       3   2         600 000                      84%       16%        0%
                                community forest management plans                                                                                                       on-going
                                Rendering surface water drinkable using                                                                                               Identification
PANA_GN_19                                                                                                 NAPA Guinea                       3   2         320 000                      78%       22%        0%
                                Hydropur©                                                                                                                               on-going
                                Support to community and private anacard                                                                                              Identification
PANA_GN_1                                                                NAPA Guinea                                                         3   2         600 000                      76%       24%        0%
                                tree planting                                                                                                                           on-going
                                Development of an early warning system                                                                                                Identification
PANA_GN_11                                                                                                 NAPA Guinea                       3   2         150 000                      68%       28%        4%
                                to safeguard agricultural productivity                                                                                                  on-going
                                                                                                                                                                          60%
                                Restoration of the banks and development
PO_R22213_GUI_16                                                         PO_R2 Guinea                                                        3   2        1 368 067    identified -     63%       37%        0%
                                of agroforestry
                                                                                                                                                                        PIDACC
                                                                                                                                                                          60%
PO_R2317_GUI_22                 Adaptation to climate change (flooding)                                    PO_R2 Guinea                      1   2        1 179 832    identified -     58%       42%        0%
                                                                                                                                                                        PIDACC
                                                                                                                                                                          60%
                                Implementation of the Kankan wildlife
PO_R2242_GUI_13                                                                                            PO_R2 Guinea                      2   2        2 100 840    identified -     56%       44%        0%
                                reserve management plan
                                                                                                                                                                        PIDACC
                                Promotion of fire management and                                                                                                      Identification
PANA_GN_12                                                                                                 NAPA Guinea                       3   2         300 000                      55%       45%        0%
                                prohibited access                                                                                                                       on-going
                                                                                                                                                                          60%
PO_R12308_GUI_11 Construction of nursery ponds to rear fry                                                 PO_R1 Guinea                      2   3         282 353     identified -     54%       46%        0%
                                                                                                                                                                        PIDACC
                                                                                                                                                                          60%
PO_R12309_GUI_12 Construction of fish ponds in Guinea                                                      PO_R1 Guinea                      2   3         759 664     identified -     54%       46%        0%
                                                                                                                                                                        PIDACC

PO_R22230_GUI_19 Protection of spring heads and banks                                                      PO_R2 Guinea                      3   2         695 798        60%           47%       53%        0%
                 (sub-watersheds of the Niandan, Tinkisso,                                                                                                             identified -


       d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

       Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
       96                                                                                                                                                                                                          Appendixes



                                                                                                                                  Overall                                            Financial scheduling and
                                                                     Reference                                                                                                           Implementation
                                                                                     Contribution Preparation                     action                 Funding
N°                                    Action title                 document and
                                                                                     to resilience   stage                         cost                  sources                 PO-PT1               PO-PT2              PO-PT3
                                                                 beneficiary country
                                                                                                                                  (USD)                                           2016-18             2019-21             2022-24
                      Milo)                                                                                                                              PIDACC
                      Preservation of the ecosystems and                                                                                                   60%
PO_R2231_GUI_20       conservation of biodiversity (Ramsar -     PO_R2 Guinea                 3                  2                  932 773             identified -                47%                 53%                  0%
                      Niger, Niandan –Milo, Niger-Mafou,)                                                                                                PIDACC
                                                                                                                                                      Identification
PANA_GN_16            Construction of multi-purpose mini-dams    NAPA Guinea                  3                  2                  600 000                                         40%                 60%                  0%
                                                                                                                                                        on-going
                                                                                                                                                      Identification
PANA_GN_17            Construction of hillside reservoirs        NAPA Guinea                  3                  2                  180 000                                         40%                 60%                  0%
                                                                                                                                                        on-going
                      Support for the development of
                                                                                                                                                           50%
                      collaborative management of the Tinkisso,
PO_R2132_GUI_14                                                 PO_R2 Guinea                  1                  2                  425 210             identified -                37%                 63%                  0%
                      Niger- Tinkisso and Sankarani - Fié
                                                                                                                                                         PIDACC
                      Ramsar sites
PO_R11204_GUI_01                                                                                                                                           50%
                 Fomi safeguard policies elaboration             PO_R1 Guinea                 3                  3               2 000 000                                           2%                 39%                 59%
(extrait)                                                                                                                                               identified -
                 Rehabilitation of dams and construction of
                                                                                                                                                           60%
                 reservoirs for irrigation and fish farming at
PO_R12115_GUI_06                                                 PO_R1 Guinea                 3                  4               9 132 773              identified -                 0%                 27%                 73%
                 Kankan, Kouroussa, Mandiana, Faranah,
                                                                                                                                                         PIDACC
                 Dinguiraye, Kérouané and Kissidougou.




                                                                                                      d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

                      Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
      Appendixes                                                                                                                                                                                                              97



      MALI
                                                                                                                                       Reference                                                                 Financial scheduling and
                                                                                                                                                                                    Overall                          Implementation
                                                                                                                                     document and   Contribution    Preparation                   Funding
N°                                                                          Action title                                                                                          action cost
                                                                                                                                      beneficiary   to resilience      stage                      sources        PO-PT1    PO-PT2    PO-PT3
                                                                                                                                                                                    (USD)
                                                                                                                                        country                                                                  2016-18   2019-21   2022-24

                                                                                                                                    NC PNSFN                                                    Identification
CN_MLI_45_PNSFN_26                         Pollution warning station on the Niger River                                                                  2              2             177 679                    100%       0%        0%
                                                                                                                                    Mali                                                          on-going
                                           Feasibility study of small developments in the tops
                                                                                                                                    NC PNSFN                                                    Identification
CN_MLI_53_ PNSFN_34                        of the sub-watersheds of the upper stretches of the                                                           3              2             813 941                    100%       0%        0%
                                                                                                                                    Mali                                                          on-going
                                           Niger and Bani rivers for environmental restoration
                                           Global study of pollution of the waters of the Niger                                     NC PNSFN                                                    Identification
CN_MLI_54_ PNSFN_35                                                                                                                                      2              2             255 520                    100%       0%        0%
                                           River in Upper Niger in Mali                                                             Mali                                                          on-going
                                           Study for the development of a communication
                                           strategy and setting up of an Information System                                         NC PNSFN                                                    Identification
CN_MLI_57_ PNSFN_38                                                                                                                                      2              2             465 351                    100%       0%        0%
                                           for the integrated management of the resources of                                        Mali                                                          on-going
                                           the Niger River Basin
                                           Study of the design of the observatory of the Niger                                      NC PNSFN                                                    Identification
CN_MLI_58_ PNSFN_39                                                                                                                                      3              2             126 914                    100%       0%        0%
                                           River in Mali                                                                            Mali                                                          on-going
                                           Training activities for those involved in the                                            NC PNSFN                                                    Identification
CN_MLI_59_PNSFN_40                                                                                                                                       1              2             162 450                    100%       0%        0%
                                           management of the water resources in the Basin                                           Mali                                                          on-going
                                           Construction of structures to fight flooding in the                                                                                                  60% identified
PO_R2318_MLI_32                                                                                                                     PO_R2 Mali           3              2           2 124 370                    100%       0%        0%
                                           region of Gao                                                                                                                                          - PIDACC
                                           Topographical and photographic survey by LIDAR
                                                                                                                                    NC PNSFN                                                    Identification
CN_MLI_55_ PNSFN_36                        laser procedure of dam reservoirs (Sélingué,                                                                  1              2             473 812                     97%       3%        0%
                                                                                                                                    Mali                                                          on-going
                                           Markala, Talo, Djenné)
                                           Programme for the development of irrigation in the                                       NC PNSFN                                                    Identification
CN_MLI_35 _PNSFN_16                                                                                                                                      3              2         205 346 539                     58%       42%       0%
                                           Bani and Sankarani basin                                                                 Mali                                                          on-going
                                                                                                                                    NC Fast start                                               60% identified
CN_MLI_4_Fast_start_4                      Fish-farming development programme                                                                            3              2          31 000 000                     56%       44%       0%
                                                                                                                                    Mali                                                              -
                                           Support for knowledge of the quality of the water
                                                                                                                                                                                                60% identified
PO_R21204_MLI_17                           resources and acquisition of meteorological                                              PO_R2 Mali           3              2           4 042 017                     55%       45%       0%
                                                                                                                                                                                                  - PIDACC
                                           equipment
PO_R22218_MLI_30                           Anti-erosion and anti-silting measures, and                                              PO_R2 Mali           3              2           9 981 513 60% identified      36%       64%       0%

      d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

      Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
      98                                                                                                                                                                                                         Appendixes



                                                                                   Reference                                                                                                              Financial scheduling and
                                                                                                                                                      Overall                                                 Implementation
                                                                                 document and    Contribution            Preparation                                             Funding
N°                                             Action title                                                                                         action cost
                                                                                  beneficiary    to resilience              stage                                                sources                 PO-PT1            PO-PT2         PO-PT3
                                                                                                                                                      (USD)
                                                                                    country                                                                                                               2016-18           2019-21       2022-24
                          sustainable forest management                                                                                                                          - PIDACC
                          Programme of pastoral development resilient to         NC Fast start                                                                               50% identified
CN_MLI_3_Fast_start_3                                                                                  3                          2                  109 900 000                                           36%               35%           29%
                          climate change;                                        Mali                                                                                              -
                          Programme for the development of agriculture           NC Fast start                                                                               40% identified
CN_MLI_2_Fast_start_2                                                                                  3                          2                    94 000 000                                          35%               35%           30%
                          which is resilient to climate change.                  Mali                                                                                              -
                          Project to develop fish farming in floating cages                                                                                                  60% identified
PO_R12311_MLI_09                                                                 PO_R1 Mali            2                          5                      3 073 950                                         32%               68%           0%
                          and in ponds                                                                                                                                         - PIDACC
                          The Economic and Environmental Rehabilitation          NC PNSFN                                                                                    90% identified
CN_MLI_23_PNSFN_4                                                                                      3                          2                    60 918 627                                          32%               41%           27%
                          project for the Niger River                            Mali                                                                                              -
                          Feasibility study for the reshaping of the Niger       NC PNSFN                                                                                     Identification
CN_MLI_56_ PNSFN_37                                                                                    1                          2                      1 692 184                                         31%               69%           0%
                          Rriver in the towns of Mopti and Bamako                Mali                                                                                           on-going
                          Support for vulnerable groups for cattle and sheep                                                                                                 60% identified
PO_R12211_MLI_25                                                                 PO_R1 Mali            3                          2                      3 915 966                                         28%               36%           36%
                          fattening in the regions of Gao, Timbuktu                                                                                                            - PIDACC
                          Intensive reforestation programme to rebuild the       NC Fast start                                                                               30% identified
CN_MLI_1_Fast_start_1                                                                                  3                          2                  188 800 000                                           27%               42%           31%
                          forest ecosystems in Mali                              Mali                                                                                              -
                                                                                 NC Fast start                                                                               50% identified
CN_MLI_5_Fast_start_5     Programme for harvesting and storing rainwater                               3                          2                    62 800 000                                          26%               74%           0%
                                                                                 Mali                                                                                              -
CN _MLI_60_PNIDACC        Integrated national project for development and        NC PNIDACC                                                                                  10% identified
                                                                                                       3                          5                    72 000 000                                          26%               40%           34%
                          adaptation to climate changes in the Niger Basin       Mali                                                                                              -
                          Integrated Management of Natural Resources             NC PNSFN                                                                                         100%
CN_MLI_34_PNSFN_15                                                                                     3                          2                      1 951 500                                         23%               77%           0%
                          programme                                              Mali                                                                                           identified -
                          The project for the development and recovery of
                                                                                 NC PNSFN                                                                                    20% identified
CN_MLI_24 _PNSFN_5        the banks of the Niger River in the District of                              2                          2                         846 092                                        13%               87%           0%
                                                                                 Mali                                                                                              -
                          Bamako
                          Rehabilitation and equipping of village irrigation                                                                                                 60% identified
PO_R12116_MLI08                                                                  PO_R1 Mali            3                          2                      5 588 235                                           7%              93%           0%
                          areas in the region of Gao                                                                                                                           - PIDACC
                          Project to support the development of agriculture in                                                                                               60% identified
PO_R12148_MLI07                                                                  PO_R1 Mali            3                          4                    14 159 664                                            4%              96%           0%
                          the Douentza area                                                                                                                                    - PIDACC


                                                                                                    d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

                    Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
      Appendixes                                                                                                                                                                                                              99



                                                                                                                                       Reference                                                                 Financial scheduling and
                                                                                                                                                                                    Overall                          Implementation
                                                                                                                                     document and   Contribution    Preparation                   Funding
N°                                                                          Action title                                                                                          action cost
                                                                                                                                      beneficiary   to resilience      stage                      sources        PO-PT1    PO-PT2    PO-PT3
                                                                                                                                                                                    (USD)
                                                                                                                                        country                                                                  2016-18   2019-21   2022-24

                                           Protection of banks by planting and transplanting                                                                                                    60% identified
PO_R22217_MLI_18                                                                                                                    PO_R2 Mali           3              2           8 258 824                     4%        96%       0%
                                           bourgou, and measures against invasive plants                                                                                                          - PIDACC
                                                                                                                                                                                                Identification
PO_R12149_MLI12                            National Horticultural Support Project                                                   PO_R1 Mali           3              4           6 105 882                     2%        71%       27%
                                                                                                                                                                                                  on-going
                                                                                                                                                                                                Identification
PO_R12150_MLI13                            Support for the potato sector in Mali                                                    PO_R1 Mali           2              4             344 538                     2%        71%       27%
                                                                                                                                                                                                  on-going
PO_R1252_MLI_11                            Economic promotion of agricultural and forest                                            PO_R1 Mali                                                  Identification
                                                                                                                                                         1              2           2 579 832                     2%        71%       27%
                                           products in Mali                                                                                                                                       on-going
                                                                                                                                                                                                Identification
PO_R22215_MLI_14                           "Green Wall" experimental project                                                        PO_R2 Mali           3              2           9 910 924                     0%       100%       0%
                                                                                                                                                                                                  on-going
                                           Firewood production project and installation of a                                                                                                    Identification
PO_R2257_MLI_19                                                                                                                     PO_R2 Mali           3              2             810 000                     0%       100%       0%
                                           wood market in the region of Gao and Timbuktu                                                                                                          on-going
                                           Support for the production of seeds of agricultural                                                                                                  Identification
PO_R12151_MLI_24                                                                                                                    PO_R1 Mali           2              2           2 974 790                     0%        50%       50%
                                           origin                                                                                                                                                 on-going




      d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

      Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
     100                                                                                                                                                                                                         Appendixes



     NIGER
                                                                      Reference                                                                                                   Financial scheduling and
                                                                                                            Overall                                                                   Implementation
                                                                    document and Contribution Preparation                                             Funding
N°                                     Action title                                                       action cost
                                                                     beneficiary to resilience   stage                                                sources                 PO-PT1               PO-PT2               PO-PT3
                                                                                                            (USD)
                                                                       country                                                                                                 2016-18              2019-21             2022-24

                      Strengthening of the existing pollution                                                                                          60%
PO_R21205_NIG_36_     control team and creation and equipping of PO_R2 Niger              3                 2                    282 353            identified -                100%                  0%                   0%
                      4 new stations                                                                                                                 PIDACC
                                                                                                                                                       60%
                      Strengthening of community capacity for
PO_R2319_NIG_38_                                                    PO_R2 Niger           1                 2                    991 597            identified -                100%                  0%                   0%
                      adaptation (flooding)
                                                                                                                                                     PIDACC
PO_R12312_NIG_12      Project for the Management and                PO_R1 Niger
                                                                                                                                                      100%
                      Sustainable Use of Natural Resources and                            2                 2               13 021 357                                          100%                  0%                   0%
                                                                                                                                                    identified -
                      Adaptation to Climate Change
                      Support for fish-farming and training of                                                                                        100%
PO_R12314_NIG_14                                                    PO_R1 Niger           2                 2                 5 280 672                                         100%                  0%                   0%
                      fishermen                                                                                                                     identified -
                      Development of 300 ha of ponds overrun                                                                                          100%
PO_R12315_NIG_15                                                    PO_R1 Niger           3                 2                 1 136 134                                         100%                  0%                   0%
                      with Typha australis (Dosso region)                                                                                           identified -
                      Enhancement of the shared management
                                                                                                                                                  Identification
PO_R2133_NIG_39       of the water resources in the national part   PO_R2 Niger           1                 2                 2 174 790                                          64%                 36%                   0%
                                                                                                                                                    on-going
                      of the Niger Basin
                      Stabilisation of dunes in the regions of
                                                                                                                                                       60%
                      Tillabéry and Dosso (Kandadji area, Dallol,
PO_R22223_NIG_31                                                  PO_R2 Niger             3                 2                 1 026 891             identified -                 63%                 37%                   0%
                      Maouri and Foga area, Ouallam area)
                                                                                                                                                     PIDACC
                      (3,000 ha)
                      Soil and water conservation in the regions
                                                                                                                                                       60%
                      of Tillabéry, Dosso and Tahoua; Kandadji,
PO_R22224_NIG_32                                                 PO_R2 Niger              3                 2                 1 285 714             identified -                 63%                 37%                   0%
                      Maouri, Foga areas; Ouallam, Kollo, Konni,
                                                                                                                                                     PIDACC
                      Madaoua and Bouza area (15,000 ha)
                                                                                                                                                       60%
                      Rehabilitation of the classified forest of
PO_R2243_NIG_35                                                     PO_R2 Niger           3                 4               11 023 691              identified -                 47%                 53%                   0%
                      Guesselbodi (2,000 ha)
                                                                                                                                                     PIDACC
PO_R22222_NIG_30      Bioligical and mechanical treatment of        PO_R2 Niger           3                 2                 2 594 958                60%                       36%                 64%                   0%
                      koris in Tillabery and Tahoua region (15                                                                                      identified -


                                                                                                    d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

                    Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
     Appendixes                                                                                                                                                                                                101



                                                                                                                  Reference                                                            Financial scheduling and
                                                                                                                                                        Overall                            Implementation
                                                                                                                document and Contribution Preparation                 Funding
N°                                                             Action title                                                                           action cost
                                                                                                                 beneficiary to resilience   stage                    sources        PO-PT1    PO-PT2     PO-PT3
                                                                                                                                                        (USD)
                                                                                                                   country                                                           2016-18    2019-21    2022-24
                                    000m3)                                                                                                                            PIDACC

                                    Restoration of fallow land and promotion                                                                                            60%
PO_R22234_NIG_33                                                                                                PO_R2 Niger                3   2        1 680 672    identified -     33%        67%        0%
                                    of agroforestry (10,000 ha)                                                                                                       PIDACC
                                    Development and planting of village forests                                                                                         60%
PO_R22235_NIG__34                   in the Tillabéry regions, Téra, Say, Torodi PO_R2 Niger                                                3   2        1 344 538    identified -     33%        67%        0%
                                    and Makalondi municipalities (20,000 ha)                                                                                          PIDACC
                                    Development and adaptation of fisheries to                                                                                      Identification
PO_R2322_NIG_19                                                                PO_R2 Niger                                                 1   2          912 605                     32%        68%        0%
                                    climate change                                                                                                                    on-going
                                                                                                                                                                        60%
                                    Construction of a new reservoir dam at
PO_R12152_NIG_05                                                                                                PO_R1 Niger                3   3        1 194 958    identified -     27%        73%        0%
                                    Aboka
                                                                                                                                                                      PIDACC
PO_R12316_NIG_29                    Rehabilitation of a nursery pond in Moli                                    PO_R1 Niger                                             60%
                                    and construction of a nursery pond in                                                                  2   2        1 003 361    identified -     27%        73%        0%
                                    Madarounfa                                                                                                                        PIDACC
                                                                                                                                                                        60%
                                    Rehabilitation of the irrigated area of Galmi
PO_R12119_NIG_04                                                                  PO_R1 Niger                                              3   2        2 823 529    identified -     17%        83%        0%
                                    250 ha
                                                                                                                                                                      PIDACC
PO_R1245_NIG_37                     Construction of flood protection dikes                                      PO_R1 Niger                                             60%
                                    around Niamey irrigation scheme and                                                                    3   2        1 793 277    identified -     9%         91%        0%
                                    other related infrastructure                                                                                                      PIDACC
                                                                                                                                                                        60%
                                    Construction of two (2) weirs for floodplain
PO_R12158_NIG_16                                                                                                PO_R1 Niger                3   2        2 605 042    identified -     9%         64%        27%
                                    crop production (Gorouol, DolBel, Terra)
                                                                                                                                                                      PIDACC
PO_R1313_NIG_27                     Rehabilitation of 300 km between                                            PO_R1 Niger                                             60%
                                    Labezanga and Dolé (Gaya)                                                                              1   2        1 085 714    identified -     4%         96%        0%
                                                                                                                                                                      PIDACC
PO_R1323_NIG_28                     Construction of 30 landing stages between                                   PO_R1 Niger                                             60%
                                    Labezanga and Dolé (Labezanga, Ayorou,                                                                 1   2        1 302 521    identified -     4%         96%        0%
                                    Tillabéry, Gothuey, Niamey, Kollo, Gaya,                                                                                          PIDACC


     d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

     Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
     102                                                                                                                                                                                                         Appendixes



                                                                       Reference                                                                                                  Financial scheduling and
                                                                                                             Overall                                                                  Implementation
                                                                     document and Contribution Preparation                                            Funding
N°                                    Action title                                                         action cost
                                                                      beneficiary to resilience   stage                                               sources                 PO-PT1               PO-PT2               PO-PT3
                                                                                                             (USD)
                                                                        country                                                                                                2016-18              2019-21             2022-24
                      Dolé), et Konni, Madarounfa, Abalak
                      Project for development, management of
                      natural resources and promotion of                                                                                          Identification
PO_R2115_NIG_22_                                                     PO_R2 Niger           3                2                 6 052 101                                           0%                100%                   0%
                      Moringa oleifera (Tajaé, Malbaza and                                                                                          on-going
                      Tsernaoua)
                      Integrated project to stabilise the dunes                                                                                   Identification
PO_R22220_NIG_20                                                     PO_R2 Niger           3                2                    472 269                                          0%                100%                   0%
                      and combat poverty (Namaro)                                                                                                   on-going
                                                                                                                                                  Identification
PO_R22221_NIG_21      Reforestation project in schools               PO_R2 Niger           3                2                    339 496                                          0%                100%                   0%
                                                                                                                                                    on-going
                      Sustainable management of the forest
                                                                                                                                 126 242               30%
PO_R22231_NIG_18      resources and promotion of alternative         PO_R2 Niger           3                4                                                                     0%                100%                   0%
                                                                                                                                     017            identified -
                      energy sources
                      Development of agroforestry and                                                                                                 100%
PO_R22232_NIG__24                                                    PO_R2 Niger           3                4               34 584 689                                            0%                100%                   0%
                      sustainable management of soil fertility                                                                                      identified -
                      Support for the improvement of soil fertility,                                                                                  100%
PO_R22233_NIG_25                                                     PO_R2 Niger           3                4               37 417 575                                            0%                100%                   0%
                      restoration of degraded land                                                                                                  identified -
                      Rehabilitation of the irrigated area of Tara                                                                                Identification
PO_R12117_NIG_02                                                     PO_R1 Niger           3                2                 1 278 992                                           0%                 83%                  17%
                      101 ha                                                                                                                        on-going
                      Construction of the Kaoura Abdou                                                                                            Identification
PO_R12155_NIG_09                                                     PO_R1 Niger           3                5               17 442 017                                            0%                  0%                 100%
                      hydroagricultural dam at Badaguichiri                                                                                         on-going
                      Creation of an irrigated area and                                                                                           Identification
PO_R12157_NIG11                                                      PO_R1 Niger           3                2               12 774 790                                            0%                  0%                 100%
                      rehabilitation of the dyke at Gatawani Dolé                                                                                   on-going
                      Support for the development of the fishing                                                                                       20%
PO_R12313_NIG_13                                                     PO_R1 Niger           2                2                 9 425 210                                           0%                  0%                 100%
                      and fish-farming sector                                                                                                       identified -
                      Development and use of the valley of                                                                                        Identification
PO_R1244_NIG23                                                       PO_R1 Niger           3                2                 3 040 336                                           0%                  0%                 100%
                      Goroubi (Tamou and Torodi)                                                                                                    on-going




                                                                                                    d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

                    Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
      Appendixes                                                                                                                                                                                                         103



      NIGERIA
                                                                                                                            Reference                                                                Financial scheduling and
                                                                                                                                                                       Overall                           Implementation
                                                                                                                          document and      Contribution Preparation                 Funding
N°                                                                          Action title                                                                             action cost
                                                                                                                           beneficiary      to resilience   stage                    sources        PO-PT1    PO-PT2    PO-PT3
                                                                                                                                                                       (USD)
                                                                                                                             country                                                                2016-18   2019-21   2022-24

                                                      Delimitating the zones for the
                                                      conservation (forests, protected
                                                      zones) / Identification of sites
                                                      a) Advocacy to Niger, Benue,
                                                      Zamfara and Katsina States                                                                                                   Identification
PO_R2111_NIA_22                                                                                                         PO_R2 Nigeria            3            2         593 277                     100%       0%        0%
                                                       (Construction of Earthdam,                                                                                                    on-going
                                                      Boreholes, washbores, handdug
                                                      wells etc).
                                                      b) To establish and support seed
                                                      banks
                                                      Fight against bush fire
                                                      a) Capacity building of the Federal                                                                                          Identification
PO_R22226_NIA_24                                      Fire Service b) Procurement of fire                               PO_R2 Nigeria            3            2         176 471                     100%       0%        0%
                                                                                                                                                                                     on-going
                                                      fighting facilities towards combating
                                                      bush fire.
                                                      Capitalization of the fight against the
                                                      water hyacinth and the proliferation of
                                                      sida cordifolia
                                                      a) Procurement of Open water Kit for                                                                                             60%
PO_R2254_NIA_32                                       open water hyacinth control.            PO_R2 Nigeria                                      1            2         226 891     identified -    100%       0%        0%
                                                      b) Training of operators and                                                                                                   PIDACC
                                                      technicians
                                                      c) Operation and maintenance of
                                                      harvester.
                                                      Strengthening the Shared
                                                      management of water resources in
                                                      the Basin (Construction of weirs, and
                                                                                                                                                                                       60%
                                                      erosion control and runoff water
PO_R21212_NIA_32                                                                                                        PO_R2 Nigeria            1            2         225 210     identified -     95%       5%        0%
                                                      catchment infrastructures;
                                                                                                                                                                                     PIDACC
                                                      Quantitative management of water
                                                      resources)
                                                      a) Reconnaissance survey to identify

      d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

      Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
      104                                                                                                                                                                                                       Appendixes



                                                                          Reference                                                                                                      Financial scheduling and
                                                                                                                    Overall                                                                  Implementation
                                                                        document and     Contribution Preparation                                              Funding
N°                                         Action title                                                           action cost
                                                                         beneficiary     to resilience   stage                                                 sources                 PO-PT1             PO-PT2            PO-PT3
                                                                                                                    (USD)
                                                                           country                                                                                                      2016-18           2019-21            2022-24
                              suitable locations for weirs, erosion
                              control structure and runoff
                              management
                              b)Engagement of Consultants to
                              design the infrastructures
                              c) Engagement of Contractor for the
                              construction of weirs, erosion control
                              structures and infrastructures
PO_R2214_NIA_23               Measures for the conservation of         PO_R2 Nigeria
                              forestry galleries on secondary rivers                                                                                        Identification
                                                                                               3                      2                1 297 479                                         83%                17%                 0%
                              (Conservation of biodiversity/Forest                                                                                            on-going
                              management)
                              Flood management Project
                              a) Undertake flood forecasting and
                              warning on flood prone areas
                              b)Undertake flood hazard
                              assessment including hazard
                              mapping and risk evaluation                                                                                                        10%
PO_R2320_NIA_13                                                        PO_R2 Nigeria           3                      2                4 954 622              identified -               76%                24%                 0%
                              c)Develop and promote regulations                                                                                                PIDACC
                              for flood plain management based on
                              flood plain zoning.
                              d) Put in place structures for flood
                              prevention, control and water
                              conservation.
                              Development of tools for the
                              modelling of hydrological forecasts
                              a)Procurement and installation of                                                                                             Identification
PO_R21206_NIA_9               hardware and software for                PO_R2 Nigeria           3                      2                1 176 471                                         54%                46%                 0%
                                                                                                                                                              on-going
                              hydrological modeling;
                              b)Training and capacity building
                              Modelization of hydraulic variation                                                                                           Identification
PO_R2134_NIA_12__10                                                    PO_R2 Nigeria           3                      2                1 201 681                                         54%                46%                 0%
                              a) Develop a methodology and                                                                                                    on-going


                                                                                                   d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

                  Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
      Appendixes                                                                                                                                                                                                         105



                                                                                                                            Reference                                                                Financial scheduling and
                                                                                                                                                                       Overall                           Implementation
                                                                                                                          document and      Contribution Preparation                 Funding
N°                                                                          Action title                                                                             action cost
                                                                                                                           beneficiary      to resilience   stage                    sources        PO-PT1    PO-PT2    PO-PT3
                                                                                                                                                                       (USD)
                                                                                                                             country                                                                2016-18   2019-21   2022-24
                                                      approach to understand how existing
                                                      flow dynamics models can be used
                                                      with the addition of flow and pressure
                                                      monitors to improve understanding of
                                                      network flow dynamics, their
                                                      relationships to system operational
                                                      changes and user demands, and thus
                                                      to water quality dynamics throughout
                                                      the system. The methodology should
                                                      allow an understanding of flow
                                                      dynamics in real-time or near real-
                                                      time.
                                                      b) Dam safety review processes and
                                                      status for Jibiya, Kampe –omi and
                                                      Doma dams.
                                                      c) Emergency Action plan and
                                                      procedures in the three chosen dams.
                                                      d) Provision of automatic guaging
                                                      station and flood measuring station
                                                      upstream of kanji and the drainage
                                                      basins between kanji and jebba
                                                      dams.
                                                      c). Provision of Meteorological and
                                                      hydrological stations at both kanji and
                                                      jebba
                                                      Capitalization of the fight against the
                                                      water hyacinth and the proliferation of
                                                      sida cordifolia
                                                      a) Procurement of Open water Kit for
                                                      open water hyacinth control.                                                                                                 Identification
PO_R2234_NIA_18                                                                               PO_R2 Nigeria                                      3            2        1 258 824                     54%       46%       0%
                                                                                                                                                                                     on-going
                                                      b) Training of operators and
                                                      technicians
                                                      c) Operation and maintenance of
                                                      harvester.


      d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

      Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
      106                                                                                                                                                                                                       Appendixes



                                                                         Reference                                                                                                       Financial scheduling and
                                                                                                                    Overall                                                                  Implementation
                                                                       document and      Contribution Preparation                                              Funding
N°                                         Action title                                                           action cost
                                                                        beneficiary      to resilience   stage                                                 sources                 PO-PT1             PO-PT2            PO-PT3
                                                                                                                    (USD)
                                                                          country                                                                                                       2016-18           2019-21            2022-24

                              Conservation and management of the
                              coastal delta zone of the Niger river
                              a) Construction of flood protection
                              drainage facilities in Koton-Karfe,
                              Mamu Awka, Yenogua and Koko.                                                                                                  Identification
PO_R2241_NIA_14                                                     PO_R2 Nigeria              3                      2                1 090 756                                         54%                46%                 0%
                              b) To create reinforcement and                                                                                                  on-going
                              adaptation of basic water
                              infrastructure and promotion of
                              integrated coastal management of the
                              coastal zone.
                              Strengthening of community capacity
                              for adaptation to climate change
                              (Inventory and dissemination of good
                              practices in restoring degraded
                              ecosystems; Inventory and
                              dissemination of good practices in
                              protecting ecosystems) /
                              a) Integration of Climate Change
                              Adaptation into the capabilities,
                              bodies and management instruments
                              of the national and regional
                              institutions of the Basin                                                                                                          60%
PO_R2255_NIA_35                                                     PO_R2 Nigeria              1                      2                    277 311            identified -               54%                46%                 0%
                              b) Interaction (build strong synergy
                                                                                                                                                               PIDACC
                              development) with various tier of
                              government (Federal, State and Local
                              Government), NGOs, CBOs, Private
                              Sector.
                              b) Awareness Creation at community
                              levels in each vulnerable catchment
                              in the country.
                              c) Improve understanding of the local
                              communities on climate change
                              issues -community town hall
                              meetings; jingles in local dialect in


                                                                                                   d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

                  Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
      Appendixes                                                                                                                                                                                                         107



                                                                                                                            Reference                                                                Financial scheduling and
                                                                                                                                                                       Overall                           Implementation
                                                                                                                          document and      Contribution Preparation                 Funding
N°                                                                          Action title                                                                             action cost
                                                                                                                           beneficiary      to resilience   stage                    sources        PO-PT1    PO-PT2    PO-PT3
                                                                                                                                                                       (USD)
                                                                                                                             country                                                                2016-18   2019-21   2022-24
                                                      radios; production of pamphlets for
                                                      extension workers .
                                                      Research work to integrate, in future
                                                      models, scenarios dealing with the
                                                      increase in temperature in order to
                                                      calculate the need in water of the
                                                      plants and the evaporation of the
                                                      damming lakes
                                                      a) Hydrological data collection and
                                                      analysis on existing and planned
                                                      reservoirs, reservoirs operation,                                                                                            Identification
PO_R2256_NIA_6                                                                               PO_R2 Nigeria                                       3            2        1 774 790                     54%       46%       0%
                                                                                                                                                                                     on-going
                                                      b) Procurement of computer
                                                      hardware and software, training and
                                                      capacity building.
                                                      c) Catchment protection strategies
                                                      through agro-forestry and aforestation
                                                      programmes and drilling of wind
                                                      pump boreholes and rainwater
                                                      harvesting within each catchment.
                                                      Conservation and management of
                                                      the middle of Niger area
                                                      a) Construction of 400 windpump
                                                      boreholes along the middle Niger are
                                                                                                                                                                                   Identification
PO_R2232_NIA_15                                       b) Development of seed banks for       PO_R2 Nigeria                                       3            2         566 387                      47%       53%       0%
                                                                                                                                                                                     on-going
                                                      economic trees
                                                      c) Promotion of agro-forestry in the
                                                      middle Niger for soil conservation and
                                                      catchment protection
                                                      Socio-economic utilisation of invasive
                                                      aquatic plant species
                                                                                                                                                                        151 490 Identification
PO_R2252_NIA_17                                       a) Procurement of aquatic weeds                                   PO_R2 Nigeria            3            2                                      47%       53%       0%
                                                                                                                                                                            756   on-going
                                                      harvesters
                                                      b) Training of operators and


      d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

      Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
      108                                                                                                                                                                                                        Appendixes



                                                                            Reference                                                                                                     Financial scheduling and
                                                                                                                     Overall                                                                  Implementation
                                                                          document and    Contribution Preparation                                              Funding
N°                                          Action title                                                           action cost
                                                                           beneficiary    to resilience   stage                                                 sources                 PO-PT1             PO-PT2            PO-PT3
                                                                                                                     (USD)
                                                                             country                                                                                                     2016-18           2019-21            2022-24
                               technicians
                               c) Operation and maintenance of
                               harvester.
                               Development of Resilience of the
                               population and the Ecosystem in the
                               Basin (Conservation of
                               biodiversity/Forest management;
                               Preservation of biodiversity /
                               Management of the fauna reserve)
                               a) Support to the development of
                               traditional fish farming                                                                                                           60%
PO_R2235_NIA_33                b)Procurement of fishing inputs such      PO_R2 Nigeria          3                      2                4 139 496              identified -               46%                54%                 0%
                               as Yamaha Outboard engines of                                                                                                    PIDACC
                               various Horse powers, mono filament
                               nets, twines and lead/sinkers, chokor
                               smoking kilns.
                               c)Seedling development and
                               distribution for agro-forestry.
                               d) Community sensitization on best
                               environmental conservation practices
                               Erosion, flood and siltation control in
                               Nigeria.
                               a) Reconnaissance survey to identify
                               vulnerable zones within the basin
                               b)Engagement of Consultants to
                               design suitable flood and erosion                                                                                             Identification
PO_R22225_NIA_21               control structures and sites to be        PO_R2 Nigeria          3                      2              20 292 437                                          36%                64%                 0%
                                                                                                                                                               on-going
                               dredged
                               c) Engagement of suitable
                               contractors for the construction of
                               each facility.
                               d) Construction of 2000 tubewells
                               each for Kebbi, Sokoto, Kwara, and


                                                                                                    d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

                   Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
      Appendixes                                                                                                                                                                                                         109



                                                                                                                            Reference                                                                Financial scheduling and
                                                                                                                                                                       Overall                           Implementation
                                                                                                                          document and      Contribution Preparation                 Funding
N°                                                                          Action title                                                                             action cost
                                                                                                                           beneficiary      to resilience   stage                    sources        PO-PT1    PO-PT2    PO-PT3
                                                                                                                                                                       (USD)
                                                                                                                             country                                                                2016-18   2019-21   2022-24
                                                      Zamfara states
                                                      e)Procurement of 2000Nos, 3" water
                                                      pumps each for Kebbi, Sokoto,
                                                      Kwara, and Zamfara states.
                                                      f) Bathymetric survey of Jibiya,
                                                      Kampe – omi and Doma Dam
                                                      g)Survey and Di-silting of Jibiya,
                                                      Kampe – Omi andDoma Dams and
                                                      Reservoirs along the River Niger and
                                                      its Tributaries in Nigeria for flood
                                                      control and protection of water
                                                      quality.
                                                      h) Demarcation of flood plain
                                                      downstream of jebba.
                                                      Monitoring of the application of the
                                                      minimum low water flow.
                                                      a) Expansion of surface water
                                                      monitoring network through
                                                      installation and operation of stream
                                                      gauging equipment Procurement of                                                                                             Identification
PO_R2?1_NIA_XXX                                                                                                         PO_R2 Nigeria            3            2        1 764 706                     33%       67%       0%
                                                      Flow                                                                                                                           on-going
                                                      b) Measurement equipment;
                                                      c)Drilling of groundwater monitoring
                                                      boreholes and instrumentation with
                                                      data loggers.
                                                      Develop some protected zones
                                                      a) Advocacy to Kebbi, Sokoto, Niger,
                                                      Yobe, Adamawa, Taraba, Zamfara
                                                      and Katsina States (Construction of                                                                                          Identification
PO_R2114_NIA__19                                      Earthdam, Boreholes, washbores,                                   PO_R2 Nigeria            3            2        2 598 319                     33%       67%       0%
                                                                                                                                                                                     on-going
                                                      handdug wells etc). Seedling
                                                      b) To establish and support seed
                                                      banks.


      d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

      Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
      110                                                                                                                                                                                                         Appendixes



                                                                           Reference                                                                                                       Financial scheduling and
                                                                                                                      Overall                                                                  Implementation
                                                                         document and      Contribution Preparation                                              Funding
N°                                           Action title                                                           action cost
                                                                          beneficiary      to resilience   stage                                                 sources                 PO-PT1             PO-PT2            PO-PT3
                                                                                                                      (USD)
                                                                            country                                                                                                       2016-18           2019-21            2022-24

                                Support for the functioning of Niger-
                                HYCOS
                                a)Operation and maintenance of the
                                existing 18No Data Collection                                                                                                 Identification
PO_R21213_NIA_11                Platform (DCP) stations;                PO_R2 Nigeria            3                      2                1 324 370                                         33%                67%                 0%
                                                                                                                                                                on-going
                                b)Expansion of network the DCPs
                                equipped with SutronMeteosat; Data
                                processing; Training
PO_R22236_NIA_8                 Rehabilitation of degraded              PO_R2 Nigeria                                                                         Identification
                                agricultural land                                                3                      2                1 253 782                                         33%                67%                 0%
                                                                                                                                                                on-going
PO_R12160_NIA27                 Irrigation development inTada           PO_R1 Nigeria                                                                         Identification
                                Shonga (Kwara State)                                             3                      2                1 845 378                                         27%                73%                 0%
                                                                                                                                                                on-going
PO_R12317_NIA_03__04            Support to fisheries development        PO_R1 Nigeria                                                                              10%
                                                                                                 2                      2                2 171 429              identified -               27%                73%                 0%
                                                                                                                                                                 PIDACC
PO_R1112_NIA01                  Rehabilitation of Kainji dam (Including PO_R1 Nigeria                                                        136 800 Identification
                                Units 7, 8, 9, 10 et 11)                                         3                      2                                                                  15%                48%                37%
                                                                                                                                                 000   on-going
PO_R12212_NIA_05                Development of water points for cattle PO_R1 Nigeria                                                                               10%
                                and development of transhumance                                  3                      2                5 092 437              identified -                8%                79%                13%
                                pathways                                                                                                                         PIDACC
PO_R12161_NIA_28_30__31__33 Construction of multipurpose dams,          PO_R1 Nigeria                                                        243 858 0% identified
                            irrigation schemes and support                                       3                      2                                                                   3%                33%                64%
                                                                                                                                                 824  - PIDACC
                            measures to adapt to climate change




                                                                                                     d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

                    Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
     Appendixes                                                                                                                                                                                                            111



     CHAD
                                                                                                                  Reference                                           Overall                       Financial scheduling and
                                                                                                                document and               Contribution Preparation   action        Funding             Implementation
N°                                                            Action title
                                                                                                                 beneficiary               to resilience   stage       cost         sources        PO-PT1    PO-PT2    PO-PT3
                                                                                                                   country                                            (USD)                        2016-18   2019-21   2022-24

                                       Improvement and dissemination of                                                                                                           Identification
PANA_TD_3                                                                                                   NAPA Chad                           3            2        1 000 000                     62%       38%        0%
                                       crop calendars                                                                                                                               on-going
                                       Rural, Pastoral and Transhumance                                                                                                 17 616 0% identified
PO_R12216_TCH_11                                                                                            PO_R1 Chad                          3            2                                      54%       46%        0%
                                       Infrastructure project.                                                                                                             807  - PIDACC
                                       National Observatory for Climate                                                                                                           Identification
PANA_TD_8                                                                                                   NAPA Chad                           3            2        1 600 000                     53%       38%        9%
                                       Change                                                                                                                                       on-going
                                       Development of the waterhole at                                                                                                                30%
PO_R12213_TCH_05                       Torrock for crops and to provide                                     PO_R1 Chad                          3            2        1 048 739    identified -     50%       50%        0%
                                       drinking water for cattle                                                                                                                    PIDACC
                                       Construction of defensive structures
                                                                                                                                                                                  Identification
PANA_TD_5                              and restoration of land for the                                      NAPA Chad                           3            2        1 300 000                     40%       60%        0%
                                                                                                                                                                                    on-going
                                       development of agricultural activities
                                       Improvement of the quality of seasonal
                                                                                                                                                                                  Identification
PANA_TD_7                              forecasting and its integration in the                               NAPA Chad                           3            2        1 700 000                     40%       60%        0%
                                                                                                                                                                                    on-going
                                       strategy for monitoring vulnerability.
                                       Improvement of information, education
                                                                                                                                                                                  Identification
PANA_TD_4                              and communication concerning                                         NAPA Chad                           3            2        1 100 000                     38%       62%        0%
                                                                                                                                                                                    on-going
                                       adaptation to climate change
                                       Hydro-agricultural development at                                                                                                          Identification
PO_R12165_TCH_08                                                                                            PO_R1 Chad                          3            4        2 823 529                     36%       64%        0%
                                       Fianga. 5,000 ha                                                                                                                             on-going
                                       Djarao, Domo and Léo hydro-                                                                                                     169 371    Identification
PO_R12166_TCH_09                                                                                            PO_R1 Chad                          3            4                                      36%       64%        0%
                                       agricultural development. 10,000 ha                                                                                                 429      on-going
                                       Improvement of intercommunity                                                                                                              Identification
PANA_TD_6                                                                                                   NAPA Chad                           3            2        1 500 000                     35%       52%       13%
                                       grazing areas                                                                                                                                on-going
                                       Hydro-agricultural development at                                                                                                          Identification
PO_R12167_TCH_10                                                                                            PO_R1 Chad                          3            4        1 164 706                     34%       66%        0%
                                       Ghétahlé -Tréné. 5,000 ha                                                                                                                    on-going

                                       Reduction of the vulnerability of                                                                                                          Identification
PANA_TD_10                                                                                                  NAPA Chad                           3            2        2 000 000                     33%       67%        0%
                                       populations to climate change /                                                                                                              on-going

     d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

     Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
     112                                                                                                                                                                                                        Appendixes



                                                                    Reference                                                   Overall                                           Financial scheduling and
                                                                  document and       Contribution Preparation                   action                 Funding                        Implementation
N°                                   Action title
                                                                   beneficiary       to resilience   stage                       cost                  sources                 PO-PT1              PO-PT2              PO-PT3
                                                                     country                                                    (USD)                                           2016-18             2019-21             2022-24
                       Management of climate-related
                       hazards and adaptation to climate
                       change
                       Mobilisation of surface water for                                                                                           Identification
PANA_TD_1                                                       NAPA Chad                  3                   2               1 800 000                                         31%                 67%                  2%
                       agriculture and to supply cattle.                                                                                             on-going
                                                                                                                                                        10%
                       Development of the rice-growing area                                                                         15 630
PO_R12162_TCH_02                                                PO_R1 Chad                 3                   5                                     identified -                26%                 74%                  0%
                       of Voli (Gounou Gaya). 1,020 ha                                                                                 252
                                                                                                                                                      PIDACC
                       Diversification and intensification of
                                                                                                                                                   Identification
PANA_TD_2              crop production in the Sudanian and      NAPA Chad                  3                   2               1 200 000                                         24%                 50%                 26%
                                                                                                                                                     on-going
                       Sahelian areas of Chad
                       Development of an area for floodplain
                                                                                                                                                   Identification
PO_R12168_TCH_12       crop production in the region of Mayo    PO_R1 Chad                 3                   2                  741 176                                        20%                 80%                  0%
                                                                                                                                                     on-going
                       Kebbi Est (at Tikem). 600 ha




                                                                                                   d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

                   Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
     Appendixes                                                                                                                                                                                                                 113



     ES-NBA


                                                                                                               Reference                                                                                 Financial scheduling and
                                                                                                                                                                           Overall                           Implementation
                                                                                                             document and                  Contribution    Preparation                  Funding
N°                                                              Action title                                                                                             action cost
                                                                                                              beneficiary                  to resilience      stage                     sources         PO-PT1    PO-PT2    PO-PT3
                                                                                                                                                                           (USD)
                                                                                                                country                                                                                 2016-18   2019-21   2022-24

                                              Development of the gender policy
                                                                                                                                                                                       Identification
PO_R5221_SE/ABN                               (finalise the policy and implement PO_R5 ES-ABN                                                         1              2    134 454                       100%       0%        0%
                                                                                                                                                                                           on-going
                                              it)
                                              Development of external                                                                                                                  Identification
PO_R5321_SE/ABN                                                                                           PO_R5 ES-ABN                                1              2    153 782                       100%       0%        0%
                                              communication                                                                                                                                on-going
                                                                                                                                                                                                50%
                                              Hydraulic modelling of the inner
BM_DIN_MA_1                                                                                               CIWA Project                                3              2   1 400 000       identified -   100%       0%        0%
                                              delta of the Niger
                                                                                                                                                                                             CIWA
                                              Dissimination and application of                                                                                                         Identification
PO_R4121_ SE/ABN                                                                                          PO_R4 ES-ABN                                3              2   3 705 042                       70%       15%       15%
                                              the Water Charter to all States                                                                                                              on-going
                                              Rendering the decision-making                                                                                                            Identification
PO_R4111_ SE/ABN                                                                                          PO_R4 ES-ABN                                3              2 10 729 412                        47%       49%       4%
                                              tools operational                                                                                                                            on-going
                                                                                                                                                                                                60%
                                              Inventory and general mapping of
PO_R21207_SE/ABN1_12_13                                                        PO_R2 ES-ABN                                                           3              2   2 917 647       identified -    30%       60%       10%
                                              the ecosystems of the basin
                                                                                                                                                                                           PIDACC
                                              Capitalisation and dissemination
                                                                                                                                                                                                60%
                                              of good practices for the
PO_R2253_SE/ABN_11                                                                                        PO_R2 ES-ABN                                1              2 11 532 773        identified -    19%       34%       47%
                                              restoration of degraded
                                                                                                                                                                                           PIDACC
                                              ecosystems
                                              Monitoring water resources in the                                                                                           108 494      Identification
PO_R2112_SE/ABN_10                                                                                        PO_R2 ES-ABN                                3              2                                   16%       30%       54%
                                              Niger Basin                                                                                                                   118            on-going




     d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

     Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
114                                                                                                                                          Appendixes




           Appendix H : Financial and
      implementation schedule of the CRIP
                     actions




                              d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

         Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
Appendixes                                                                                                                                                                                                                   115




SELECTED ACTIONS IN THE CLIMATE RESILIENCE INVESTMENT PLAN FOR NIGER BASIN – KNOWLEDGE AND INSTITUTIONS PACKAGE

                                                                                                                                                                                                          Financial scheduling and
                                                                                                 Reference document                                                         Prioritization options
                                                                                                                                      Overall action      Funding                                             Implementation
                                     Action title                                                  and beneficiary
                                                                                                                                       cost (USD)         sources         Contribution    Preparation   PO-PT1    PO-PT2      PO-PT3
                                                                                                       country
                                                                                                                                                                          to resilience      stage      2016-18    2019-21    2022-24

 1 – Knowledge. Collection and generation of climatic and hydrological information. Weather-forecasting tools and decision-making tools
 Improvement of knowledge of water resources and
                                                                                                                                                        Identification
 enhancement of the hydro-meteorological and                                                    PO_R2 Guinea                                756 303                            3              2         100%        0%         0%
                                                                                                                                                          on-going
 hydrogeological data collection system
 Study for the development of a communication strategy
 and setting up of an Information System for the                                                                                                        Identification
                                                       NC PNSFN Mali                                                                        465 351                            2              2         100%        0%         0%
 integrated management of the resources of the Niger                                                                                                      on-going
 River Basin
 Study of the design of the observatory of the Niger                                                                                                    Identification
                                                                                                NC PNSFN Mali                               126 914                            3              2         100%        0%         0%
 River in Mali                                                                                                                                            on-going
 Strengthening of the existing pollution control team and                                                                                              60% identified -
                                                          PO_R2 Niger                                                                       282 353                            3              2         100%        0%         0%
 creation and equipping of 4 new stations                                                                                                                PIDACC
                                                                                                Component of CIWA                                      50% identified -
 Hydraulic modelling of the inner delta of the Niger                                                                                       1 400 000                           3              2         100%        0%         0%
                                                                                                project                                                   CIWA
 Development of adaptation and water resource                                                                                                          60% identified -
                                                                                                PO_R2 Ivory Coast                           452 101                            3              2          94%        6%         0%
 management tools                                                                                                                                        PIDACC
                                                                                                National
                                                                                                communication                                           Identification
 Development of a data bank relating to climate change                                                                                      761 483                            3              2          93%        7%         0%
                                                                                                concerning climate                                        on-going
                                                                                                change - Benin
 Setting up of a climate hazard forecasting and early
 warning system for food safety in 4 vulnerable agro-                                           NAPA Benin                                 8 190 000 70% identified -          3              2          72%        28%        0%
 ecological zones
 Setting up a system for observation, information
                                                                                                                                                        Identification
 management and warning with regard to climate                                                  PNACC Cameroon                             2 220 000                           3              2          72%        28%        0%
                                                                                                                                                          on-going
 hazards in Cameroon
 Develop models for the allocation of the water                                                                                                         Identification
                                                                                                NC - PND Ivory Coast                       1 184 529                           3              2          71%        26%        3%
 resources of river basin agencies                                                                                                                        on-going


d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
116                                                                                                                                                                                                           Appendixes




                                                                                                                                                                                           Financial scheduling and
                                                         Reference document                                                           Prioritization options
                                                                                 Overall action           Funding                                                                              Implementation
                      Action title                         and beneficiary
                                                                                  cost (USD)              sources                  Contribution              Preparation               PO-PT1               PO-PT2               PO-PT3
                                                               country
                                                                                                                                   to resilience                stage                   2016-18             2019-21              2022-24

Development of an early warning system to safeguard                                                   Identification
                                                         NAPA Guinea                    150 000                                             3                         2                  68%                  28%                    4%
agricultural productivity                                                                               on-going
                                                         National
Enhancement of capabilities with regard to climate       communication                                Identification
                                                                                       3 892 023                                            3                         2                  59%                  41%                    0%
observation in the Benin section of the Niger basin      concerning climate                             on-going
                                                         change - Benin
Support for knowledge of the quality of the water                                                   60% identified -
                                                         PO_R2 Mali                    4 042 017                                            3                         2                  55%                  45%                    0%
resources and acquisition of meteorological equipment                                                 PIDACC
Development of tools for the modelling of hydrological                                                Identification
                                                         PO_R2 Nigeria                 1 176 471                                            3                         2                  54%                  46%                    0%
forecasts                                                                                               on-going
                                                                                                      Identification
Modelling of hydraulic variation                         PO_R2 Nigeria                 1 201 681                                            3                         2                  54%                  46%                    0%
                                                                                                        on-going
Useful research work for the future models / Research
work to integrate, in future models, scenarios dealing
                                                                                                      Identification
with the increase in temperature in order to calculate   PO_R2 Nigeria                 1 774 790                                            3                         2                  54%                  46%                    0%
                                                                                                        on-going
the need in water of the plants and the evaporation of
the damming lakes
Observatoire National sur les Changements
                                                                                                      Identification
Climatiques (ONCC) / National Observatory for Climate NAPA Chad                        1 600 000                                            3                         2                  53%                  38%                    9%
                                                                                                        on-going
Change
Reduction of vulnerability to climate change by
                                                                                                      Identification
enhancing measures for prevention and management         NAPA Burkina Faso             7 446 000                                            3                         2                  49%                  28%                    23%
                                                                                                        on-going
of food crises in the Oursi and Boulsa zones.
                                                                                                    60% identified -
Rendering the decision-making tools operational          PO_R4 SE-ABN                  2 917 647                                            3                         2                  47%                  49%                    4%
                                                                                                      PIDACC
Improvement of the quality of seasonal forecasting and
                                                                                                      Identification
its integration in the strategy for monitoring           NAPA Chad                     1 700 000                                            3                         2                  40%                  60%                    0%
                                                                                                        on-going
vulnerability.
Development of research activities in water
                                                         NC PAGIRE Burkina                            Identification
management, more particularly in the context of                                        5 245 771                                            3                         2                  40%                  30%                    30%
                                                         Faso                                           on-going
adaptation to climate change



                                                                                               d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

               Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
Appendixes                                                                                                                                                                                                                   117



                                                                                                                                                                                                          Financial scheduling and
                                                                                                 Reference document                                                         Prioritization options
                                                                                                                                      Overall action      Funding                                             Implementation
                                     Action title                                                  and beneficiary
                                                                                                                                       cost (USD)         sources         Contribution    Preparation   PO-PT1    PO-PT2      PO-PT3
                                                                                                       country
                                                                                                                                                                          to resilience      stage      2016-18    2019-21    2022-24

 Monitoring of the application of the minimum low water                                                                                                 Identification
                                                                                                PO_R2 Nigeria                              1 764 706                           3              2          33%        67%        0%
 flows.                                                                                                                                                   on-going
                                                                                                                                                        Identification
 Support for the functioning of Niger-HYCOS                                                     PO_R2 Nigeria                              1 324 370                           3              2          33%        67%        0%
                                                                                                                                                          on-going
                                                                                                                                                        Identification
 Monitoring water resources in the Niger Basin                                                  PO_R2 SE-ABN                             10 729 412                            3              2          30%        60%        10%
                                                                                                                                                          on-going
 Equipment and improvement of knowledge concerning
 the quality of the water resources (Materials and                                                                                                     60% identified -
                                                       PO_R2 Burkina Faso                                                                   707 563                            3              2          0%        100%        0%
 equipment, Improvement of knowledge of the quality of                                                                                                   PIDACC
 the water resources)
 Development of a sound national Water Information                                              NC PAGIRE Burkina                                       Identification
                                                                                                                                         16 464 951                            3              2          N/A        N/A       100%
 System (WIS)                                                                                   Faso                                                      on-going
 2 - Assessment of vulnerability. Communication and awareness-raising
 Adaptation of the national gender policy and their                                                                                                     Identification
                                                                                                PNACC Cameroon                             2 220 000                           3              2          72%        28%        0%
 vulnerability to climate change                                                                                                                          on-going
 Raising the awareness of the population,
 professionals, administration and decision-makers to                                                                                                   Identification
                                                                                                PNACC Cameroon                             2 220 000                           3              2          72%        28%        0%
 the effects of climate change and the measures to be                                                                                                     on-going
 taken
                                                                                                                                                        Identification
 Development of external communication                                                          PO_R5 SE-ABN                               3 705 042                           3              2          70%        15%        15%
                                                                                                                                                          on-going
 Improvement of information, education and
                                                                                                                                                        Identification
 communication concerning adaptation to climate                                                 NAPA Chad                                  1 100 000                           3              2          38%        62%        0%
                                                                                                                                                          on-going
 change
                                                                                                                                                        Identification
 "One School, 5 hectares of forest" project                                                     PO_R2 Ivory Coast                          3 721 008                           3              6          37%        63%        0%
                                                                                                                                                          on-going
 Reduction of the vulnerability of populations to climate
                                                                                                                                                        Identification
 change / Management of climate-related hazards and                                             NAPA Chad                                  2 000 000                           3              2          33%        67%        0%
                                                                                                                                                          on-going
 adaptation to climate change
 Education, professional training and enhancement of                                                                                                    Identification
                                                                                                PNACC Cameroon                             5 550 000                           3              2          19%        45%        36%
 capabilities concerning climate change                                                                                                                   on-going


d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
118                                                                                                                                                                                                            Appendixes




                                                                                                                                                                                            Financial scheduling and
                                                           Reference document                                                          Prioritization options
                                                                                  Overall action           Funding                                                                              Implementation
                      Action title                           and beneficiary
                                                                                   cost (USD)              sources                  Contribution              Preparation               PO-PT1               PO-PT2               PO-PT3
                                                                 country
                                                                                                                                    to resilience                stage                   2016-18             2019-21              2022-24

Inventory and general mapping of the ecosystems of                                                     Identification
                                                           PO_R2 SE-ABN              108 494 118                                             3                         2                  16%                  30%                    54%
the basin                                                                                                on-going
                                                                                                       Identification
Reforestation project in schools                           PO_R2 Niger                   339 496                                             3                         2                   0%                 100%                    0%
                                                                                                         on-going
3 - Integration of climate change adaptation into the capabilities, bodies and management instruments of the national and regional institutions of the Basin
Training activities for those involved in the              NC PNSFN Mali                               Identification
                                                                                         162 450                                             1                         2                 100%                   0%                    0%
management of the water resources in the Basin                                                           on-going
Strengthening of community capacity for adaptation                                                   60% identified -
                                                           PO_R2 Niger                   991 597                                             1                         2                 100%                   0%                    0%
(flooding)                                                                                             PIDACC
Strengthening the Shared management of water
                                                                                                     60% identified -
resources in the Basin (Inventory and dissemination of     PO_R2 Nigeria                 226 891                                             1                         2                 100%                   0%                    0%
                                                                                                       PIDACC
good practices in protecting ecosystems)
Distribution and application of the Water Charter to all                                               Identification
                                                           PO_R4 SE-ABN                  134 454                                             1                         2                 100%                   0%                    0%
States                                                                                                   on-going
Development of the gender policy (finalise the policy                                                  Identification
                                                           PO_R5 SE-ABN                  153 782                                             1                         2                 100%                   0%                    0%
and implement it)                                                                                        on-going
Inclusion of climate hazards when updating the Land        PNACC Cameroon                              Identification
                                                                                        3 330 000                                            1                         2                  68%                  32%                    0%
Use Plan                                                                                                 on-going
Enhancement of the shared management of the water                                                      Identification
                                                           PO_R2 Niger                  2 174 790                                            1                         2                  64%                  36%                    0%
resources in the national part of the Niger Basin                                                        on-going
                                                                                                     60% identified -
Adaptation to climate change (flooding)                    PO_R2 Guinea                 1 179 832                                            1                         2                  58%                  42%                    0%
                                                                                                       PIDACC
                                                                                                     60% identified -
Development of a good practice guide                       PO_R2 Benin                   598 319                                             1                         2                  54%                  46%                    0%
                                                                                                       PIDACC
Strengthening the shared management of natural                                                         Identification
                                                           PO_R2 Cameroon               1 260 504                                            1                         2                  54%                  46%                    0%
resources in the national part of the Niger Basin                                                        on-going
                                                                                                     60% identified -
Enhancement of communities' ability to adapt               PO_R2 Ivory Coast             352 941                                             1                         2                  54%                  46%                    0%
                                                                                                       PIDACC
Strengthening of community capacity for adaptation to                                                60% identified -
                                                           PO_R2 Nigeria                 277 311                                             1                         2                  54%                  46%                    0%
climate change (Inventory and dissemination of good                                                    PIDACC


                                                                                                d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

                Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
Appendixes                                                                                                                                                                                                                   119



                                                                                                                                                                                                          Financial scheduling and
                                                                                                 Reference document                                                         Prioritization options
                                                                                                                                      Overall action      Funding                                             Implementation
                                     Action title                                                  and beneficiary
                                                                                                                                       cost (USD)         sources         Contribution    Preparation   PO-PT1    PO-PT2      PO-PT3
                                                                                                       country
                                                                                                                                                                          to resilience      stage      2016-18    2019-21    2022-24
 practices in restoring degraded ecosystems; Inventory
 and dissemination of good practices in protecting
 ecosystems)
 Support for the development of collaborative
                                                                                                                                                       50% identified -
 management of the Tinkisso, Niger- Tinkisso and                                                PO_R2 Guinea                                425 210                            1              2          37%        63%        0%
                                                                                                                                                         PIDACC
 Sankarani - Fié Ramsar sites
 Development of strategies for adaptation to climate                                                                                                   100% identified
                                                                                                PO_R2 Benin                                 608 403                            1              2          36%        64%        0%
 change                                                                                                                                                  - PIDACC
                                                                                                                                                        Identification
 Enhancement of the ability to adapt and intervene                                              PO_R2 Ivory Coast                          2 110 924                           1              2          33%        67%        0%
                                                                                                                                                          on-going
 Project for the Management and Sustainable Use of                                                                                                      Identification
                                                                                                PO_R2 Niger                                 912 605                            1              2          32%        68%        0%
 Natural Resources and Adaptation to Climate Change                                                                                                       on-going
 Protection of the resources and ecosystems in the                                                                                                      Identification
                                                                                                PO_R2 Cameroon                             8 438 655                           1              2          27%        73%        0%
 national part of the Niger Basin                                                                                                                         on-going
 Capitalisation and dissemination of good practices for                                                                                                60% identified -
                                                                                                PO_R2 SE-ABN                             11 532 773                            1              2          19%        34%        47%
 the restoration of degraded ecosystems                                                                                                                  PIDACC
 Development of the water development and
                                                                                                                                                        Identification
 management scheme for the national part of the Niger                                           PO_R2 Benin                                 621 849                            1              2          0%        100%        0%
                                                                                                                                                          on-going
 Basin
CIWA: Cooperation in International Waters in Africa
NC: National Contribution
DIN: Inner Delta of the Niger
ONCC: National Observatory for Climate Change
NAPA: National Adaptation Programmes of Action
PIDACC: Programme for Integrated Development and Adaptation to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
NAP: National Adaptation Plan
PNACC: National Programme for Adaptation to Climate Change
PNSFN: National Programme to Safeguard the Niger River
PO: NBA Operational Plan
SE/ABN: Executive Secretariat of the NBA
SIE: Water Information System




d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
      120                                                                                                                                                                                                              Appendixes




      SELECTED ACTIONS IN THE CLIMATE RESILIENCE INVESTMENT PLAN FOR NIGER BASIN – SECOND PACKAGE

                                                                                                                                                                                                     Financial scheduling and
                                                                                                                                                Prioritization options
                                                            Reference document and     Overall action          Funding                                                                                   Implementation
                       Action title
                                                              beneficiary country       cost (USD)             sources                   Contribution to                 Preparation                PO-PT1            PO-PT2            PO-PT3
                                                                                                                                           resilience                       stage                    2016-18           2019-21           2022-24

4 - Measures targeting vulnerability to water stress
Rehabilitation of the Baskouré dam and preparation of
                                                                                                         30% identified -
60 hectares of lowlands in the municipalities of            PO_R1 Burkina Faso              1 452 101                                                3                            5                  100%                 0%                  0%
                                                                                                            PIDACC
Baskouré, Diabo and Fada
                                                                                                            Identification
Construction of improved wells                              NAPA Guinea                       250 000                                                3                            2                  100%                 0%                  0%
                                                                                                              on-going
                                                                                                            Identification
Dissemination of rainwater harvesting basins                NAPA Guinea                       280 000                                                3                            2                  100%                 0%                  0%
                                                                                                              on-going
Development of irrigated rice farming in Middle and                                                         Identification
                                                            NAPA Guinea                       300 000                                                3                            2                  100%                 0%                  0%
Upper Guinea                                                                                                  on-going
Exploitation of indigenous knowledge and positive                                                           Identification
                                                            NAPA Guinea                       300 000                                                3                            2                  100%                 0%                  0%
practices                                                                                                     on-going
                                                                                                            Identification
Promotion of breeding small ruminants                       NAPA Guinea                       325 000                                                3                            2                  100%                 0%                  0%
                                                                                                              on-going
Promotion of bricks made of compacted earth with the
                                                                                                            Identification
aim of reducing the environmental impact of fired           NAPA Guinea                       600 000                                                3                            2                  100%                 0%                  0%
                                                                                                              on-going
bricks
Intensification of pearl millet farming in the northern                                                     Identification
                                                            NAPA Guinea                       350 000                                                3                            2                  100%                 0%                  0%
area of Guinea                                                                                                on-going
Feasibility study of small developments in the tops of
                                                                                                            Identification
the sub-watersheds of the upper stretches of the Niger      NC PNSFN Mali                     813 941                                                3                            2                  100%                 0%                  0%
                                                                                                              on-going
and Bani rivers for environmental restoration
Rehabilitation of the dam and creation of 192 ha of
                                                                                                            Identification
irrigated land downstream of the Sidi-KompIenga dam         PO_R1 Burkina Faso              3 290 756                                                3                            5                   99%                 1%                  0%
                                                                                                              on-going
(Gnagna, East)
Development of irrigated crops in the provinces of                                                          Identification
                                                            NAPA Burkina Faso                 443 300                                                3                            2                   98%                 2%                  0%
Gourma, Namemtenga, Tapoa and Sanmatenga.                                                                     on-going
Rehabilitation of the dam and 14 ha of irrigated utilised                                                30% identified -
                                                            PO_R1 Burkina Faso              1 363 025                                                3                            5                   97%                 3%                  0%
agricultural land equipped with 50 wells at Dabesma                                                         PIDACC

                                                                                                        d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

                       Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
      Appendixes                                                                                                                                                                                                                    121



                                                                                                                                                                                                                Financial scheduling and
                                                                                                                                                                                    Prioritization options
                                                                                            Reference document and                          Overall action      Funding                                             Implementation
                                Action title
                                                                                              beneficiary country                            cost (USD)         sources         Contribution to   Preparation   PO-PT1    PO-PT2    PO-PT3
                                                                                                                                                                                  resilience         stage      2016-18   2019-21   2022-24
(Gnagna, East)
Development and management of the waterhole at                                                                                                                Identification
                                                                                           NAPA Burkina Faso                                      275 000                             3                2         96%       4%        0%
Oursi                                                                                                                                                           on-going
Strengthening the Shared management of water
resources in the Basin (Construction of weirs, and
                                                                                                                                                             60% identified -
erosion control and runoff water catchment                                                 PO_R2 Nigeria                                          225 210                             1                2         95%       5%        0%
                                                                                                                                                                PIDACC
infrastructures; Quantitative management of water
resources)
Enhancement and safeguarding of access to water
                                                                                                                                                              Identification
resources and wastewater treatment in a context of                                         PNACC Cameroon                                        8 880 000                            3                2         88%       12%       0%
                                                                                                                                                                on-going
climate change
Safeguarding of agricultural production by the use of
                                                                                                                                                              Identification
appropriate technological packages in the South-West                                       NAPA Burkina Faso                                      297 924                             3                2         85%       15%       0%
                                                                                                                                                                on-going
and East regions.
Construction of the Coalla dam (5 Mm3) in the
                                                                                                                                                             50% identified -
province of Gnagna (East) and preparation of 122 ha                                        PO_R1 Burkina Faso                                    5 749 580                            3                5         82%       18%       0%
                                                                                                                                                                PIDACC
of irrigated land
Completion of the construction of the Bambakari dam
                                                                                                                                                             20% identified -
(163 Mm3) in the province of Déno (Sahel) and                                              PO_R1 Burkina Faso                                   31 751 261                            3                5         72%       28%       0%
                                                                                                                                                                PIDACC
preparation of 300ha of irrigated land
Adaptation of the farming calendars to the new climate                                     National communication on                                          Identification
                                                                                                                                                 2 538 276                            3                2         65%       35%       0%
context                                                                                    climate change Benin                                                 on-going
Development of multi-purpose hydroagricultural                                                                                                               50% identified -
                                                                                           PO_R1 Cameroon                                        1 100 840                            3                2         62%       38%       0%
infrastructures in the municipality of Garoua                                                                                                                   PIDACC
                                                                                                                                                              Identification
Improvement and dissemination of crop calendars                                            NAPA Chad                                             1 000 000                            3                2         62%       38%       0%
                                                                                                                                                                on-going
Programme for the development of irrigation in the                                                                                                            Identification
                                                                                           NC PNSFN Mali                                      205 346 539                             3                2         58%       42%       0%
Bani and Sankarani basin                                                                                                                                        on-going
Rural, Pastoral and Transhumance Infrastructure                                                                                                              0% identified -
                                                                                           PO_R1 Chad                                           17 616 807                            3                2         54%       46%       0%
project.                                                                                                                                                       PIDACC
Development of the waterhole in Dori                                                       PO_R1 Burkina Faso                                   86 301 389   0% identified -          3                2         51%       49%       0%


      d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

      Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
      122                                                                                                                                                                                                              Appendixes




                                                                                                                                                                                                     Financial scheduling and
                                                                                                                                                Prioritization options
                                                          Reference document and       Overall action          Funding                                                                                   Implementation
                      Action title
                                                            beneficiary country         cost (USD)             sources                   Contribution to                 Preparation                PO-PT1            PO-PT2            PO-PT3
                                                                                                                                           resilience                       stage                    2016-18           2019-21           2022-24
                                                                                                               PIDACC
Development of integrated farming which is resilient to                                                     Identification
                                                          PNACC Cameroon                    8 880 000                                                3                            2                   51%                49%                  0%
the effects of climate change                                                                                 on-going
Development of the waterhole at Torrock for crops and                                                    30% identified -
                                                          PO_R1 Chad                        1 048 739                                                3                            2                   50%                50%                  0%
to provide drinking water for cattle                                                                        PIDACC
Mobilisation of surface water in order to adapt to
                                                                                                            Identification
climate change in the most vulnerable municipalities of   NAPA Benin                        2 875 000                                                3                            2                   49%                39%              12%
                                                                                                              on-going
the departments in the Centre and the North
                                                                                                         40% identified -
Rehabilitation of the Kiemna dam                          PO_R1 Burkina Faso                  334 454                                                3                            4                   47%                53%                  0%
                                                                                                            PIDACC
                                                                                                         20% identified -
Rehabilitation of the Bani dam                            PO_R1 Burkina Faso                  768 252                                                3                            5                   46%                54%                  0%
                                                                                                            PIDACC
Creation of 241 ha of irrigated land at the SIRBA dam                                                       Identification
                                                          PO_R1 Burkina Faso                3 448 739                                                3                            5                   42%                58%                  0%
(Gnagna, East)                                                                                                on-going
                                                                                                         40% identified -
Rehabilitation of the Boudieri dam                        PO_R1 Burkina Faso                1 351 261                                                3                            5                   42%                58%                  0%
                                                                                                            PIDACC
                                                                                                         40% identified -
Rehabilitation of the Touro dam                           PO_R1 Burkina Faso                1 568 067                                                3                            5                   41%                59%                  0%
                                                                                                            PIDACC
                                                                                                            Identification
Construction of multi-purpose mini-dams                   NAPA Guinea                         600 000                                                3                            2                   40%                60%                  0%
                                                                                                              on-going
                                                                                                            Identification
Construction of hillside reservoirs                       NAPA Guinea                         180 000                                                3                            2                   40%                60%                  0%
                                                                                                              on-going
                                                                                                            Identification
Hydro-agricultural development at Fianga. 5,000 ha        PO_R1 Chad                        2 823 529                                                3                            4                   36%                64%                  0%
                                                                                                              on-going
Djarao, Domo and Léo hydro-agricultural development.                                                        Identification
                                                     PO_R1 Chad                           169 371 429                                                3                            4                   36%                64%                  0%
10,000 ha                                                                                                     on-going
Programme for the development of agriculture which is
                                                          NC Fast start Mali               94 000 000 40% identified -                               3                            2                   35%                35%              30%
resilient to climate change.
Hydro-agricultural development at Ghétahlé -Tréné.                                                          Identification
                                                          PO_R1 Chad                        1 164 706                                                3                            4                   34%                66%                  0%
5,000 ha                                                                                                      on-going


                                                                                                        d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

                       Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
      Appendixes                                                                                                                                                                                                                    123



                                                                                                                                                                                                                Financial scheduling and
                                                                                                                                                                                    Prioritization options
                                                                                            Reference document and                          Overall action      Funding                                             Implementation
                                Action title
                                                                                              beneficiary country                            cost (USD)         sources         Contribution to   Preparation   PO-PT1    PO-PT2    PO-PT3
                                                                                                                                                                                  resilience         stage      2016-18   2019-21   2022-24

Safeguarding of cereal production by the promotion of
                                                                                                                                                              Identification
supplementary irrigation in the provinces of Oudalan                                       NAPA Burkina Faso                                      408 660                             3                2         33%       66%       0%
                                                                                                                                                                on-going
and Nammemtenga.
Mobilisation of surface water for agriculture and to                                                                                                          Identification
                                                                                           NAPA Chad                                             1 800 000                            3                2         31%       67%       2%
supply cattle.                                                                                                                                                  on-going
                                                                                                                                                             60% identified -
Construction of a new reservoir dam at Aboka                                               PO_R1 Niger                                           1 194 958                            3                3         27%       73%       0%
                                                                                                                                                                PIDACC
Irrigation development inTada Shonga (Kwara State)                                                                                                            Identification
                                                                                           PO_R1 Nigeria                                         1 845 378                            3                2         27%       73%       0%
                                                                                                                                                                on-going
Programme for harvesting and storing rainwater                                             NC Fast start Mali                                   62 800 000 50% identified -           3                2         26%       74%       0%
Development of the rice-growing area of Voli (Gounou                                                                                                         10% identified -
                                                                                           PO_R1 Chad                                           15 630 252                            3                5         26%       74%       0%
Gaya). 1,020 ha                                                                                                                                                 PIDACC
Rehabilitation of the dam and creation of 11 ha of
irrigated utilised agricultural land and preparation of                                                                                                      40% identified -
                                                                                           PO_R1 Burkina Faso                                    1 885 714                            3                5         24%       76%       0%
100 ha of horticultural land at Tanga (Kouritenga,                                                                                                              PIDACC
Centre-East) equipped with 50 wells
Diversification and intensification of crop production in                                                                                                     Identification
                                                                                           NAPA Chad                                             1 200 000                            3                2         24%       50%       26%
the Sudanian and Sahelian areas of Chad                                                                                                                         on-going
Development of an area for floodplain crop production                                                                                                         Identification
                                                                                           PO_R1 Chad                                             741 176                             3                2         20%       80%       0%
in the region of Mayo Kebbi Est (at Tikem). 600 ha                                                                                                              on-going
                                                                                                                                                           100% identified
Project for the construction of a dam and                                                                                                                  - PIDACC 55%,
                                                                                           PO_R1 Ivory Coast                                     2 952 941                            3                2         18%       82%       0%
hydroagricultural development at KOUBAN 80ha                                                                                                                 BOAD 30% ,
                                                                                                                                                               Etat 15%
                                                                                                                                                             70% identified -
Project for the construction of a dam and
                                                                                           PO_R1 Ivory Coast                                     3 524 370    PIDACC 55%,             3                2         18%       82%       0%
hydroagricultural development at Katiendé 22ha
                                                                                                                                                                Etat 15%
                                                                                                                                                             70% identified -
Project for the construction of a dam and
                                                                                           PO_R1 Ivory Coast                                     5 835 294    PIDACC 55%,             3                2         18%       82%       0%
hydroagricultural development at Dimbasso. 182 ha
                                                                                                                                                                Etat 15%
Rehabilitation of the irrigated area of Galmi 250 ha                                       PO_R1 Niger                                           2 823 529 60% identified -           3                2         17%       83%       0%


      d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

      Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
      124                                                                                                                                                                                                              Appendixes




                                                                                                                                                                                                     Financial scheduling and
                                                                                                                                                Prioritization options
                                                            Reference document and     Overall action          Funding                                                                                   Implementation
                       Action title
                                                              beneficiary country       cost (USD)             sources                   Contribution to                 Preparation                PO-PT1            PO-PT2            PO-PT3
                                                                                                                                           resilience                       stage                    2016-18           2019-21           2022-24
                                                                                                               PIDACC
Rehabilitation of Kainji dam (Including Units 7, 8, 9, 10                                                   Identification
                                                            PO_R1 Nigeria                 136 800 000                                                3                            2                   15%                48%              37%
et 11)                                                                                                        on-going
Construction of two (2) weirs for floodplain crop                                                        60% identified -
                                                            PO_R1 Niger                     2 605 042                                                3                            2                    9%                64%              27%
production (Gorouol, DolBel, Terra)                                                                         PIDACC
Development of water points for cattle and                                                               10% identified -
                                                            PO_R1 Nigeria                   5 092 437                                                3                            2                    8%                79%              13%
development of transhumance pathways                                                                        PIDACC
Rehabilitation and equipping of village irrigation areas                                                 60% identified -
                                                            PO_R1 Mali                      5 588 235                                                3                            2                    7%                93%                  0%
in the region of Gao                                                                                        PIDACC
Construction of hydro-agricultural dams, development
                                                                                                         10% identified -
and utilisation of the Garoua area upstream (Bocklé,        PO_R1 Cameroon                  2 813 445                                                3                            2                    5%                95%                  0%
                                                                                                            PIDACC
Garoua III, Bénoué department)
                                                                                                            Identification
Development and utilisation of the Lagdo II area            PO_R1 Cameroon                 74 386 555                                                3                            4                    5%                95%                  0%
                                                                                                              on-going
Development and utilisation of the Faro-Bénoué                                                              Identification
                                                            PO_R1 Cameroon                 21 581 513                                                3                            4                    5%                95%                  0%
confluence area                                                                                               on-going
                                                                                                            Identification
Development of the west Garoua area                         PO_R1 Cameroon                 13 361 345                                                3                            4                    5%                95%                  0%
                                                                                                              on-going
                                                                                                         10% identified -
Development of small individual areas                       PO_R1 Cameroon                  7 517 647                                                3                            4                    5%                95%                  0%
                                                                                                            PIDACC
Rehabilitation and agricultural diversification of twenty                                                10% identified -
                                                            PO_R1 Benin                     7 515 966                                                3                            2                    5%                72%              23%
agro-pastoral reservoirs in Benin                                                                           PIDACC
Rehabilitation and diversification of 5 small dams at
                                                                                                           56% identified
Gamagou, Gah, Guessou, Sombi, Kérékou, Wara and             PO_R1_Benin                     1 500 000                                                3                            4                    5%                72%              23%
                                                                                                             PIDACC
Zougou Pantrossi in Superior Alibori region
Low-cost development of 10,000 ha of plains in                                                           60% identified -
                                                            PO_R1 Ivory Coast               3 215 126                                                3                            2                    5%                58%              37%
Kabadougou and Folon (north-west)                                                                           PIDACC
                                                                                                            Identification
Development of smallholders irrigation schemes              PO_R1 Cameroon                 62 512 605                                                3                            4                    5%                57%              38%
                                                                                                              on-going
Project to support the development of agriculture in the PO_R1 Mali                        14 159 664 60% identified -                               3                            4                    4%                96%                  0%


                                                                                                        d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

                       Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
      Appendixes                                                                                                                                                                                                                    125



                                                                                                                                                                                                                Financial scheduling and
                                                                                                                                                                                    Prioritization options
                                                                                            Reference document and                          Overall action      Funding                                             Implementation
                                Action title
                                                                                              beneficiary country                            cost (USD)         sources         Contribution to   Preparation   PO-PT1    PO-PT2    PO-PT3
                                                                                                                                                                                  resilience         stage      2016-18   2019-21   2022-24
Douentza area                                                                                                                                                   PIDACC
Construction of multipurpose dams, irrigation schemes                                                                                                        0% identified -
                                                                                           PO_R1 Nigeria                                      243 858 824                             3                2         3%        33%       64%
and support measures to adapt to climate change                                                                                                                PIDACC
                                                                                                                                                             10% identified -
Construction of ten (10) multi-purpose dams                                                PO_R1 Benin                                          35 647 059                            3                2         3%        29%       68%
                                                                                                                                                                PIDACC
                                                                                                                                                              Identification
National Horticultural Support Project                                                     PO_R1 Mali                                            6 105 882                            3                4         2%        71%       27%
                                                                                                                                                                on-going
                                                                                                                                                             20% identified -
Construction of multipurpose dams                                                          PO_R1 Cameroon                                        4 872 269                            3                2         2%        69%       29%
                                                                                                                                                                PIDACC
Rehabilitation of 84 reservoirs in the region of Bagoue                                                                                                       Identification
                                                                                           PO_R1 Ivory Coast                                    56 003 361                            3                2         2%        59%       39%
and Kabadougou                                                                                                                                                  on-going
                                                                                                                                                          90% identified -
Low-cost development of 20,000 ha of Bagoué                                                                                                                3 bailleurs à
                                                                                           PO_R1 Ivory Coast                                  106 198 319                             3                2         2%        59%       39%
floodplains                                                                                                                                               30% chacun +
                                                                                                                                                            Etat 10%
Fomi safeguard policies elaboration                                                        PO_R1 Guinea                                          2 000 000 50% identified -           3                3         2%        39%       59%
                                                                                                                                                              Identification
Rehabilitation of the irrigated area of Tara 101 ha                                        PO_R1 Niger                                           1 278 992                            3                2         0%        83%       17%
                                                                                                                                                                on-going
Support for the production of seeds of agricultural                                                                                                           Identification
                                                                                           PO_R1 Mali                                            2 974 790                            2                2         0%        50%       50%
origin                                                                                                                                                          on-going
Rehabilitation of dams and construction of reservoirs
for irrigation and fish farming at Kankan, Kouroussa,                                                                                                        60% identified -
                                                                                           PO_R1 Guinea                                          9 132 773                            3                4         0%        27%       73%
Mandiana, Faranah, Dinguiraye, Kérouané and                                                                                                                     PIDACC
Kissidougou.
Construction of the Kaoura Abdou hydroagricultural                                                                                                            Identification
                                                                                           PO_R1 Niger                                          17 442 017                            3                5         0%        0%        100%
dam at Badaguichiri                                                                                                                                             on-going
Creation of an irrigated area and rehabilitation of the                                                                                                       Identification
                                                                                           PO_R1 Niger                                          12 774 790                            3                2         0%        0%        100%
dyke at Gatawani Dolé                                                                                                                                           on-going
5 – Measures targeting vulnerability to flooding
Construction of structures to fight flooding in the region                                 PO_R2 Mali                                            2 124 370 60% identified -           3                2        100%       0%        0%


      d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

      Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
      126                                                                                                                                                                                                              Appendixes




                                                                                                                                                                                                     Financial scheduling and
                                                                                                                                                Prioritization options
                                                           Reference document and      Overall action          Funding                                                                                   Implementation
                      Action title
                                                             beneficiary country        cost (USD)             sources                   Contribution to                 Preparation                PO-PT1            PO-PT2            PO-PT3
                                                                                                                                           resilience                       stage                    2016-18           2019-21           2022-24
of Gao                                                                                                         PIDACC
                                                                                                         10% identified -
Flood management Project                                   PO_R2 Nigeria                    4 954 622                                                3                            2                   76%                24%                  0%
                                                                                                            PIDACC
                                                                                                            Identification
Flood protection                                           PO_R2 Ivory Coast                1 307 563                                                3                            2                   42%                58%                  0%
                                                                                                              on-going
Feasibility study for the reshaping of the Niger Rriver in                                                  Identification
                                                           NC PNSFN Mali                    1 692 184                                                1                            2                   31%                69%                  0%
the towns of Mopti and Bamako                                                                                 on-going
                                                                                                          0% identified -
Construction of flood-protection dykes                     PO_R2 Benin                     50 732 773                                                3                            2                   16%                84%                  0%
                                                                                                            PIDACC
The project for the development and recovery of the
                                                           NC PNSFN Mali                      846 092 20% identified -                               2                            2                   13%                87%                  0%
banks of the Niger River in the District of Bamako
Construction of flood protection dikes around Niamey                                                     60% identified -
                                                           PO_R1 Niger                      1 793 277                                                3                            2                    9%                91%                  0%
irrigation scheme and other related infrastructure                                                          PIDACC
6 – Measures targeting vulnerability to soil degradation
                                                                                                         60% identified -
Reforestation of 300 ha on the banks of waterholes         PO_R2 Guinea                       354 622                                                3                            2                  100%                 0%                  0%
                                                                                                            PIDACC
36- Topographical and photographic survey by LIDAR
                                                                                                            Identification
laser procedure of dam reservoirs (Sélingué, Markala,      NC PNSFN Mali                      473 812                                                1                            2                   97%                 3%                  0%
                                                                                                              on-going
Talo, Djenné)
Restoration of the banks and development of                                                              60% identified -
                                                           PO_R2 Guinea                     1 368 067                                                3                            2                   63%                37%                  0%
agroforestry                                                                                                PIDACC
Stabilisation of dunes in the regions of Tillabéry and
                                                                                                         60% identified -
Dosso (Kandadji area, Dallol, Maouri and Foga area,        PO_R2 Niger                      1 026 891                                                3                            2                   63%                37%                  0%
                                                                                                            PIDACC
Ouallam area) (3,000 ha)
Soil and water conservation in the regions of Tillabéry,
Dosso and Tahoua; Kandadji, Maouri, Foga areas;                                                          60% identified -
                                                           PO_R2 Niger                      1 285 714                                                3                            2                   63%                37%                  0%
Ouallam, Kollo, Konni, Madaoua and Bouza area                                                               PIDACC
(15,000 ha)
Fight against the impacts of gold-mining on the                                                             Identification
                                                           PO_R2 Ivory Coast                  349 580                                                3                            2                   54%                46%                  0%
environment and health                                                                                        on-going


                                                                                                        d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

                       Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
      Appendixes                                                                                                                                                                                                                    127



                                                                                                                                                                                                                Financial scheduling and
                                                                                                                                                                                    Prioritization options
                                                                                            Reference document and                          Overall action      Funding                                             Implementation
                                Action title
                                                                                              beneficiary country                            cost (USD)         sources         Contribution to   Preparation   PO-PT1    PO-PT2    PO-PT3
                                                                                                                                                                                  resilience         stage      2016-18   2019-21   2022-24

Restore degraded land through the promotion of                                                                                                                Identification
                                                                                           NC - AGIR Ivory Coast                                 8 577 681                            3                2         52%       48%       0%
agroforestry and community reforestation                                                                                                                        on-going
Protection of spring heads and banks (sub-watersheds                                                                                                         60% identified -
                                                                                           PO_R2 Guinea                                           695 798                             3                2         47%       53%       0%
of the Niandan, Tinkisso, Milo)                                                                                                                                 PIDACC
Restoration and protection of the tributaries of the
                                                                                                                                                             60% identified -
Niger River by reforestation campaigns and anti-                                           PO_R2 Ivory Coast                                     1 297 479                            3                2         46%       54%       0%
                                                                                                                                                                PIDACC
erosion and anti-silting measures
Construction of defensive structures and restoration of                                                                                                       Identification
                                                                                           NAPA Chad                                             1 300 000                            3                2         40%       60%       0%
land for the development of agricultural activities                                                                                                             on-going
Protection of the basin (Departments of Odienné,
Boundiali, Madinani, Minignan and Tengréla) /                                                                                                                 Identification
                                                                                           PO_R2 Ivory Coast                                     1 931 092                            3                2         39%       61%       0%
Treatment of degraded land for the protection of the                                                                                                            on-going
banks
Stabilisation of 2,500 ha of dunes in the provinces of                                                                                                        Identification
                                                                                           PO_R2 Burkina Faso                                    2 831 933                            3                2         38%       62%       0%
Oudalan, Séno and Yagha                                                                                                                                         on-going
                                                                                                                                                             50% identified -
Restoration of land and anti-erosion measures                                              PO_R2 Burkina Faso                                    7 078 992                            3                2         36%       64%       0%
                                                                                                                                                                PIDACC
Anti-erosion and anti-silting measures, and sustainable                                                                                                      60% identified -
                                                        PO_R2 Mali                                                                               9 981 513                            3                2         36%       64%       0%
forest management                                                                                                                                               PIDACC
Bioligical and mechanical treatment of koris in Tillabery PO_R2 Niger                                                                                        60% identified -
                                                                                                                                                 2 594 958                            3                2         36%       64%       0%
and Tahoua region (15 000m3)                                                                                                                                    PIDACC
                                                                                                                                                              Identification
Erosion, flood and siltation control in Nigeria.                                           PO_R2 Nigeria                                        20 292 437                            3                2         36%       64%       0%
                                                                                                                                                                on-going
Recovery of 6,191 ha of degraded land in Séno and
                                                                                                                                                             10% identified -
Oudalan (restoration of land (Restoration of land,                                         PO_R2 Burkina Faso                                    3 828 571                            3                2         33%       67%       0%
                                                                                                                                                                UEMOA
studies)
Development and planting of village forests in the
                                                                                                                                                             60% identified -
Tillabéry regions, Téra, Say, Torodi and Makalondi                                         PO_R2 Niger                                           1 344 538                            3                2         33%       67%       0%
                                                                                                                                                                PIDACC
municipalities (20,000 ha)
Restoration of fallow land and promotion of                                                                                                                  60% identified -
                                                                                           PO_R2 Niger                                           1 680 672                            3                2         33%       67%       0%
agroforestry (10,000 ha)                                                                                                                                        PIDACC

      d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

      Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
      128                                                                                                                                                                                                              Appendixes




                                                                                                                                                                                                     Financial scheduling and
                                                                                                                                                Prioritization options
                                                             Reference document and    Overall action          Funding                                                                                   Implementation
                       Action title
                                                               beneficiary country      cost (USD)             sources                   Contribution to                 Preparation                PO-PT1            PO-PT2            PO-PT3
                                                                                                                                           resilience                       stage                    2016-18           2019-21           2022-24

Rehabilitation of degraded agricultural land                 PO_R2 Nigeria                                  Identification
                                                                                            1 253 782                                                3                            2                   33%                67%                  0%
                                                                                                              on-going
                                                                                                          0% identified -
Anti-erosion and anti-silting measures, continued            PO_R2 Benin                    7 075 630                                                3                            2                   30%                70%                  0%
                                                                                                            PIDACC
Improve water resource protection against siltation and      CN PAGIRE Burkina Faso                         Identification
                                                                                           16 837 232                                                3                            2                   21%                44%              35%
invasive species                                                                                              on-going
Conservation and participatory management of sub-
watersheds (support for protection, studies and                                                             Identification
                                                             PO_R2 Cameroon                12 169 748                                                3                            2                    7%                93%                  0%
enhancement of capacities)                                                                                    on-going

Development of the Mayo–Louti catchment area                                                                Identification
                                                             PO_R2 Cameroon                 3 257 143                                                3                            5                    7%                93%                  0%
(restoration of land, studies)                                                                                on-going
Protection of banks by planting and transplanting                                                        60% identified -
                                                             PO_R2 Mali                     8 258 824                                                3                            2                    4%                96%                  0%
bourgou, and measures against invasive plants                                                               PIDACC
Promotion and development of reforestation in the            PO_R2 Ivory Coast                           10% identified -
                                                                                            1 495 798                                                3                            2                    0%               100%                  0%
North of the country (wood energy)                                                                          PIDACC
                                                                                                            Identification
"Green Wall" experimental project                            PO_R2 Mali                     9 910 924                                                3                            2                    0%               100%                  0%
                                                                                                              on-going
Development of agroforestry and sustainable                                                              100% identified
                                                             PO_R2 Niger                   34 584 689                                                3                            4                    0%               100%                  0%
management of soil fertility                                                                                   -
Support for the improvement of soil fertility, restoration                                               100% identified
                                                             PO_R2 Niger                   37 417 575                                                3                            4                    0%               100%                  0%
of degraded land                                                                                               -
Integrated project to stabilise the dunes and combat                                                        Identification
                                                             PO_R2 Niger                      472 269                                                3                            2                    0%               100%                  0%
poverty (Namaro)                                                                                              on-going
7 - Measures targeting vulnerability to degradation of the grazing land
Forage production and stockpiling of emergency
                                                                                                            Identification
supplies for cattle in the Burkina Faso area of the          NAPA Burkina Faso                330 000                                                3                            2                  100%                 0%                  0%
                                                                                                              on-going
Sahel
Safeguarding pastoral areas in the regions of the Sahel                                                     Identification
                                                        NAPA Burkina Faso                     300 000                                                3                            2                   94%                 6%                  0%
and the East.                                                                                                 on-going


                                                                                                        d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

                       Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
      Appendixes                                                                                                                                                                                                                    129



                                                                                                                                                                                                                Financial scheduling and
                                                                                                                                                                                    Prioritization options
                                                                                            Reference document and                          Overall action      Funding                                             Implementation
                                Action title
                                                                                              beneficiary country                            cost (USD)         sources         Contribution to   Preparation   PO-PT1    PO-PT2    PO-PT3
                                                                                                                                                                                  resilience         stage      2016-18   2019-21   2022-24

Reduction of the vulnerability of the livestock sector to                                                                                                     Identification
                                                                                           PNACC Cameroon                                        5 550 000                            3                2         65%       35%       0%
the effects of climate change (REVEECC))                                                                                                                        on-going
Support for management of the pastoral area and                                                                                                              60% identified -
                                                                                           PO_R1 Ivory Coast                                     1 863 866                            3                2         43%       57%       0%
prevention of conflicts in the northern area                                                                                                                    PIDACC
Programme of pastoral development resilient to climate
                                                       NC Fast start Mali                                                                     109 900 000 50% identified -            3                2         36%       35%       29%
change;
                                                                                                                                                              Identification
Improvement of intercommunity grazing areas                                                NAPA Chad                                             1 500 000                            3                2         35%       52%       13%
                                                                                                                                                                on-going
Support for vulnerable groups for cattle and sheep                                                                                                           60% identified -
                                                                                           PO_R1 Mali                                            3 915 966                            3                2         28%       36%       36%
fattening in the regions of Gao, Timbuktu                                                                                                                       PIDACC
Bukina Faso National Observatory on Pastoralism                                            Bukina Faso Climate                                                Identification
                                                                                                                                                 3 294 682                            3                2         N/A       N/A       100%
(ONPB)                                                                                     Investment Projects                                                  on-going
8 - Measures targeting vulnerability to degradation of the ecosystems
                                                                                                                                                             60% identified -
Creation of a fish farm in Minignan                                                        PO_R1 Ivory Coast                                      206 723                             2                4        100%       0%        0%
                                                                                                                                                                PIDACC
Creation of cane rat ranches in order to reduce
                                                                                                                                                              Identification
bushfires and improve living conditions for rural                                          NAPA Guinea                                            300 000                             3                2        100%       0%        0%
                                                                                                                                                                on-going
populations
Promotion of the use of solar energy to dry fish with the                                                                                                     Identification
                                                          NAPA Guinea                                                                             300 000                             3                2        100%       0%        0%
aim of reducing the use of wood for smoking                                                                                                                     on-going
Delimitating the zones for the conservation (forests,                                                                                                         Identification
                                                                                           PO_R2 Nigeria                                          593 277                             3                2        100%       0%        0%
protected zones) / Identification of sites                                                                                                                      on-going
                                                                                                                                                              Identification
Fight against bush fire                                                                    PO_R2 Nigeria                                          176 471                             3                2        100%       0%        0%
                                                                                                                                                                on-going
                                                                                                                                                             100% identified
Support for fish-farming and training of fishermen                                         PO_R1 Niger                                           5 280 672                            2                2        100%       0%        0%
                                                                                                                                                                   -
Development of 300 ha of ponds overrun with Typha                                                                                                            100% identified
                                                                                           PO_R1 Niger                                           1 136 134                            3                2        100%       0%        0%
australis (Dosso region)                                                                                                                                           -
Development and adaptation of fisheries to climate                                         PO_R1 Niger                                                       100% identified
                                                                                                                                                13 021 357                            2                2        100%       0%        0%
change                                                                                                                                                             -


      d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

      Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
      130                                                                                                                                                                                                              Appendixes




                                                                                                                                                                                                     Financial scheduling and
                                                                                                                                                Prioritization options
                                                             Reference document and    Overall action          Funding                                                                                   Implementation
                       Action title
                                                               beneficiary country      cost (USD)             sources                   Contribution to                 Preparation                PO-PT1            PO-PT2            PO-PT3
                                                                                                                                           resilience                       stage                    2016-18           2019-21           2022-24

Performance of work to restore the forests in the rural                                                     Identification
                                                             NC - DCDF Ivory Coast          1 300 000                                                3                            2                   90%                10%                  0%
sector                                                                                                        on-going
Restoration project for degraded forests in the rural                                                       Identification
                                                             NC - PND Ivory Coast           1 086 213                                                3                            2                   90%                10%                  0%
sector                                                                                                        on-going
Support for the implementation of community forest                                                          Identification
                                                             NAPA Guinea                      600 000                                                3                            2                   84%                16%                  0%
management plans                                                                                              on-going
Project to support communities in the savannah area          NC - Management of
                                                                                                            Identification
for protection against desertification and the loss of the   community forests Ivory        1 710 327                                                3                            2                   83%                17%                  0%
                                                                                                              on-going
means of subsistence of the local communities.               Coast
Conservation measures of Forest galeries on                  PO_R2 Nigeria                                  Identification
                                                                                            1 297 479                                                3                            2                   83%                17%                  0%
secondary rivers                                                                                              on-going
Project to plant useful forest trees in the communities                                                     Identification
                                                             NC - PND Ivory Coast           1 297 905                                                3                            2                   78%                22%                  0%
of the regions of Poro, Tchologo and Bagoué                                                                   on-going
Promotion of energy-saving equipment (improved
stoves, M'Bora stew pot) and renewable energy                                                               Identification
                                                             NAPA Burkina Faso              1 230 000                                                3                            2                   68%                32%                  0%
technologies (pressure cooker, water heater and solar                                                         on-going
dryers, etc.)
Reduction of the vulnerability of forests to climate                                                        Identification
                                                             PNACC Cameroon                 8 880 000                                                3                            2                   65%                35%                  0%
change in Cameroon                                                                                            on-going
Development of fisheries infrastructure Aménagement          PO_R1 Ivory Coast                           60% identified -
                                                                                            1 030 252                                                2                            2                   62%                38%                  0%
des infrastructures de pêche                                                                                PIDACC
Implementation of the Kankan wildlife reserve                                                            60% identified -
                                                             PO_R2 Guinea                   2 100 840                                                2                            2                   56%                44%                  0%
management plan                                                                                             PIDACC
                                                                                                            Identification
Support the fight against bushfires                          NC - AGIR Ivory Coast          3 578 969                                                3                            2                   55%                45%                  0%
                                                                                                              on-going
                                                                                                            Identification
Promotion of fire management and prohibited access           NAPA Guinea                      300 000                                                3                            2                   55%                45%                  0%
                                                                                                              on-going
Forest development in the provinces of Oudalan and                                                       10% identified -
                                                             PO_R2 Burkina Faso             1 712 605                                                3                            2                   54%                46%                  0%
Séno                                                                                                        UEMOA
                                                                                                         60% identified -
Construction of nursery ponds to rear fry                    PO_R1 Guinea                     282 353                                                2                            3                   54%                46%                  0%
                                                                                                            PIDACC

                                                                                                        d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

                       Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
      Appendixes                                                                                                                                                                                                                    131



                                                                                                                                                                                                                Financial scheduling and
                                                                                                                                                                                    Prioritization options
                                                                                            Reference document and                          Overall action      Funding                                             Implementation
                                Action title
                                                                                              beneficiary country                            cost (USD)         sources         Contribution to   Preparation   PO-PT1    PO-PT2    PO-PT3
                                                                                                                                                                                  resilience         stage      2016-18   2019-21   2022-24

                                                                                                                                                          60% identified -
Construction of fish ponds in Guinea                                                       PO_R1 Guinea                                           759 664                             2                3         54%       46%       0%
                                                                                                                                                             PIDACC
Capitalization of the fight against the water hyacinth                                                                                                        Identification
                                                                                           PO_R2 Nigeria                                         1 258 824                            3                2         54%       46%       0%
and the proliferation of sida cordifolia                                                                                                                        on-going
Development, rational management of natural training
                                                                                                                                                              Identification
and use of non-wood forest products (NWFP) in the                                          NAPA Burkina Faso                                      700 000                             3                2         52%       48%       0%
                                                                                                                                                                on-going
East region of Burkina Faso
Preservation of the ecosystems and conservation of
                                                                                                                                                             60% identified -
biodiversity (Ramsar -Niger, Niandan –Milo, Niger-                                         PO_R2 Guinea                                           932 773                             3                2         47%       53%       0%
                                                                                                                                                                PIDACC
Mafou,)
Rehabilitation of the classified forest of Guesselbodi                                                                                                       60% identified -
                                                                                           PO_R2 Niger                                          11 023 691                            3                4         47%       53%       0%
(2,000 ha)                                                                                                                                                      PIDACC
Conservation and management of the middle of Niger                                                                                                            Identification
                                                                                           PO_R2 Nigeria                                          566 387                             3                2         47%       53%       0%
area                                                                                                                                                            on-going
Socio-economic utilisation of invasive aquatic plant                                                                                                          Identification
                                                                                           PO_R2 Nigeria                                      151 490 756                             3                2         47%       53%       0%
species                                                                                                                                                         on-going
Adaptation of households to climate change by the
promotion of renewable energies and efficient
                                                                                                                                                              Identification
economical hearths and pressure cookers in areas                                           NAPA Benin                                            2 106 600                            3                2         43%       57%       0%
                                                                                                                                                                on-going
vulnerable to climate change and where the land is
severely degraded
Support for the development of fishing activities around                                                                                                     60% identified -
                                                         PO_R1 Ivory Coast                                                                       2 942 857                            2                3         43%       57%       0%
dams (Boundiali, Minignan and Odienné)                                                                                                                          PIDACC
                                                                                                                                                              Identification
Develop some protected zones                                                               PO_R2 Nigeria                                         2 598 319                            3                2         33%       67%       0%
                                                                                                                                                                on-going
Project to develop fish farming in floating cages and in                                                                                                     60% identified -
                                                                                           PO_R1 Mali                                            3 073 950                            2                5         32%       68%       0%
ponds                                                                                                                                                           PIDACC
The Economic and Environmental Rehabilitation
                                                                                           NC PNSFN Mali                                        60 918 627 90% identified -           3                2         32%       41%       27%
project for the Niger River
Rehabilitation of a nursery pond in Moli and                                               PO_R1 Niger                                                       60% identified -
                                                                                                                                                 1 003 361                            2                2         27%       73%       0%
construction of a nursery pond in Madarounfa                                                                                                                    PIDACC


      d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

      Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
      132                                                                                                                                                                                                              Appendixes




                                                                                                                                                                                                     Financial scheduling and
                                                                                                                                                Prioritization options
                                                           Reference document and      Overall action          Funding                                                                                   Implementation
                      Action title
                                                             beneficiary country        cost (USD)             sources                   Contribution to                 Preparation                PO-PT1            PO-PT2            PO-PT3
                                                                                                                                           resilience                       stage                    2016-18           2019-21           2022-24

Support to fisheries development                           PO_R1 Nigeria                              10% identified -
                                                                                            2 171 429                                                2                            2                   27%                73%                  0%
                                                                                                         PIDACC
Intensive reforestation programme to rebuild the forest
                                                           NC Fast start Mali             188 800 000 30% identified -                               3                            2                   27%                42%              31%
ecosystems in Mali
Promotion of wildlife and habitat management by local                                                       Identification
                                                           NAPA Burkina Faso                  810 000                                                2                            2                   24%                76%                  0%
communities in the region of Mouhoun                                                                          on-going
Support for fishermen and fish-farmers around the                                                        20% identified -
                                                           PO_R1 Cameroon                   4 752 941                                                2                            5                   21%                79%                  0%
Lagdo dam                                                                                                   PIDACC
Provision for the fight against aquatic invasive species
                                                                                                         60% identified -
in Cameroon, Ivory Coast and Nigeria (30 000 ha +          PO_R1 Cameroun                   4 192 347                                                3                            2                    7%                56%              37%
                                                                                                            PIDACC
5000 ha + 2500 m3)
Firewood production project and installation of a wood                                                      Identification
                                                           PO_R2 Mali                         810 000                                                3                            2                    0%               100%                  0%
market in the region of Gao and Timbuktu                                                                      on-going
Project for development, management of natural
                                                                                                            Identification
resources and promotion of Moringa oleifera (Tajaé,        PO_R2 Niger                      6 052 101                                                3                            2                    0%               100%                  0%
                                                                                                              on-going
Malbaza and Tsernaoua)
Sustainable management of the forest resources and
                                                           PO_R2 Niger                    126 242 017 30% identified -                               3                            4                    0%               100%                  0%
promotion of alternative energy sources
Support for the development of the fishing and fish-
                                                           PO_R1 Niger                      9 425 210 20% identified -                               2                            2                    0%                 0%             100%
farming sector
Development and use of the valley of Goroubi (Tamou                                                         Identification
                                                           PO_R1 Niger                      3 040 336                                                3                            2                    0%                 0%             100%
and Torodi)                                                                                                   on-going
Rehabilitation of the classified forest of BOUNDIALI in
                                                           NC - SODEFOR Ivory                               Identification
the north of Ivory Coast with the participation of the                                      1 718 098                                                3                            2                    N/A               N/A             100%
                                                           Coast                                              on-going
neighbouring populations (as for PO_R22208_CI_15)
Rehabilitation of the classified forest of FENGOLO -
PALE in the north of Ivory Coast with the participation    NC - SODEFOR Ivory                               Identification
                                                                                            1 065 560                                                3                            2                    N/A               N/A             100%
of the neighbouring populations (as for                    Coast                                              on-going
PO_R22208_CI_15)
9 - Measures targeting vulnerability to deterioration of the water quality and health
Protection of children under 5 and pregnant women          NAPA Benin                       1 112 500       Identification                           3                            2                  100%                 0%                  0%

                                                                                                        d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

                       Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
      Appendixes                                                                                                                                                                                                                    133



                                                                                                                                                                                                                Financial scheduling and
                                                                                                                                                                                    Prioritization options
                                                                                            Reference document and                          Overall action      Funding                                             Implementation
                                Action title
                                                                                              beneficiary country                            cost (USD)         sources         Contribution to   Preparation   PO-PT1    PO-PT2    PO-PT3
                                                                                                                                                                                  resilience         stage      2016-18   2019-21   2022-24
against malaria in the areas most vulnerable to climate                                                                                                         on-going
change
                                                                                                                                                              Identification
Pollution warning station on the Niger River                                               NC PNSFN Mali                                          177 679                             2                2        100%       0%        0%
                                                                                                                                                                on-going
Global study of pollution of the waters of the Niger                                                                                                          Identification
                                                                                           NC PNSFN Mali                                          255 520                             2                2        100%       0%        0%
River in Upper Niger in Mali                                                                                                                                    on-going
Mark out and display protection areas around the main                                                                                                         Identification
                                                                                           NC - PND Ivory Coast                                  1 015 310                            3                2         91%       9%        0%
water resources                                                                                                                                                 on-going
                                                                                                                                                              Identification
Rendering surface water drinkable using Hydropur©                                          NAPA Guinea                                            320 000                             3                2         78%       22%       0%
                                                                                                                                                                on-going
10 – Measures targeting vulnerability linked to the rising sea-level
Conservation and management of the coastal delta                                                                                                              Identification
                                                                                           PO_R2 Nigeria                                         1 090 756                            3                2         54%       46%       0%
zone of the Niger river                                                                                                                                         on-going
11 – Measures strengthening resilience (e.g. generation of jobs, revenues, etc.)
Support to the development of community and private                                                                                                           Identification
                                                                                           NAPA Guinea                                            600 000                             3                2         76%       24%       0%
Anacard tree planting                                                                                                                                           on-going
Development of improved wood carbonisation
                                                                                           National communication on                                          Identification
techniques and promotion of economical stoves in                                                                                                 4 061 242                            1                2         65%       35%       0%
                                                                                           climate change Benin                                                 on-going
order to reduce deforestation
Reduction of the effects of climate change on the                                                                                                             Identification
                                                                                           PNACC Cameroun                                        3 330 000                            3                2         65%       35%       0%
fisheries sector                                                                                                                                                on-going
Fish-farming development programme                                                         NC Fast start Mali                                   31 000 000 60% identified -           3                2         56%       44%       0%
Enhance the resilience of vulnerable populations by
                                                                                                                                                              Identification
restoring degraded land (agroforestry and community                                        NC - PND Ivory Coast                                  8 579 373                            3                2         52%       48%       0%
                                                                                                                                                                on-going
reforestation)
Development of Resilience of the population and the
Ecosystem in the Basin (Conservation of                                                                                                                      60% identified -
                                                                                           PO_R2 Nigeria                                         4 139 496                            3                2         46%       54%       0%
biodiversity/Forest management; Preservation of                                                                                                                 PIDACC
biodiversity / Management of the fauna reserve)
Rehabilitation of 300 km between Labezanga and Dolé                                        PO_R1 Niger                                           1 085 714 60% identified -           1                2         4%        96%       0%


      d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

      Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
      134                                                                                                                                                                                                              Appendixes




                                                                                                                                                                                                     Financial scheduling and
                                                                                                                                                Prioritization options
                                                           Reference document and      Overall action          Funding                                                                                   Implementation
                       Action title
                                                             beneficiary country        cost (USD)             sources                   Contribution to                 Preparation                PO-PT1            PO-PT2            PO-PT3
                                                                                                                                           resilience                       stage                    2016-18           2019-21           2022-24
(Gaya)                                                                                                         PIDACC
Construction of 30 landing stages between Labezanga        PO_R1 Niger
and Dolé (Labezanga, Ayorou, Tillabéry, Gothuey,                                                         60% identified -
                                                                                            1 302 521                                                1                            2                    4%                96%                  0%
Niamey, Kollo, Gaya, Dolé), et Konni, Madarounfa,                                                           PIDACC
Abalak
Integrated national project for development and
                                                           CN PNIDAC                       72 000 000 10% identified -                               3                            5                   26%                40%              34%
adaptation to climate changes in the Niger Basin
Integrated Management of Natural Resources                                                               100% identified
                                                           CN PNSFN Mali                    1 951 500                                                3                            2                   23%                77%                  0%
Programme                                                                                                      -
                                                                                                            Identification
Support for the potato sector in Mali                      PO_R1 Mali                         344 538                                                2                            4                    2%                71%              27%
                                                                                                              on-going
Economic promotion of agricultural and forest products     PO_R1 Mali                                       Identification
                                                                                            2 579 832                                                1                            2                    2%                71%              27%
in Mali                                                                                                       on-going
Diversification of the energy offer in a context of                                                         Identification
                                                           PNACC Cameroun                  22 200 000                                                3                            2                   17%                45%              38%
climate change                                                                                                on-going
                                                                                                            Identification
Promotion of market gardening                              NAPA Guinea                        250 000                                                3                            2                  100%                 0%                  0%
                                                                                                              on-going
Creation of a palm grove covering 100 ha along the                                                          Identification
                                                           PO_R1 Burkina Faso               1 741 176                                                1                            5                    0%                44%              56%
Gourouol in the province of Oudalan                                                                           on-going
                                                           Projets d‟investissements                        Identification
Climate insurance project for farmers (PACE)                                               22 438 361                                                3                            2                    N/A               N/A             100%
                                                           Climat Burkina Faso                                on-going
Project to set up three areas for the intensification of   Projets d‟investissements                        Identification
                                                                                           41 143 764                                                3                            2                    N/A               N/A             100%
animal production (ZIPA)                                   Climat Burkina Faso                                on-going
                                                                                                  ONCC: National Observatory for Climate Change
      AGIR : Global Alliance for Resilience                                                       NAPA: National Adaptation Programmes of Action
      CIWA: Cooperation in International Waters in Africa
      NC: National Contribution
      DCDF: Land Registry and Forestry Development Department (Côte d’Ivoire)                     PIDACC: Programme for Integrated Development and Adaptation to Climate Change in the
      DIN: Inner Delta of the Niger                                                               Niger Basin




                                                                                                        d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

                       Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
Appendixes                                                                                                                            135




Appendix I : Adaptation and Resilience
      funding sources identified




d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
136                                                                                                                                           Appendixes



Various sources of funding and initiatives have been set up by multilateral development banks and
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) for the purposes of
financing needs with respect to climate change adaptation. The main initiatives as have been
identified are as follows:
 The Green Climate Fund (GCF, UNFCCC) : the Green Climate Fund, which was officially
  recorded during the 2010 Cancún conference, will help contribute to reaching the final goal of
  the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). Within the context
  of sustainable development, the Green Climate Fund encourages energy transition and
  climate-resilient development by contributing financial support to developing countries to adapt
  to and mitigate the effects of climate change, all the while taking into account the needs of
  these countries, which are particularly vulnerable to the negative effects of climate change
  (GCF, 2015). The Green Climate Fund should have accrued upwards of 100 thousand million
  dollars per year by 2020, with half of this amount being allocated to adaptation projects. It was
  recently decided that half of this amount being allocated for adaptation would be dedicated to
  more vulnerable countries.
      The selection process is based on 6 compulsory criteria broken down into subcriteria, of which
      one at the very least should be met (1- The potential of the expected results and impact of the
      action, 2- The potential of the action to catalyse a large-scale paradigm shift, 3- The potential
      for sustainable development and co-benefits, 4- Financing needs and the vulnerability of the
      recipient country, 5- Country ownership, 6- The efficiency and economic effectiveness of the
      action). Priorities with respect to action categories and geographical regions have been set and
      have been included in the table below.




                        Source: GCF, Analysis of the expected role and impact
 Climate Investment Funds (CIF) (BM, BAfD, BAsD, BERD, BID): These were created in 2008
  as a rapid climate change financial instrument for the world, receiving US$8.1 thousand million.
  CIFs provide developing countries with grants, concessional loans, risk mitigation instruments
  and share acquisition to catalyse major financing in the private sector, multilateral development
  banks (MDBs) and other similar players. There are actually two funds: the Clean Technology
  Fund (CTF) and the Strategic Climate Fund (SCF):
  - The Clean Technology Fund (CTF) has an annual amount of US$ 5.3 thousand million and
      provides financial support to middle-income countries to mitigate the effects of climate
      change. It encourages the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions via the implementation
      of low-carbon technology in the areas of renewable energy, energy efficiency and
      sustainable transport.



                               d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

                Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
Appendixes                                                                                                                            137


       -      The Strategic Climate Fund (SCF) acts as a general framework to support three targeted
              programmes with dedicated financing for new approaches with the potential for scale
              increases as well as transformative actions with the goal of dealing with a specific
              challenge related to climate change or providing sector-specific solutions.
                          The goal of the Forest Investment Programme (FIP) is to support actions in
                             countries who are keen to reduce GHG emissions as a result of
                             deforestation and forest degradation (to the tune of US$785 million). This
                             programme is aimed at actions targeting the management, development and
                             restoration of forest areas as included in the CIP (270,000 ha and 25 actions
                             in question).
                          The Pilot Programme for Climate Resilience (PPCR) is the SCF's first
                             operational programme which began in 2008, with US$1.2 million. The
                             purpose of this programme is piloting and demonstrating various ways of
                             incorporating climate risk and resilience within development planning as a
                             complement to other activities currently under way. It consists of four
                             components: (i) the development and dissemination of good agricultural and
                             food safety practices, (ii) strengthening the resilience of supply
                             infrastructures for potable water and sanitation, (iii) the collection, analysis
                             and use of meteorological and hydrological data and (iv) feasibility studies
                             with respect to strengthening the resilience of coastal region habitats. This
                             programme would appear to be best suited to CIP action financing
                             needs.
                          The aim of the Programme for Scaling Up Renewable Energy in Low
                             Income Countries (SREP) is to show the economic, social and
                             environmental viability of low-carbon development for the energy sector
                             (US$796 million).
 Adaptation Fund: This fund is wholly dedicated to projects and programmes aimed at
  combating the negative effects of climate change in developing countries. That means that only
  costs related to the implementation of a specific adaptation action would be funded. The
  Adaptation Fund will only finance projects and programmes whose main, explicit objective is
  climate change adaptation and improving resilience (Adaptation Fund, 2014).
 'Traditional' development backers: the whole of bilateral and multilateral donors (World Bank,
   EU, UNDP, ADB, AfDB, BEI, JICA, AFD, KfW, USAID, etc.) who actively participate in financing
   adaptation measures in developing countries. The aforementioned funds normally finance
   projects led by development backers.
 Regional financial institutions: Both the CEMAC/ECCAS and UEMOA/ECOWAS have public
  policies on climate change adaptation and have developed financing and adaptation tools such
  as the FEVAC during the COP 21 conference. These funds may be accessed to support the
  implementation of CIPs.

Sources:

Operational policies and guidelines for parties to access resources from the adaptation fund, 2014.

BRLi, Guidelines for climate adaptation mainstreaming in water infrastructure development. 2012.

BRLi, Defining climate-compatible actions for the world of water, a tangible contribution to COP21,
PFE/AFD, August 2015.

GCF, Analysis of the Expected Role and Impact of the Green Climate Fund, February 2015




d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
138                                                                                                                                  Appendixes




 Appendix J : Implementation strategy




                      d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

      Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
Appendixes                                                                                                                            139




1.            INTRODUCTION.

Essentially (65%) coming from of the 2016-2024 NBA Operational Plan, the actions of CRIP will be
implemented according to the strategy defined in the OP and adopted in a regional workshop of
NBA member countries on 12 September 2015 in Cotonou. This chapter reminds of the methods of
intervention and cooperation of the ES/NBA, and with the partners involved in the CRIP that are:
countries, Technical and Financial Partners.

2.            General aspects on the implementation of CRIP actions

In the chronology of the implementation of CRIP actions, those of the (Knowledge and Institutions) 4
Package will be primarily implemented to support the implementation of the actions of the sectoral
actions package that contribute to strengthen the resilience of people and ecosystems of the basin
to the climate change impacts5.

To finance country-investments of the CRIP, member countries are expected to provide a national
contribution to the financing of each action. For the entire OP, a financial contribution of at least
10% is requested from member countries to mark their commitment to the implementation of
adaptation and resilience actions to climate change.

Following the evaluation of the implementation of the 1st three-year plan of the CRIP, priority
actions of the 2nd and 3rd year plans will be a rolling update 6 to reflect the status of
implementation of the actions of the previous three-year plan.


3.   IMPLEMENTATION OF ACTIONS OF THE “KNOWLEDGE AND INSTITUTIONS”
PACKAGE

3.1.          Objectives and results

Managing the variability and hydro-climatic uncertainties requires an improving knowledge of the
climate and its impacts on natural resources, development of modeling tools for decision support.
Also, the Package of actions No.1: “Knowledge and Institutions” aims to strengthen the capacity of
national and regional institutions that support people to practice resilience actions.

Among the institutions implementing the CRIP, will be supported:
 The NBA Executive Secretariat;
 National Focal Structures;
 Non-state organizations working on the ground in the area of climate change.

3.2.          Support to ES/NBA

In charge of promoting cooperation between member countries and contributing to improving the
living conditions of the people of the basin through the sustainable management of water resources
and associated ecosystems in accordance with the term of the mandate assigned to it by the
revised Convention of N‟djamena establishing the Niger Basin Authority and signed by the Heads
of State and Government of the nine (9) NBA member countries on 29 October 1987, the ES/NBA
and NFS will benefit from the Investment actions of the No.1 “Knowledge -Institutions” Package of
the CRIP.




4 These actions correspond to the actions assigned to axes 5, 4 and 3 of the NBA Operationnal Plan.
5 These actions correspond to the actions assigned to axes 5, 4 and 3 of the NBA Operationnal Plan.
6 The relevant actions that have not been implemeted or not entirely implemented in one 3-year plan are extend in the next 3-year plan.


d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
140                                                                                                                                               Appendixes


Support to the ES/NBA in its basic functions

Basic functions of the ES/NBA will be strengthened:
 in terms of environmental monitoring of the basin‟s resources through the development of the
   Niger Basin Observatory.
 as regards the hydrological and hydro-geological monitoring of the River Niger Basin and its
   tributaries by supporting the intensification of the monitoring network of hydrological flows and
   water quality.
 as regards the development of hydrological forecasting and the development of its early
   warning system.
 regarding the identification and implementation of sustainable funding for the operation and
   technical investments of ES/NBA.
 regarding managing and improving its performance by increasing its human resources,
   improving working conditions.

Technically, individual and collective skills of the ES/NBA and NFS executives will be strengthened
through the implementation of the training plan which is being developed. This training plan will be
enriched with themes related to Climate Change (CC), to climate change impacts and adaptation
and mitigation measures.

Support to the setting up of a monitoring-evaluation system

Planning, monitoring & evaluation of the CRIP will follow the logic being defined for the
implementation of the Operational Plan of which the CRIP is a part. The M&E system will be aimed
at conducting a timely collection, processing and dissemination of appropriate information on the
implementation process of planned activities, the physical and financial achievements and results
achieved7 in order to enable stakeholders to implement and policy makers to make decisions that
will enable the speeding up and maximizing of expected results.

This M&E system will be based on four (4) components or interdependent pillars which are:
 Planning: It will first be for three years then broken down in detail for each year through Annual
  Work Plans and Budget (AWPB),
 Monitoring of activities and supervision of implementation: This activity will measure progress
  and performance achieved following the logic of transformation of activities and results of
  resources made available to the stakeholders;
 Monitoring of results: It helps measure progress recorded in achieving the intermediate and
  strategic outcomes. To do this, a performance measurement framework of the CRIP will be
  established as early as the 1st year of implementation;
 Audits and evaluations: They will be conducted by independent consultancy firms to ensure that
  the financial resources made available to the ES/NBA, NFS or supported institutions use
  resources for their goals.

Supervisory and audit operations will be conducted each year. The evaluations will be scheduled
as follows:
 Annual reviews (annual reports);
 A mid-term evaluation of the first three-year plan of the CRIP or OP;
 A mid-term evaluation of the Strategic Plan during the 2nd year of the three-year plan. A final
  evaluation of the Strategic Plan.




7 See the expected results of the CRIP at the end of the Appendix

                                   d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

                 Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
Appendixes                                                                                                                                        141


The organizational system of planning, monitoring and periodic evaluation of CRIP results will
extend to the Executive Secretariat and to the countries (NFS and NCU). This offshoot of the
system will enable greater ownership of the planning system (including the work plans), increased
accountability and a more concerted management between the regional and national levels.

Support to the establishment of an effective internal                                                                                 and   external
communication of the CRIP/NBA among stakeholders

In the implementation of the CRIP, an effective communication mechanism with each of the
stakeholders involved in the implementation of the CRIP will be developed.

Objective:

The CRIP/NBA communication plan that will be developed will be aimed to inform and convince all
along the implementation of CRIP, the Political and Administrative Authorities of NBA member
countries, the TFPs community, local Communities, Civil Society and the people of the basin on the
reality of CC so that they can accept to invest in the plan to strengthen the people's resilience to
climate change in the River Niger Basin. This CRIP/NBA Communication Plan in its implementation
is divided into 2 parts. They are:
 •           Communication for COP21;
 •           Communication after COP21.

Communication for COP21

This communication aims to bring together the political leaders of the nine (9) NBA member
countries so that they can lend their group support to the CRIP/NBA to submit to the community of
donors and technical partners present at the COP 21, the initiative of the resilience plan of the
people of the River Niger Basin as regards CC.

This communication will be organized around:
 the participation at the COP21 of an ES/NBA technical team of 9 NFS Coordinators of each
   member country and two representatives of civil society (1 user and 1 user of RNB).
 the organization of an NBA resilience day with a panel team to present the CRIP/NBA, deliver
   the advocacy necessary for the TFPs to finance the CRIP/NBA.
 the animation of an NBA stand at the Africa Pavilion.

Communication after COP21

Communication after COP 21 will (1) continue, through international meetings, the dynamics of the
mobilization of Technical and Financial Partners; (2) promote the CRIP within the countries.

Promotion of the CRIP/NBA within the countries aims to:
 Raise awareness among policy makers such as the members of the Finance Commission and
  Environment Commission of National Assemblies. The aim of this communication is that
  finance laws that are voted at the meetings should be made available to national projects on
  the strengthening of population resilience, resources to fund national counterparts of actions
  registered in the CRIP/NBA document.
 Support organizations and technical ministries in the organization of the CC event. These
  Climate change events is intended to (i) inform the producer groups of the reality on CC (ii)
  disseminate good practice in terms of sustainable natural resources management (iii) build
  national alliances (support organization for producers, producer organizations – University -
  Research Institute) to promote, disseminate good practices for resilience.

Communication on CRIP after COP21 will be intense in 2016.



d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
142                                                                                                                                              Appendixes




3.3.     At the level of Countries and state organizations.

The strengthening needs of state and non-state structures such as defined in the CRIP will be met
as far as possible. These structures will be identified at the pace of actions to be implemented on
the ground. Under these structures, we have the strengthening of NFS, NCU/RCU.


4.   IMPLEMENTATION OF ACTIONS OF THE SECTORAL PACKAGE ENHANCING
POPULATION RESILIENCE, ECOSYSTEMS, INFRASTRUCTURES

The actions of the sectoral package aims to contribute to the strengthening of resilience of
populations and ecosystems of the basin to climate change through the reduction of exposure
and/or reduction of the sensitivity of the people or their livelihoods to CC sectoral impacts identified
in the RNB.

4.1. Implementation of actions of the sectoral                                                                     Package                  enhancing
population resilience, ecosystems, infrastructures

Objective

Sectoral actions of the CRIP are exclusively investment activities in member countries. These
actions of this package aim to:
 reduce the vulnerability of populations and or their livelihood situations such as:
   • water stress;
   • floods;
   • degradation of water quality;
   • soil degradation;
   • degradation of pasture;
   • degradation of ecosystems;
   • rise in sea level.
 enhance the adaptive capacity of people through the implementation of socio-economic
   activities.

Implementation
 implementation of sectoral actions should be planned and implemented in synergy with all the
   stakeholders whose roles and means of action have been previously defined;
 The cooperation topics for the appraisal of actions, the process of research and engagement of
  funding, programming and implementation of activities in countries are described for each
  action with various groups of national and regional stakeholders 8 in charge of the planned
  actions;
 The monitoring and evaluation mechanism for the implementation of actions in countries and
  the monitoring processes will be identified for each country action with the various groups of
  national and regional stakeholders;

8 ES/NBA, NFS, national technical services, civil society organisations, NGO, firms

                                  d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

                 Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
Appendixes                                                                                                                                   143


 For each action, the risk of implementation and measures for their mitigation will be identified
  and monitored by the NFS, Climate change focal points and the NCU in order to prevent delays
  in the technical, financial and even decision-making implementation;
 Countries‟ responsiveness to requests from NBA, the TFPs for their projects, as well as their
  recording among national priority projects, will be decisive in the appraisal, the search for
  funding and the conduct of NBA projects;

For every country action, the MSDS will be developed. This MSDS should include among others:
 general aspects on the project: reference and/or coding, origin (SP, OP, SDAP, etc.), the
   location, main recipient countries from the action, duration, cost (overall and OP1), funding
   source;
 the objectives, outcomes and indicators, project management and the implementation
   conditions, potential funding sources;
 the addresses of the project holders/country at the national level and at the Executive
   Secretariat;
 milestones and major activities in progress for maturity (feasibility, evaluation) and for funding;
 The risks of implementation for each action.

4.2. Stakeholders    and  actors   of                                                                   cooperation/partners          for   the
implementation of CRIP/NBA actions

The implementation of the CRIP such as actions of the sectoral Package actions will require:
 soliciting, among others, a multitude of experts and specialists of technical services of the
   administration, NGOs, consultancy firms, both in the Executive Secretariat, at the level of
   member countries for the implementation and close monitoring of technical and environmental
   studies, conduct of actions and capacity building;
 strengthening of cooperation/consultation frameworks with donors, national governments, civil
   society organizations and the beneficiaries of investments;
 a strong will of member countries to make national legislation in line with the Water Charter.

Therefore, NBA will use different technical partners to support the implementation of the OP or
CRIP at national and regional levels. This will require for NBA:
 the ability to establish, with national stakeholders of the ToR, contracts/specific cooperation
   agreement, capacity to control and supervise, the establishment of an effective communication
   mechanism with each partner;
 to define areas of cooperation (with NGOs, civil society, regional basin organizations), in
   connection with the expected results of SP, OP and CRIP;
 the completion of the drafting of the annexes to the Water Charter, their dissemination and
   consensus among member countries on monitoring and decision support tools;
 operationalization of the water management bodies such as the Permanent Technical
   Committee, sub-basins Commissions, Panel of Experts, Regional Advisory Group, the Niger
   Basin Observatory (NBO) and NFS.

4.3.          Gender equality

As in all countries, regional and international development organizations, through its interventions,
NBA will contribute to reducing Gender inequalities for gender equality in all sectors of economic
and social life of the beneficiaries of projects and programmes.




d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
144                                                                                                                                              Appendixes


The adverse effects of climate change are very heavy on the female population in terms of water
stress, food shortages, etc. Thus, all the actions of capacity building, communication, project and
programme formulation, conduct of studies and monitoring and evaluation will be integrated where
possible, differentiated and specific aspects that make visible the actions of NBA projects/
programmes contributing to reducing gender disparities.

As part of the implementation of coherent actions, the development of an NBA gender policy,
already started will be finalized and action measures will be identified with countries for their
implementation.


5.        INSTITUTIONAL SET UP OF THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE CRIP/NBA

5.1.      NBA Governing Bodies

The implementation of the CRIP will be based on NBA policy making, steering and execution
bodies which are:
 The Summit of Heads of State and Government: the supreme policy-making and decision-
  making body. It meets every two (02) years in an Ordinary Session;
 The Council of Ministers: the Authority‟s control body. It is responsible for monitoring the
  activities of the Executive Secretariat and reports to the Summit of Heads of State and
  Government. It meets once a year in an Ordinary Session;
 The Technical Committee of Experts: It has a mandate to prepare the sessions of the Council of
  Ministers to which it submits reports and recommendations;
 The NBA Executive Secretariat9: It is the coordinating and implementation body of the Authority
  and is managed by an Executive Secretary.

These statutory bodies are supplemented by:
 The Advisory Committee of Partners and Financial Officers (ACPFO): It studies the possibilities
  of assistance, defines the nature and volume, recalls the implementing rules and monitors the
  implementation of projects and programmes This body meets once a year on the sidelines of
  the Council of Ministers meeting.
 The Regional Steering Committee (RSC) of projects and programmes: Control and decision-
  making body, reporting to the Council of Ministers through the Executive Secretariat. It meets
  once (1) a year.

As part of the implementation of the CRIP, these aforementioned bodies are completed by the
following:
 Within the ES/NBA: the Steering and Arbitration Committee (SAC) retained in the
  implementation strategy of the SP. The SAC is responsible for: (i) the strategic direction and
  oversight of all NBA interventions; (ii) validation and adoption of the annual activity plans; (iii)
  review of progress made and provide recommendations on corrective measures. This
  committee meets quarterly.
 In the member countries:
              The National Focal Structures (NFS/NBA), inter-ministerial technical services, NFS are
               responsible for coordinating and monitoring NBA activities in each member country by
               involving all stakeholders at the national level such as focal points in charge of national
               projects recorded in the CRIP. Capacity building of institutions and bodies will be
               extended to NFS. The support needs of the latter will involve:
                   - the operation of NFS and participation of their representatives in national and/or
                       regional decision-making workshops;


9 Pending the conclusions of the institutional and organizational audit, the CRIP actions will be implemented by a
     provisional organization of ES/NBA whose composition has been described in the Operationnal Plan, following the
     regional workshop held on September 12, 2015 in Cotonou (Benin).

                                  d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

                 Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
Appendixes                                                                                                                            145


                             -     the monitoring of CRIP actions in the field;
                             -     requests for support from national or regional coordinating units of users;
                             -     the organization of awareness events on “Climate Change” and its impacts.
                     The National Coordinating Units of Users (NCU) of the Niger Basin‟s natural resources
                      and their gathering, the Regional Coordinating Units of Users (RCU), composed of
                      elected representatives from user associations are responsible for (i) promoting and
                      organizing cooperation between users; (ii) contributing to the management of national
                      resources. The RCU represents the users in the NBA statutory body and in venues for
                      discussions and negotiations on the future of the basin. Capacity building of institutions
                      and bodies will be extended to NCU/RCU. The need for support of the latter will
                      concern:
                         -   the operation of NCU and participation of their representatives in national and/or
                             regional decision-making workshops;
                         -   the monitoring of CRIP actions in the field;
                         -   requests for support from users;
                         -   the organization of awareness events on “Climate Change” and its impacts.
 With Technical and Financial Partners

The implementation of the CRIP, as with the OP, will be monitored through the current ACPFO that
will expand its powers for this purpose.

5.2.          Intergovernmental and Regional Organizations

In order to widen its thinking and create conditions for the achievement of its strategic results, NBA
will cooperate on issues of population resilience to climate change with:
 basin organizations and networks of basin organizations (VBA, OMVS, CICOS, ZRA (Zambezi
   River Authority), INBO, ANBO, etc.) for technical exchanges and sharing of experiences;
 regional organizations for integration and socio-economic development (AU, ECOWAS,
   ECCAS, WAEMU, CEMAC) for a convergence of their actions for the benefit of the people of
   the basin.

Cooperation Agreements between NBA and these organizations will be established in connection
with the results of the Operational Plan and the CRIP. Every two years, cooperation activities will
be assessed by stakeholders to assess progress and plan future actions.

5.3.          NGOs and development organizations

As part of the implementation of sectoral actions, diversified expertise of NGOs and national or
international associations will be sought at the regional and national level to ensure support and
proximity control of the implementation of actions. The following activities will be particularly
targeted:
 Information and capacity building of users;
 accompanying, monitoring and evaluation of field projects on behalf of NBA;
 control of compliance with environmental standards in the execution of works;
 support to the ownership of techniques and achievements by local people.

Gender promotion associations, among others, will be involved in communication with users and
the promotion of gender.

5.4.          Project management of CRIP/NBA investments

SP actions can be divided into two (2) categories:
 regional and national actions with trans-boundary impact;
 national actions with non-trans-boundary impact.

d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
146                                                                                                                                         Appendixes


i)     Regional actions and national actions with trans-boundary impacts are actions that have
impacts (positive or negative) for at least two member countries. They are financed by loans,
donations, grants and legacies or own funds of the member countries or the NBA Executive
Secretariat.

The project management of the technical, environmental and social studies, the search for funding
as well as the monitoring and evaluation of these actions is provided by the NBA Executive
Secretariat in accordance with Decision No.1 of the 9th Summit of Heads of State and
Government, held on 16 September 2010 in Abuja.

Project management of work, such as that of major infrastructure and facilities is currently provided
by member countries and could be delegated to the NBA Executive Secretariat.

ii)     National actions with non-trans-boundary impact:

When funding is also provided by owner member countries from their own funds or from loans from
donors, the project management of studies and work is under the responsibility of each owner
member country, in accordance with national legislation.

However, when the financing of these actions is mobilized through the NBA Executive Secretariat
within the context of regional projects/programmes, project management of studies and works is
provided by the NBA Executive Secretariat. This is the case of projects/programmes such as: (i)
the Reversing Land and Water Degradation Trends Project in the Niger basin (2005-2011); (ii) the
Silting Control Programme in the Niger Basin (2004-2015); and (iii) the Water Resources
Development and Sustainable Ecosystems Management Programme in Niger Basin (2007-2015).


6.      SCHEDULE OF THE IMPLEMENTATION OF CRIP ACTIONS

In view of the links between the two packages of CRIP actions and the need to ensure a successful
implementation of this plan, the sequencing of the execution of actions of the packages will be as
follows:




                             d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

              Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
Appendixes                                                                                                                            147




d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
148                                                                                                                                                                                                      Appendixes




PROPOSAL OF A RESULT CHAIN FOR CRIP

Ultimate result: The resilience of the populations of the Niger River Basin to the impacts of climate change has been
strengthened.




                                                                                          d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

          Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
Appendixes                                                                                                                            149




                               Appendix K : Bibliography.




d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
150                                                                                                                                           Appendixes



ABN-BM, 2013. Evaluation des risques climatiques pour le Bassin du Fleuve Niger,

ABN 2007.Atlas – Bassin du Niger, WWF – Wetlands – UNOPS.

Agrymet 2010

BRLi, Guidelines for Climate adaptation mainstreaming in water infrastructure development.
2012.

GCF 2015. Analysis of the Expected Role and Impact of the Green Climate Fund.

Giannini et al. 2008. A global perspective on African climate.

Gitz V. & Meybeck A., 2012. Risks, vulnerabilities and resilience in a context of climate
change. FAO

IPCC Fifth Assessment Report: Climate Change 2014

IPCC Fourth Assessment Report: Climate Change 2007

IPCC, SREX, 2012. Gestion des risques de catastrophes et de phénomènes extrêmes pour
les besoins de l‟adaptation au changement climatique.

Maplecroft, 2013. Maplecroft Climate Change and Risk Atlas 2014. . Visité le 08/09/2015.

ND-GAIN, 2013. Notre Dame University, Global Adaptation Index. . Visité le 08/09/2015.

NAPAs

Operational policies and guidelines for parties to access resources from the adaptation fund,
2014.

USAID, 2011. Climate Change, Waterand Conflict in theNiger River Basin.

World Bank, 2012: Project Appraisal document for the first part of the second phase of the
Niger Basin Water Resources Development and Sustainable Ecosystems Management
Program (WRD-SEMP APL 2A; contribution to the financing of Kandadji dam in Niger)




                               d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

               Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
Appendixes                                                                                                                            151




                             Appendix L : Acronyms and
                                    abbreviation




d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
152                                                                                                                                           Appendixes


AFD: Agence Française de Développement (French Development Agency)
AfDB: African Development Bank
AGIR: Alliance Globale pour la Résilience (Global Alliance for Resilience)
AU: African Union
AWPB: Annual Work Plan and Budget
BOAD : West African Development Bank
CC : Climate Change
CCTP : Consultative Committee of Technical Partners
CEMAC: Communauté Economique et Monétaire de l‟Afrique Centrale (Economic and Monetary Community
of Central African States)
CILSS: Comité permanent Inter-états de Lutte contre la Sécheresse au Sahel (Permanent Interstate
Committee for Drought Control in the Sahel)
CIP: Climate Investment Programme
CIWA: Cooperation in International Waters in Africa
CoP21: UNFCCC Conference of Parties to be held in Paris in December 2015
DCDF: Direction du Cadastre et Développement Forestier (Land Registry and Forest Development Directorate
- Ivory Coast)
DREDGE: Development Projects In Water Resources Management and Sustainable Ecosystems of the Niger
River Basin
ECCAS: Economic Community of Central African States
ECOWAS: Economic Community of West African States
EU: European Union
FEVAC: Fonds pour l‟Economie Verte en Afrique Centrale (Central African Green Economy Fund)
GHG : GreenHouse Gas
GIZ : Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit
INDC: Intended Nationally Determined Contributions
IP: SDAP Investment Programme
IPCC: Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
LCBC : Lake Chad Basin Commission
M&E : Monitoring and Evaluation
NAP: National Adaptation Plan
NAPA: National Adaptation Programmes of Action
NBA/ES: NBA Executive Secretariat
NBA: Niger Basin Authority
NBO: Niger Basin Observatory
NC: National contribution
NCCAP: National Climate Change Adaptation Plan
NCU : National Coordination of Users
NDP: National Development Plan
NFS: National Focal Structure
NGO: Non Gouvernmental Organization
NID: Niger Inner Delta
NNRSP: National Niger River Safeguarding Programme
NRB: Niger River Basin
OMVS: Senegal river development organization
ONCC: Observatoire National sur les Changements Climatiques (National Climate Change Monitoring Centre)
OP: NBA Operational Plan
P-GIRE2: Projet de Gestion Intégrée des Ressources en Eau (Integrated Water Resources Management
[IWRM] Project)
PIDACC: Programme Intégré de Développement agricole et d‟Adaptation au Changement Climatique dans le
Bassin du Niger (Integrated Niger River Basin Agricultural and Adaptation to Climate Change Programme)
PQP : Priority Quinquenal Plan
SAP: NBA Strategic Action Plan
SC: Steering Committee
RSC: Regional Steering Committee
RCU: Regional Coordination of the Users
SDAP: Sustainable Development Action Programme

                               d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

               Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
Appendixes                                                                                                                            153


SIE: Système d‟Information sur l‟Eau (Water Information System)
SODEFOR Forest Development Corporation (Ivory Coast)
TFP: Technical and Financial Partners
UEMOA: Union Economique et Monétaire d‟Afrique de l‟Ouest (West African Economic and Monetary
Union)UNFCCC: United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
USAID: United States Agency for International Development
VBA: Volta Basin Authority
WB: World Bank




d:\800875_water_climate_abn_wb\80_production\v7_draft_versionrevise_postbamako\niger_crip_v7-3_23_11_2015_en.docx / Clément Balique

Investment plan for the Strengthening of Resilience to Climate Change in the Niger Basin
