                                                                                               102311
   Asset disclosure and wealth assessment system in Romania:
                      Lessons for Ukraine
                                        16 November 2015

This note was prepared by Dmytro Kotlyar, World Bank consultant, with guidance from Jana
Kunicova (Senior Public Sector Specialist) and Laura Pop (Financial Sector Specialist), World
Bank. It reflects information received during a study visit to Bucharest, Romania, on 21-22
September 2015, and also additional desk research of publicly accessible materials. It does not aim
to be exhaustive on all issues raised. The note aims to provide an overview of the asset disclosure
and wealth assessment system in Romania, as well as to describe the main anti-corruption
institutions in Romania. The note’s objective is to inform policy-makers and practitioners in Ukraine
on the Romanian experience and contribute to the on-going process of setting up a new corruption
prevention institution in Ukraine and building its function of financial control of public officials.

National Integrity Agency of Romania
The National Integrity Agency (ANI; Agenția Națională de Integritate) was established in 2007 as
an autonomous administrative authority operating at the national level. ANI verifies wealth and
interest statements, controls timely submission of asset declarations, oversees compliance with
conflicts of interest and incompatibilities requirements. See structure of the ANI in the Annex to
this note.
ANI conducts administrative investigations and is subject to judicial control. ANI undergoes an
annual external independent audit. The annual budget of the ANI for 2015 was RON 36 million or
about EUR 8 million (budget in 2014 – about EUR 4.3 million). The ANI has no regional offices.
ANI’s head and deputy heads are selected through an open competition by the National Integrity
Council. They cannot be dismissed for political reasons before the expiration of their term of office,
except for in case of a negative conclusion of the external audit conducted by a reputable firm
(recently, Deloitte). The National Integrity Council is a special body set up to oversee ANI’s work
and also to guarantee its independence. It consists of representatives of all parliamentary factions,
civil society, etc.
ANI’s overall staff is 200 persons, but only 100 positions have actually been filled in, including 40
inspectors. This is explained by insufficient budget of the ANI. There are about 100 cases per
inspector at any given time. Overall about 4,000 inspections are conducted annually. Inspectors have
autonomous status and are operationally independent. They have either legal or economic
background. Leadership of the ANI and heads of units cannot interfere with inspections. There is no
specialization of inspectors; cases are distributed randomly. ANI does not engage external experts.
ANI concluded cooperation agreements with public agencies to obtain access to databases, e.g.
population database, company register. All public agencies whose employees are supposed to submit
asset and interests declarations have authorized officers (usually within the HR units) who act as
liaison officers for the ANI. Such officers provide consultations on how to fill out asset declarations,
forward paper copies of declarations to the ANI, compile a list of persons who failed to submit
declarations. Such officers and the heads of agencies are liable for non-compliance with their duties.
ANI prepares four types of reports based on investigations conducted by inspectors: 1) on violation
of incompatibility requirements; 2) on violation of conflicts of interest requirement resulting in
administrative sanction; 3) on violation of conflicts of interest requirement resulting in criminal
sanction (referred to the law enforcement agencies for criminal investigation); 4) significant
difference in declarant’s wealth and income (see below).
ANI has the best track record in cases of incompatibilities and conflicts of interests (see the charts
below). The law stipulates dissuasive sanctions, in particular removal from office (including for



                                                                                                      1
MPs) and inability to occupy a range of public sector positions or run for the same type of position
as the one from which the official was suspended for 3 years.
Most notifications passed on to ANI come from private citizens and mass media reports (in
particular, obtained through the media monitoring).1
Legality of ANI reports can be challenged in administrative courts, which happens very often. As
of September 2015, there were about 3,000 cases in courts with the ANI is a defendant. The success
rate of the ANI in defending its decisions is 95%. Litigation on behalf of the ANI is carried out by
the ANI’s Legal Department. The latter also provides clarifications on the law application upon
request of declarants (the number of such requests increased significantly during the past two years).
ANI uses several software tools:
1) the electronic database of declarations (includes only declarations submitted electronically) that
is also used to analyze submitted data and detect irregularities (e.g. “red flag” significant changes in
assets compared with previous declarations, discrepancies between assets and income). There is no
possibility of automatic verification of data in external registers/databases;
2) software for monitoring mass media for information relevant to the ANI’s mandate (searching
for key words);
3) internal case management system for ANI inspectors (includes all documents related to a case
from its launch till final report and follow up, including documents from other agencies and third
parties; reminders on upcoming deadlines for receiving information requested from other entities);
heads of divisions, directors general and director of ANI can access the case management system
and review information on any case.
To obtain information on bank accounts of a person the ANI inspector first submits a request to the
Fiscal Service. The latter runs a register of bank accounts and informs the ANI about all accounts
opened in the declarant’s name. Then the ANI inspector can request specific information on the
account from the bank.
Deadlines are established for processing of cases by the inspector: sixth months for cases on
incompatibilities and conflicts of interests; 1 year for unjustified wealth cases. Although delays
happen sometimes in practice.




1
    EU CVM Report on Romania, January 2015, http://bit.ly/1DaMlIc.

                                                                                                      2
      Quality of persons investigated by ANI (high profile cases) 2008 - 2015
                                                                                  County Council
                         Deputies (M Ps); 86                                        Presidents /
                                                                                V ice Presidents; 22


                                                                                        M inisters, 6
                                                                                      State Secretar ies, 4
                                                                                H igh Public Ser vants
                                                                                (Gener al Secretar ies),
                                                                                           5
                                    Senator s (M Ps); 32



                                    Unjustified assets; 9      M ain findings (high profile cases) 2008 - 2015
                  Other cr iminal deeds;
                            43
                                                                                            Cr iminal conflicts of
                                                                                                interests; 38

                                                                      Conflicts of
                                                                                          Administr ative conflict
                                                                      interests, 73
                                                                                             of interests; 35
           I ncompatibilities; 87

                                                                                                                                   Page 19




Source: ANI presentation.

Asset and interest disclosure framework




                          I ntroducing assets and interests disclosures
                                                                                                               ANI
                                                 First                                                         introduces
                                                 sanctions       Online                  Special               electronic
          Obligation                             for failure     public                  online                for ms for
          to disclose       Disclosures          to disclose     por tal is              sections for          assets and
          assets is         become               assets and      established             candidates`           interests
          introduced        public               interests       by ANI                  disclosures           disclosures




           1996      …     2003      …     2007        2008    2009    2010      2011        2012       …     2014      2015


                                                                                                                     Online
                                                                                                                     public
                                         National              ANI `s law       New                                  por tal
                                         Integrity             is declared      legislative                          reaches 5
                                         Agency is             unconstitu       fr amewor k                          million
                                         established           tional           enters in force                      disclosures

                                                                                                                          Page 4




Source: ANI presentation.




                                                                                                                                             3
In Romania there are about 300,000 public officials who fill in asset and private interests
declarations; during an election year the number of declarations filed is multiplied 2-3 times due to
election candidates who have to file declarations as well. The ANI’s web-site contains more than
5.2 million declarations as of September 2015. Two separate forms are submitted –for assets and
interests.
There are several options for submitting declarations:
     i.      electronically through ANI’s web-site;
     ii.     by downloading a form from the web-site, filling it out, signing and submitting in a
             paper form;
     iii.    in paper form not using the special form.
The ANI has outsourced digitalization of paper declarations to the external company. The
digitalization includes only scanning as an image that is then uploaded on the web-site. Only
declarations submitted in the e-form are verified using electronic tools and special software.
Submission in electronic form requires a special method of authentication using a token that costs
about EUR 20 per year. This discourages electronic submissions. Only about 20% of declarations
are submitted in the electronic form.
Asset declarations are submitted: 1) annually by 15 June; 2) upon entering or leaving office (within
30 days after appointment or dismissal); 3) by candidates running for public office. Interim
declarations of significant changes in the assets of the declarant are not submitted.
The asset declaration includes information on the income of the declarant during the previous year
up to 31 December; all other information (e.g. accounts, assets) is included as of the date of
submission of the declaration.
The declarant has a right to correct his asset declaration only within 30 days after the deadline for
submission (i.e. by 15 July). However, submission of the corrected declaration does not exempt
from liability for unjustified wealth.
Forms of the declarations of assets and interests are attached to the Law #176/2010. The ANI
published on its web-site guidelines on filling out declarations of assets and interests.2
Declarations of assets and income are published on the ANI’s web-site, except for some data: ID
number, residence address, the address of real estate mentioned in the declaration, banks in which
accounts are opened. Declarations remain on the portal throughout the time a person holds a public
office and three years afterwards, then the declaration is archived.
Case is launched by ANI on its own initiative or after receiving information about possible
irregularity in the asset and interests declarations or possible violation of conflicts of interests and
incompatibility requirements. The ANI’s internal case management system randomly distributes the
case to an inspector. Inspector starts proceedings and gathers relevant information, including from
other public agencies. The resulting report can be referred to the prosecution bodies, tax authorities,
disciplinary commissions in the public agencies, wealth investigation commissions.
When gathering information during an evaluation the ANI inspectors have the right to demand
information (documents) from any person or entity, including banks, notaries and lawyers, without
a court order. ANI uses special form for sending information requests. The requests can be sent to
the following entities: tax administrations, land registrar, trade registrar, banks, credit bureaus,
utility operators, official gazettes, police authorities, electoral authorities, private companies, other
public or private entities.
The ANI does not verify the authenticity of documents produced, only wealth commission has such
right. Failure to submit information within 30 days is subject to the administrative liability of a fine
of EUR 50 per each day of delay. The official who is under investigation has the right to submit
explanation and evidence in his/her defence; the ANI requests such official to provide a statement.

2
    http://bit.ly/1HyXYu9 (in Romanian).

                                                                                                       4
Wealth investigation commissions are set up at each court of appeal and consist of two judges and
a prosecutor. The commission can summon and hear witnesses, obtain information and evidence
from the third persons. If the declarant cannot explain his assets with regard to his income, the ANI
can request and analyze information only on the declarant and his/her close relatives while the
wealth commission can investigate all other relatives of the person.
The ANI’s report on the investigation is submitted to the wealth commission, which reviews the
report to check its legality and refers the case for final decision-making to the court of appeal, which
decides on the existence of unjustified wealth and its confiscation. The final decision is published
in the official gazette. The Ministry of Finance executes confiscation orders.
The ANI starts an evaluation on unjustified assets if there is a significant difference (of more than
EUR 10,000) between income and assets of the declarant. Overall ANI opened 113 cases of
unjustified wealth, most of which are still pending in court.3 Total difference in assets established
by the ANI amounted to EUR 25 million. Only 10 final decisions were delivered by the High Court
with EUR 2.6 million confiscated into the state budget.4
The ANI does not deal directly with the criminal offence of submission of knowingly false
information in the declarations. The ANI forwards such cases to the prosecutor’s office. In the past,
however, in the vast majority of cases, the Prosecutor’s Office decided that there were insufficient
grounds for prosecution. The ANI therefore relies mostly on the offence of unjustified wealth that
is a significant discrepancy between assets and income. The proceedings are administrative, albeit
they may result in confiscation of property.
The ANI can start investigation three years after the official ceased to perform his official functions.


Other anti-corruption institutions in Romania
DNA (Direcția Națională Anticorupție). The National Anti-corruption Directorate (DNA) was
established in 2002 and was linked to the EU accession negotiations that started earlier. The DNA
is an independent judicial body and operates within the Prosecutor's Office attached to the High
Court of Cassation and Justice. The DNA’s status was reformed in 2005 following Constitutional
Court decision that certain high-level officials could be investigated/prosecuted only by the High
Court of Cassation and Justice, which contradicted independent status of the DNA. Its remit is to
investigate and prosecute high-level and complex criminal corruption cases. Parliament excluded
tax evasion crime from the DNA jurisdiction in 2013.
DNA jurisdiction covers the whole of Romania with its head office in Bucharest and 14 local offices
(in cities with court off appeal). The DNA Chief Prosecutor can institute new local offices. The
DNA is headed by a chief prosecutor who is assisted by two deputy chief prosecutors. Chief
prosecutor’s term of office is 3 years and it can be renewed once. The Minister of Justice proposes
a candidate for the Chief Prosecutor position, it is reviewed by the section of prosecutors of the High
Council of Magistracy and the President of Romania makes a final decision. The Chief Prosecutor
of DNA can be removed by the President of the Republic, at the proposal of the Minister of Justice,
after the High Council of Magistracy opinion.
There are 145 prosecutors positions in the DNA (from them 132 are actually filled in as of September
2015), 220 police officers (181 filled in) and 55 experts specialized in economics, finance, banking,
customs, and information technology. The DNA’s staff also includes 196 auxiliary employees. DNA
prosecutors investigate around 9,000 cases.
DNA has wide investigative authorities. The Law no. 78/2000 stipulates that DNA has the duty to
investigate suspected corruption committed by public officials. A case falls under DNA
investigative authority under the following conditions:
      -   the damage caused by the offence exceeds EUR 200,000;

3
    http://bit.ly/1Hk7eI2 (in Romanian).
4
     http://bit.ly/1WEBLaw (in Romanian).

                                                                                                      5
    -   the value of the bribe exceeds EUR 10,000; or
    -   the offence is committed by a public official falling into one of the categories explicitly
        listed by the law (e.g. Members of Parliament, members of the Government, specific high-
        level officials of central and local administration, judges and prosecutors, mayors, police
        officers, customs officials) as well as by persons holding a position of director and above
        within national companies and enterprises, commercial undertakings where the state is a
        stakeholder, central financial-banking units.
It should be noted that DNA’s investigative jurisdiction was used as a model by the drafters of the
Ukrainian Law on the National Anti-Corruption Bureau, as adopted in October 2014.
National Office for Crime Prevention and Asset Recovery. The legal basis for the office:
Government Decision no. 32 of 12 January 2011 regarding the designation of the National Office
for Crime Prevention and Asset Recovery as Romania’s ARO, revised in 2014; Government
Decision no. 652 of 29 June 2009 on the organization of the Ministry of Justice; Law no. 55 of 2012
on Romania’s cooperation with Europol; Government Emergency Decision no. 123 of 2007 on
consolidating cooperation with the EU Member States; the modification of Law no. 302 of 2004 on
international legal cooperation.
The Office is set up under the Ministry of Justice of Romania and acts as Romania’s Asset Recover
Office (ARO). Its functions include:
     Exchange of information with similar EU ARO’s;
     Exchange of best practices on asset recovery with other EU MS competent authorities;
     Support of Romani’s competent authorities in tracking of criminal assets;
     Collection and analysis of statistical data;
     Analysis of the disposal process of confiscated assets;
     CARIN contact point;
     Represent Romania in international fora on asset recovery and crime prevention;
     Training for Romania’s practitioners;
     Support of Romania’s competent authorities with best practice in asset management.
It has direct access to the following databases (based on username and password): Trade registry
(Ministry of Justice), Security interests in movable property (Ministry of Justice), Population records
(Ministry of Interior), Vehicles (Ministry of Interior), Passports (Ministry of Interior), Stolen assets
(Ministry of Interior), Weapons (Ministry of Interior), Stolen vehicles (Ministry of Interior), Land
register (National Agency for Land Registration), Register of bank accounts (Ministry of Finance).
The office has indirect access to databases through requests to proper authorities with regard to
information on: Boats (Ministry of Transport), Airplanes (Ministry of Transport), Customs records
(Ministry of Finance), Taxes (Ministry of Finance), Import and export control (Ministry of Finance),
any other public institution in possession of relevant data.
The Office provides information on request from another ARO (member of the ARO platform or
CARIN Network) or to national authorities (Prosecutor’s Offices, Romanian Police, Courts).
The Romanian ARO has no direct powers to freeze assets. Freezing orders can be executed directly
by the competent prosecutor’s offices or courts. The ARO’s role is to identify assets and offer
guidance if requested.
Romania plans to establish a new Asset Management Office (National Office of Management of
Seized/Confiscated Assets). Relevant draft legislation is pending in the Parliament. The agency will
focus on the maintenance of clear records of seized and confiscated assets and management of
certain categories of goods until the final decision on their confiscation.
Table. National seizures and confiscations (in EUR approximately)



                                                                                                      6
                                 2010               2011              2012               2013


 Value of damage             580.811.557        761.614.506        768.932.432      1.962.033.280
 recorded             in
 indictments
 Value of seized assets       88.279.062        241.860.286        419.587.519       434.576.213

 Value of confiscated         1.675.553          5.092.713          7.814.500          7.620.436
 assets
Source: Ministry of Justice presentation.
DGA (Directia Generala Anticoruptie). The DGA (Anti-Corruption General Directorate) was set
up in 2005 as an agency within the Ministry of Interior as a separate legal entity. Its objective is to
prevent and combat corruption within the Ministry. It is a part of the Criminal Police and its
investigative activities are directed by the prosecutor. It has 630 staff members in the central and
territorial offices (13 regional units and 39 county offices). The DGA consists of four departments
(prevention, investigation, support, analysis and forecast). The DGA developed a methodology for
detecting corruption in the MoI that is based on risk assessment approach. The DGA developed and
uses a special software MARC – Assisted Management of Corruption Risks. The Investigative
Department includes operative officers, including undercover agents. It has its own technical unit,
but also cooperates with the national security service and the MoI. The DGA conducts integrity tests
of the Ministry’s employees based on the procedure approved by the Minister’s order. The
discrepancy between income and assets of an employee can become a basis for disciplinary
proceedings. DGA conducts training for other public authorities. In 2013 the Government proposed
to extend the DGA’s mandate to cover the whole public sector, but it was rejected by the parliament.


Anti-corruption legislation in Romania
Main anti-corruption laws in Romania:
    -   Law # 176 of 1 September 2010 on the integrity of public officials and dignitaries
    -   Law # 144 of 21 may 2007 on the establishment, organization and functioning of the
        National Integrity Agency
    -   Government Emergency Ordinance # 43 of 4 April 2002 regarding the National
        Anticorruption Directorate
    -   Government Emergency Ordinance #63 of June 2013 for amending Government
        Emergency Ordinance # 43/2002 regarding the National Anticorruption Directorate
    -   Law # 78 of 8 May 2000 on preventing, discovering and sanctioning of corruption acts
    -   Criminal Code.




                                                                                                     7
                    RECOMMENDATIONS FOR UKRAINE
1. Organizational model of the ANI could be used when designing the National Agency for
   Corruption Prevention in Ukraine. In particular, the administrative investigations should be
   conducted by inspectors, who would then present a case (a “charge”) to the NACP as a
   decision-making body. The NACP procedures should not require that a member of the NACP
   is designated for each case to present it to the full panel, as it would affect impartiality and
   breach fair trial principles. The “accusation” and “decision-making” roles should be separated
   through internal rules of procedure. This would result in fair proceedings and reduce the risk
   of court appeals.
    The NACP inspectors should have sufficient operational autonomy, as is the case in the
    Romanian ANI. It includes autonomy from the NACP members and senior management of
    the NACP secretariat. Operational autonomy (non-interference in the investigation of specific
    cases) should be supported by the guarantees from arbitrary dismissal and any other
    harassment, including through disciplinary proceedings.
2. The system of the NACP liaison officers in public authorities should be established and
   reinstated in the law. It could be based on authorized anti-corruption officers that were
   appointed in all ministries and government agencies. The original draft Law of Ukraine on
   Corruption Prevention included relevant provisions, but they were removed from the draft
   text in the parliament. Such officers could be responsible for controlling submission of asset
   declarations by the employees, including new and departing employees, provide advice to the
   employees on the correct implementation of the Law on Corruption Prevention. Assigning the
   function of control over submission of asset declarations to such officers could solve the
   problem without establishing a central roster of the declarants, which appears not to be
   feasible in Ukraine’s context. Such decentralized control is easier to implement and can be
   carried out by the officers for their respective institutions by comparing the list of the new and
   outgoing employees with the declarations filed in the e-declarations system. It would require
   additional internal regulations, e.g. that the HR departments notify the officers about new and
   outgoing staff (control of submission of annual declarations by officials who are already in
   the system will be conducted by e-declarations system automatically).

3. The NACP should develop a software or use external company services for conducting mass
   media monitoring to detect information relevant for the NACP investigations, in particular
   about allegations of conflicts of interests, unexplained or excessive assets possessed/used by
   public officials, failure to submit an asset declaration or any other violation of the anti-
   corruption legislation which the NACP is supposed to enforce.
4. The e-declarations software to be used by the NACP should incorporate an algorithm to
   detect and notify the NACP officers about irregularities in the asset declarations (“red
   flags”). Examples of red flags:
        -   significant changes in income or assets compared with previous declarations,
        -   discrepancies between assets and income / income and expenditures,
        -   unusual or excessive loans,
        -   new corporate rights acquired by the declarant or his/her family member, income
            from the sale of corporate rights,
        -   casino or gamble wins, gifts,
        -   asset deals with family members,
        -   assets acquired or sold below or higher than market conditions,
        -   foreign transactions,
        -   income from trusts,


                                                                                                   8
        -   insurance payments,
        -   transactions related to intangibles, e.g. IPRs or consultancies.5
    The list of red flags could be extended based on the experience of detection and
    investigations. With time, the scope of the analysis could be extended to include external
    sources (e.g. when the e-declarations system is connected with external public registers).




5
 Based on “Practitioner manual on processing and analyzing income and asset declarations of
public officials”, Tilman Hoppe and Valts Kalnins, Council of Europe, January 2014, available at
http://bit.ly/1RvWma3.

                                                                                                   9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Annex



                                                                          STRUCTURE OF THE NATIONAL INTEGRITY AGENCY

                                                                                                                                                   PRESIDENT



                                                                                                                   CABINET OF THE PRESIDENT
                                                                                                                                                                   PUBLIC INTERNAL AUDIT
                                                                                                                                                                   DEPARTMENT

                                                                                                                                                                                                    IT INFRASTRUCTURE
                                                                                                                                                                                                        MANAGEMENT
                                                                                                                                                                      INFORMATION                       DEPARTMENT
                                                                                                                                                                   TECHNOLOGY OFFICE
                                                                                                                                                                                                  CLASSIFIED INFORMATION
                                                                                                                                                                                                       DEPARTMENT


                                                          LEGAL, PUBLIC RELATIONS AND
              INTEGRITY
                                                       COMMUNICATION GENERAL DIRECTORATE                                                           VICEPRESIDENT
             INSPECTION*



               INTEGRITY                                                                                                                                            GENERAL REGISTRY OFFICE
             INSPECTION**

                                          APPROVAL AND                    LITIGATION            COMMUNICATION,
                                           LEGISLATION
                                           DEPARTMENT
                                                                            OFFICE              PUBLIC RELATIONS
                                                                                                 AND STRATEGY
                                                                                                                                              SECRETARY GENERAL
                                                                                                  DIRECTORATE




                                                                                                                                                                          HUMAN RESOURCES
                                                                                                                           ECONOMIC
                                                                                                                                                                               OFFICE
                                                                                                                          DIRECTORATE


INTEGRITY        INTEGRITY   INTEGRITY     INTEGRITY         INTEGRITY          ANALYSIS AND
INSPECTION      INSPECTION   INSPECTION   INSPECTION         INSPECTION          PREVENTION
                                            OFFICE 4          OFFICE 5                                                                                         HUMAN RESOURCES              LABOR SAFETY
 OFFICE 1        OFFICE 2     OFFICE 3                                                 OFFICE         FINANCIAL AND       INVESTMENT AND   ADMINISTRATIVE
                                                                                                                                               OFFICE              BUREAU                    DEPARTMENT
                                                                                                       ACCOUNTING          PROCUREMENT
                                                                                                          OFFICE            DEPARTMENT



                                                                                                       ACCOUNTING            ARCHIVE
                                                                                                       DEPARTMENT          DEPARTMENT




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   10
