                        102586




TDRP Quarterly Report
  APRIL – JUNE 2014
                                                                                                                                                April – June 2014




CONTENTS
1. Operational Activities and Technical Assistance ........................................................................... 3
    1.1 Regional Activities ........................................................................................................................... 3
     African Union DDR Capacity Program (AU DDRCP) .................................................................................. 3
    1.2 Country Activities ............................................................................................................................ 8
     Burundi ................................................................................................................................................... 8
     Democratic Republic of Congo ................................................................................................................ 8
     Libya .................................................................................................................................................... 9
     Mali .................................................................................................................................................... 9
     Somalia.................................................................................................................................................. 10
     Republic of South Sudan........................................................................................................................ 10
2. Knowledge Management ........................................................................................................... 12
    2.1 Studies .......................................................................................................................................... 12
     A Comparative Study of Ex-Combatant Reintegration in the African Great Lakes Region ...................... 12
     Uganda: Children and DDR Study .......................................................................................................... 13
    2.2 Conferences and Workshops ......................................................................................................... 13
     Inter-Agency Working Group on DDR .................................................................................................... 13
     UNDP 5TH Joint Meeting DPKO-UNDP Senior DDR Officers..................................................................... 14
     New York, USA (June 24, 2014).............................................................................................................. 14
     Operational Perspectives on Armed Group Management & Violence Reduction................................... 14
    2.3 Pilot Programs ............................................................................................................................... 15
     LOGiCA Family Study ............................................................................................................................. 15
3. Program Management ............................................................................................................... 15
    Staffing.................................................................................................................................................... 15
4. Financial Management ............................................................................................................... 16
5. Outlook for Next Quarter ........................................................................................................... 17
Annex I: TDRP Multi-Donor Trust Fund Status ................................................................................ 18




                                                                                2
                                                                                                April – June 2014




1. OPERATIONAL ACTIVITIES AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE
1.1     REGIONAL ACTIVITIES

AFRICAN UNION DDR CAPACITY PROGRAM (AU DDRCP)

Background

The African Union Commission (AUC) launched the African Union Disarmament, Demobilization and
Reintegration Capacity Program 2013-2015 (AU DDRCP) in February 2013. A disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) core team was set-up within the Peace and Security Division (PSD) to facilitate AU
DDRCP’s implementation. AU DDRCP’s overall objective is to support and institutionalize DDR related
capacities within the AU in order to increase the AU’s effectiveness in performing in accordance with DDR
related goals of the 2006 Post-Conflict Reconstruction and Development (PCRD) and of the Africa Peace
and Security Architecture (APSA).

In order to achieve the overall objective, three mutually supportive components along with their
corresponding outputs have been identified. These include:

        1. Institutionalize AU capacity to support national and regional DDR related initiatives;
        2. Establish an AU DDR Resource and Research Centre to document national DDR
           experiences, best practices and develop DDR specific guidance resources; and
        3. AU Engagement in DDR Activities of Member States.

The rationale for TDRP involvement is twofold. First, TDRP aims at consolidating in African institutions, its
own experience and that of its predecessor, the Multi-Country Demobilization and Reintegration Program
(MDRP). Second, the collaboration takes place in the context of the 2006 PCRD and follows-up on AUC’s
contribution to the World Development Report (WDR) 2011 on Conflict, Security and Development.

Component One: Institutionalize AU Capacity to Support National & Regional DDR Related Initiatives

Activity One: Donors Briefing on DDR

As part of a continued dialogue and interaction with the donor community in Addis Ababa, a donors
briefing was held on 26 May 2014, to follow up from the last donors briefing that was held 18 February
2013. The rationale for holding this conference was to; (i) provide an update of the DDRCP to the
international community and explain how it is currently engaging DDR initiatives on the continent by
utilizing the APSA; and (ii) solicit additional financial support for the DDRCP. A presentation was made by
the AU, highlighting the achievements of the DDR capacity program between 2012 and 2014.

The commission also presented a budget which outlined the key priority areas and funding gaps.
Participants noted that, although the AU is progressively integrating the DDRCP Programmatic budgetary
requirements into the AU regular budget and the various pool funds, additional funding was required to
enhance support to the third component of the program: support the Member States.

Overall, participants expressed their satisfaction in the progress the program had made and the donors
suggested that the Defense and Security Division (DSD) create a Joint Financing Arrangement where



                                                     3
                                                                                                 April – June 2014



donors could support the efforts not only of DDR but other units within DSD in-order to promote
oversight and transparency. The AU Commission is currently exploring these options. They also pointed
out the need to boost the general visibility and public relations to the DDR program.

Activity Two: Third AU-Regions Steering Committee Meeting

The above AUC meeting was hosted by the Regional Centre on Small Arms (RECSA) Nairobi, Kenya, and
brought together representatives from the members of the Steering Committee: Common Market for
Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA), the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the
East African Community (EAC), the Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS), the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD), the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region (ICGLR), RECSA, the United Nations (UN) and the World Bank’s Transitional, Demobilization and
Reintegration Program (TDRP).

The Members presented briefs on their activities, highlighting key achievements and challenges in the
fight against illicit SALW. On its part, the Commission presented updates on the implementation of the AU
DDRCP, highlighting achievements, lessons learned and challenges ahead. Some of these challenges
include the need to continue to enhance the capacity of the AUC and strengthen the engagement of
RECs/RMs on DDR related issues on the African Continent, especially research and policy formulation.
The Commission also presented on the fight against illicit proliferation and trafficking of SALW, steps
towards the signature and ratification of The Arms Trade Treaty (ATT) and preparations in support of
Member States’ participation at the Fifth Biennial Meeting of States to Consider the Implementation of
the Program of Action on small arms scheduled to take place from 16 - 20 June 2014 in New York.

The Steering Committee took note of the activities carried out by the Members and called for increased
cooperation and collaboration at both planning and execution of the activities, mainly because most
Member States belong to more than one REC. This would strengthen synergy and foster closer sharing of
experiences. In this regard, the AUC was commended for inviting relevant Members of the Steering
Committee to relevant meetings. It was also agreed that Members should invite the AU Commission to
participate in their activities to encourage continental perspective in the fight against illicit SALW and DDR

Component Two: Establish AU DDR Resource and Research Centre to Document National DDR Experiences
and Best Practices and Develop DDR Specific Guidance Resources

Activity One: Supporting the development of the AU DDR Operational Guidance Notes (OGNs)

The AU DDR Operational Guidelines will provide guidance to DDR practitioners on key issues pertaining to
DDR on the African continent. It will also provide guidance to the AU, AU Missions and the RECs and RMs
with regards to their role in supporting DDR efforts. Within this context, TDRP placed two consultants to
develop OGNs on DDR National Frameworks as well as one on Reintegration. As part of this year’s main
activities, the drafts of these five OGNs are finalized and are awaiting for final validation workshop review.


    Task                                                                                Status
    Frameworks for National DDR Initiatives                                              Draft Finalized
    Reintegration                                                                        Draft Finalized
    Detention in AU Peacekeeping Operations                                              Draft Finalized
    Women, Gender and DDR                                                                Draft Finalized



                                                      4
                                                                                                  April – June 2014



    Children in Armed Conflict                                                             Draft Finalized
    DDR Program Design, Planning and Human Resources                                      To be developed
    Financing, Budgeting, Administration and Human Resources                              To be developed
    Disarmament and Arms Management                                                       To be developed
    Demobilization and Reinsertion                                                        To be developed
                                                              ND
    DDR Modalities in Conflict and Post-Conflict Situations (2 Generation DDR)            To be developed
    DDR and Foreign Combatants                                                            To be developed
    Cross-cutting Issues: Peace Processes, SSR, Special Needs Groups, Health & HIV/AIDS   To be developed
    Monitoring and Evaluation                                                             To be developed
    The Role of the AU, AU Missions, RECs/RMs in support of DDR Initiatives               To be developed

Activity Two: Second Document Review and Validation Workshop on DDR Technical Guidance Documents

The Commission embarked on the development of an initial five DDR guidance documents (Detention,
Children in Armed Conflict, Women in Armed Conflict, Reintegration and National frameworks DDR
initiatives). The Commission subsequently held a 2 day meeting, 3 - 4 December 2013 in Addis Ababa,
Ethiopia to allow AUC, RECs/ RMs and international DDR experts to review the draft documents. After
incorporating the comments and suggestions the Commission convened a second review meeting 26 – 27
May 2014, whose main purpose was to: (i) review the documents to identify if all major edits have been
captured and validate the following DDR technical guidance documents on: and (ii) get an endorsement
from the participants for the implementation of the AU DDR technical guidance documents for use by the
AU, RECs/ RMs and Member States.

These guidance documents are aimed at assisting in the planning and implementation of the wider
reintegration process, to provide national perspective in engaging national institutions; to mobilize
adequate funding; to manage the downsize of military structure; to respond to the needs of women and
ensure humane treatment of the detainees.

The participants expressed their appreciation in regards to the efforts of the AU DDRCP and provided
several useful suggestions including the development of an additional guideline on DDR in Peace Support
Operations (PSOs). The development of two additional guidance notes before the end of 2014 will be
explored.

Activity Three: AU DDR Resource and Research Center and the DDR Site

Efforts have been underway to support the establishment of the DDR Resource and Research Center in
the collection of books and relevant materials for ease access and reference. The program further
envisages to further advance the activities of referencing, cataloguing, development of web content,
linking the DDR site with useful links and install advanced search functions.

The first and second edition of the AU DDR Newsletter is published and released in February and June
2014 respectively. The first issue features the following key highlights; Overview of the AU DDR Capacity
Program; AU DDR activities; AU-UN-WB DDR Training and validation workshop; first and second steering
Committee meeting; seminar on CAAC/UNSCR 1325; AU Support to Member states (South Sudan, CAR,
Somalia and Comoros). The second issue features AU’s support to member states in Sudan and Libya;
Donors briefing on DDR; AU-Regions steering committee meeting; document review and validation
workshop.




                                                       5
                                                                                               April – June 2014



The AU DDR Capacity project has made efforts to engage in the processes of with the Peace and Security
Department’s Roster development. The Program will closely follow-up in its development to ensure the
inclusion of the DDR experts.

The African Union Youth Volunteer (AUYV) has been placed and deployed to the Defense and Security
Division expected to assume duty in April 2014. The primary duty of the volunteer is to develop the
technical aspect of the DDR site. The AUYV has been engaged to develop the AU DDR site web interface
and work in close collaboration with the Peace and Security Departments Communications unit.

The AU DDR Capacity Project has made substantial progress in developing the AU DDR site framework as
well as the content of the website. The technical aspect of the web designing is expected to be finalized in
the upcoming quarter.

Component Three: AU Engagement in DDR Activities of Member States

Activity One: Support to strengthening AMISOM for DDR and Disengaged Combatants:

A draft project proposal has been prepared by the AU core team entitled AMISOM Support to the Federal
Government of Somalia National Programme for the Treatment and Handling Disengaged Combatants for
the consideration of potential donor support. The project is an activity by the DSD within the framework
of the AU DDRCP. The project aims to complement the ability of the government of Somalia to handle
disengaged combatants by strengthening the capacity of AMISOM in their role as the first receivers of
disengaged combatants. The project components are in line with actualizing the Somali National Program
on Disengaged Combatants, as well as the UN Security Council Resolution 2036. The document is sent to
Peace Support Operations Division (PSOD) for their input.

Develop an Office Operational Task Manual for the Somalia DDR Secretariat:

As a follow up to the agreement with the Somali DDR commissioner in early November 2013, TDRP
drafted a Departmental task Matrix/Action plan outlining roles and responsibilities and timelines. This
product has been shared with the Somali DDR commissioner for review and feedback.

Activity Two: Country Activities

Joint Assessment Mission to Sudan

At the request of the Government of Sudan, a Joint AU-UN- World Bank-League of Arab States,
Technical Mission on DDR, Community Security and Small Arms Control (CSAC) and Post-Conflict
Reconstructions and Development (PCRD) needs assessment was conducted in Sudan from 14 to 17 April,
2014. The aim of the mission was i) to respond to the request from the Sudan DDR Commission for
technical support to the new national DDR Strategy and Action (2014 -2016), ii) explore linkages between
DDR, Community Security and Arms Control (CSACs), and PCRD activities towards stabilization, peace and
national reconciliation; and iv) make recommendations to the Government of Sudan, AUC   and
international partners on how to move the DDR/CSAC and SSR processes forward in the context of
promoting the Sudan’s Post Conflict Reconstruction and Development ( PCRD) efforts.

The Joint Technical Assessment Mission met with a range of national and international distinguished
personalities, including national and international Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs). Several


                                                     6
                                                                                                 April – June 2014



presentations were made which provided the opportunity to assess current DDR progress, lessons
learned, gaps and challenges, and identification of needs. In addition, the assessment examined the level
of international engagement and donor support, including how to compliment ongoing national and
international support in the area of DDR, ensuring no duplication of efforts amongst various partners.

From the discussions held with the Government of Sudan and the international community, particularly
the UN, the World Bank and the African Development Bank (AfDB) country representatives in Sudan, a
number of immediate to medium to long-term recommendations were proposed. First, there is need to
intensify advocacy and resource mobilization efforts to support the implementation of the revised
program, the “Sudan DDR, a road to Peace and Development,” and second there is need to align DDR
efforts with the ongoing transition political process. Third, that there is a greater need for the AUC and its
partners to provide training and capacity building support to the DDR process in Sudan, and finally, the
mission recommended the need for support to strengthen border security and regional co-operation to
mitigate transnational crime

In conclusion, despite the complex and highly political sensitive environment in which the Sudan DDR
Commission is operating, it is delivering against certain goals, which were originally envisaged based on
its mandate assigned after the singing of the CPA in 2005. That said, the mission suggested that with the
collective support of the AUC, its partners and the international community, the Government needs to
review its new 3 year DDR program (2014 to 2016), with the aim of prioritizing activities against certain
agreed set of criteria such as those ongoing projects that need to be completed before the end of 2014;
and activities that need to strengthen sub-regional security and border cooperation initiatives with South
Sudan, CAR, Chad and DRC.

Joint DDR Sensitization Mission to Libya

From 4 to 8 May 2014, the African Union and its partners, the United Nations and the World Bank/
AFTCS-TDRP, conducted a joint DDR sensitization mission to Libya. The main objective of the sensitization
mission was to raise awareness on the kind of DDR assistance that can be provided to the Libyan
authorities based on successful and emerging lessons learned on the African continent in dealing with
non-state armed groups, particularly militias through comprehensive DDR processes. The sensitization
briefing brought together senior government officials from all line ministers, the Libyan Program for
Reintegration and Development (formerly the Warriors Affairs Commission), and UNSMIL in Libya.

A formal sensitization briefing session was jointly organized   by the office of the AU Special
Representative of the Chairperson (SRCC), with specific support from the Head of the office Mondher
Rezgui, in collaboration with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Tripoli, Libya; the briefing was chaired by,
Madam Wafa Taher Bughaighis, Under-Secretary for Political Affairs in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of Libya. Presentations were made   by representatives of the Libyan
Government; the AU; the Libyan Program for Reintegration and Development (formerly the Warrior
Affairs Commission); the UN Mission in Libya (UNSMIL); and the Transitional Demobilization and
Reintegration Program (TDRP) of the World Bank. More than 80 participants attended, representing
relevant Libyan structures and institutions, including the Ministries of Defense, Interior and Labor, as well
as civil society organizations. Overall, a general consensus was reached during the sensitization briefing
that there is an urgent need for a national vision and coherent engagement strategy on DDR. Participants
called on the international community, particularly the AU, UN, WB and EU to assist in enhancing an
inclusive national dialogue process that takes into consideration DDR as an urgent priority. Such a



                                                      7
                                                                                                 April – June 2014



dialogue process should involve diverse audiences drawn from the community and national levels and
should discuss issues related to transitional justice, including establishment of a Truth and National
Reconciliation process.

The mission was concluded with the following recommended 6-12 months’ timeline, outlining the
following activities and strategic areas of support that is; (i) there is an urgent need to improve the public
information and communications; (ii) there is a need to facilitate an inclusive dialogue process aimed at
developing a coherent national DDR Strategy and Policy, (iii) need to conduct DDR training and capacity
building activities (iv) need to collect data and statistics (v) need to provide advisory support as well as
oversight and co-ordination support (vi) to establish border engagement and cooperation. A proposed
follow-up meeting will be considered in November 2014.

Outlook for the Next Quarter:

Activity                                                                                 Date
Development of Two DDR Guidelines                                               August-September 2014
Basic and advanced DDR training to Member states, RECs and PSOs                      August 2014
DDR South – South Exchange: Somalia and Rwanda                                     September 2014


1.2     COUNTRY ACTIVITIES

BURUNDI

Between April and June 2014, AFTCS/TDRP staff participated in two official missions to Burundi in
response to requests for technical assistance by the Emergency Transitional Demobilization Project
(PDRT). In May 2014, TDRP staff assisted in the preparation of the Implementation Completion Report
(ICR) of PDRT. TDRP staff participated in an ICR related mission and carried out an in-depth assessment of
the four project components including: an assessment of actual activities carried out; process evaluation
of the activities including reconciliation of recommendations and findings of AMs, beneficiary surveys and
the project's records; and an evaluation of results achieved (in terms of results framework indicators as
well as other unintended project results).

In June 2014, TDRP staff participated in the last implementation support mission to the Republic of
Burundi’s Commission Nationale charge de la Démobilisation, de la Réinsertion et de la Réintégration des
ex-combattants (CNDDR) with a special focus on project closeout. The meetings in Bujumbura focused on
the closure of PDRT on 30 June 2014. AFTCS/TDRP staff lent support in terms of project closeout related
to economic and social reintegration activities, support to vulnerable groups, and monitoring and
evaluation. The mission held several meetings with CNDDR to discuss project closure, outstanding
activities, and discuss ongoing support to the permanently disabled ex-combatants. Overall, the project is
expected to meet its development objective. With the closure of the project in June, the DDR process in
Burundi will officially come to an end.

DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO

TDRP has been asked to provide technical assistance to the Government of Democratic Republic of Congo
DDR Phase III. In this quarter, TDRP has worked on finalizing the Global Plan on DDR III. This document



                                                      8
                                                                                                 April – June 2014



was developed by a team of TDRP staff and consultants in close collaboration with the World Bank
Country Director in Kinshasa. The document was shared with the international and national partners at
the DESS TWG meeting that was held in June. TDRP will continue working on providing technical
assistance to the Global DDR plan and DDR III in DRC in the next quarter.

LIBYA

In May 2014, together with African Union and United Nations, TDRP conducted a joint DDR sensitization
mission to Libya. The main objective of the sensitization mission was to raise awareness on the kind of
DDR assistance that can be provided to the Libyan authorities based on successful and emerging lessons
learned on the African continent in dealing with non-state armed groups, particularly militias through
comprehensive DDR processes. The sensitization briefing brought together senior government officials
from all line ministers, the Libyan Program for Reintegration and Development (formerly the Warriors
Affairs Commission), and UNSMIL in Libya. Presentations were made by representatives of the Libyan
Government; the AU; the Libyan Program for Reintegration and Development (formerly the Warrior
Affairs Commission); the UN Mission in Libya (UNSMIL); and TDRP. More than 80 participants attended,
representing relevant Libyan structures and institutions, including the Ministries of Defense, Interior and
Labor, as well as civil society organizations. Overall, a general consensus was reached during the
sensitization briefing that there is an urgent need for a national vision and coherent engagement
strategy on DDR. Participants called on the international community, particularly the AU, UN, World Bank
and the European Union to assist in enhancing an inclusive national dialogue process that takes into
consideration DDR as an urgent priority. Such a dialogue process should involve diverse audiences drawn
from the community and national levels and should discuss issues related to transitional justice, including
establishment of a Truth and National Reconciliation process.

The mission was concluded with the following recommended 6-12 months’ timeline, outlining the
following activities and strategic areas of support that is; (i) there is an urgent need to improve the public
information and communications; (ii) there is a need to facilitate an inclusive dialogue process aimed at
developing a coherent national DDR Strategy and Policy, (iii) need to conduct DDR training and capacity
building activities (iv) need to collect data and statistics (v) need to provide advisory support as well as
oversight and co-ordination support (vi) to establish border engagement and cooperation. A proposed
follow-up meeting will be considered in November 2014.

MALI

As part of ongoing Technical Assistance to the Government of Mali DDR Working Group (DDRWG), a TDRP
team traveled to Bamako, Mali in May. The objective of the mission was to work with DDRWG in drafting
the Strategic DDR Plan, including five main DDR documents and a number of supporting documents, and
discuss and provide technical assistance on funding mechanisms and institutional set-up of the program.
The DDRWG informed the mission that the National DDR Strategy for the Stabilization of Mali will target
three groups: (i) ex-combatants, (ii) IDPs and Refugees and (iii) vulnerable people. The mission worked
with the DDRWG to suggest that each of these target groups are treated as independent sub-projects
with each having separate funding routes. This recommendation was tin the interests of focusing
individually on the needs of each of the groups and in order to ensure efficiency and targeted
programming. The mission noted a consensus in DDRWG on the recommended approach that the TDRP
team work on and address the Demobilization and Reintegration program ex-combatants while synergies




                                                      9
                                                                                              April – June 2014



with programs on IDPs and Refugees and Vulnerable Groups will be sought in areas such as civilian
disarmament, community safety, skilling programs and reinsertion activities.

TDRP team worked with DDRWG in completing the skeleton DDR Strategic Plan that will incorporate five
main components as agreed in the previous mission: (i) Communications and Public Information, (ii)
Monitoring and Evaluation, (iii) Management Information Systems, (iv) Funding Mechanisms, and (v)
Reinsertion Programing. Comments and requests by DDRWG were then incorporated in the final draft of
Strategic DDR Plan and program documents, which was completed in late June.

As requested by DDRWG, the TDRP team presented funding mechanisms and implementation
arrangements that could be best suited for a DDR program in Mali. It was highlighted that the funding
and implementation modalities should ensure that DDR is implemented in a transparent and efficient
manner, while building national capacity. TDRP mission team worked with DDRWG to initiate a first draft
DDR Operations Plan, which would form the basis for both the DDRWG and the TDRP team to plan the
way forward. A skeleton was agreed on and both teams will work off-line over the coming weeks to
complete this task. In support of the overall stabilization effort in Mali, TDRP will continue internal
discussions with World Bank colleagues to seek collaboration and synergies on conflict-affected
vulnerable people, IDPs, and ex-combatant families.

SOMALIA

As part of ongoing TDRP support to Somalia DDR process, TDRP prepared an initiative, together with the
African Union, a South-South Knowledge and Experience Exchange on DDR between Rwanda and Somalia.
It is expected that Somalia DDR team will obtain key insight into DDR affairs by interacting with their
Rwandese counterparts. Rwanda’s experience with DDR is widely considered as one of the best in Africa.
The South-South Exchange plan involves the Somali DDR department staff visiting Kigali to meet with
Rwanda DDR national program officials. The exchange will be in the form of discussions, presentations,
working groups and site visits. Rwanda DDR commission is very interested to receive the Somali
colleagues and share with them its DDR experience. TDRP is working closely with the World Bank’s South-
South Exchange Facility, which has financing and technical resources to prepare and implement effective
exchange and learning activities. It is expected that the exchange will be in the form of a 5-day workshop,
including a site visit to a vocational training center, in September – October 2014.

The plan South-South exchange activity, Capacity Development for Somalia DDR process through
Knowledge and Experience Exchange: Exchanging the DDR Experience of Rwanda, has been cleared by the
World Bank Social, Urban, Rural, and Resilience Practice Manager, World Bank Somalia Country Director
and World Bank Rwanda Country Manager. In this quarter, TDRP team continued work on finalizing the
funding process and implementation plan of the South-South Exchange in close collaboration with
government partners.

REPUBLIC OF SOUTH SUDAN

TDRP’s work in South Sudan continued this quarter following a brief hold in operations due to the civil
conflict which began in December 2013 and the resultant closing of the World Bank office in South Sudan
from December to April due to insecurity. While the scale of the fighting has diminished since December,
the events continue to have a significant impact on the country. The outbreak of conflict in the new
nation is a tragedy that underscores the dire need for an effective DDR Programme and security sector
reform in South Sudan. TDRP will continue to manage the pilot reintegration project on behalf of and


                                                    10
                                                                                                 April – June 2014



alongside the National DDR Commission (NDDRC) and will continue to provide strategic guidance to the
NDDRC in this challenging time.

DDR - Pilot Reintegration Project

The Pilot Reintegration Project of the Republic of South Sudan (RoSS)’s Pilot of the new DDR Program was
able to resume this quarter, seeing significant movement despite the challenging environment. This
includes the completion of the community projects and continued state-based reintegration livelihoods
trainings. The primary objective of the pilot reintegration project is to test the modalities of reintegration
in South Sudan to inform and improve future DDR programs in the country. In addition, the pilot is
focused on capacity building to the NDDRC staff and systems. The pilot has been progressing well and the
TDRP will complete the service delivery by July 2014 and expects to compile and present the learnings in
September and October 2014.

Resumption of State-Based Livelihoods trainings

A key component of the reintegration work is the delivery of livelihoods support. This component is
implemented by the implementing partner UNICON who resumed work in April 2014 after breaking in
December 2014. This work began with a training of trainers on entrepreneurship, financial literacy and
cooperatives for the Information, Counseling and Referral Systems (ICRS) Caseworkers of the NDDRC in
May 2014. The business skills training was then followed by a second training of trainers in agricultural
business methods provided to a group of Ministry of Agriculture Extension Workers to then work
alongside the ICRS caseworkers to provide follow-up visits to the ex-combatants that chose agricultural
training. Immediately following the training of trainers, the ICRS caseworkers and Extension Workers
traveled back to the four states of the pilot and began circulating in the states to provide the two types of
trainings, business and association/cooperative skills and agricultural business methods. This work will
continue until late July by which time all the pilot ex-combatants will have had the opportunity to
participate in the trainings. Further, a group of ex-combatants did not receive a full vocational training as
managed by UNESCO at the Mapel Transitional Facility as was initially planned. Thus, in addition to the
business and agriculture skills, this group of ex-combatants, namely drivers and auto mechanics, attended
supplemental vocational training in the respective area. Those that were trained in other vocations than
driving or auto mechanics have the option of a vocational expert visit to visit their business and teach
them additional skills to better prepare them to be self-sufficient by the end of the pilot in July 2014.

The completion of the DDR Community Projects component

A second component of the pilot project is the provision of community projects for the communities
receiving large concentrations of ex-combatants, often referred to as a peace dividend. The community
support component was implemented by IOM and supported the reintegration process through the
implementation of 17 community projects. Based on the number of ex-combatants from each state
combined with logistical factors, Western Bahr el Ghazal received nine community support projects;
Lakes five projects; Warrap two projects and Northern Bahr el Ghazal one project. These projects
targeted the payams where the highest numbers of ex-combatants originated. These community support
projects were to prioritize water interventions and improvements at local marketplaces. NDDRC State
Coordinators and IOM field staff members liaised with community members and ex-combatants to
identify the priority improvement projects that were of highest priority in their communities within the
available budget. The program originally proposed the implementation of 10 community projects but this
was far surpassed and in the end, the program was able to deliver 17 projects in total. With the exception



                                                     11
                                                                                              April – June 2014



of Northern Bahr el Ghazal, all states chose water interventions. All of these 16 water projects were
coordinated with the Rural Water Departments in each state. A series of community meetings were held
with target communities in each project site on the DDR community interventions and roles and
responsibilities of the community outlined once the project is completed. Due to the outbreak of the
conflict on 15 December 2013, activities were temporarily suspended however works on the community
support projects recommenced in late February 2014 security allowed.

Assessment of Crime and Criminal Violence Prevention in Policy and Decision Making

This quarter the TDRP also conducted an Assessment of Crime and Criminal Violence Prevention in Policy
and Decision Making in South Sudan. The overarching objectives of the assessment is to uncover the
status quo of crime and violence in the post-conflict setting of the Republic of South Sudan and map out
potential areas at the policy level for integrated approaches towards crime and criminal violence. Of
particular concern was the role that ex-combatants play in this area, both as perpetrators and survivors of
crime and violence. As such, a mission went to Juba from June 12-27 to meet with key stakeholders,
conduct focus groups and pilot a Victimization Survey. This mission was the starting point of the analysis
on integrating DDR programming and urban planning into crime and violence prevention decision-making,
as well as building a component within DDR programing that deals with civilian crime and violence
prevention. In collaboration with the National DDR Commission and with the support from three local
consultants the mission team completed over than 30 meetings with key stakeholders in Juba; conducted
13 focus groups in local communities in Juba area; and designed a Victimization Survey questionnaire for
an in-depth quantitative crime and criminal violence survey to be conducted later in the year.

Next quarter the TDRP team will continue the management of the Pilot Reintegration Project including
the completion of all service delivery by July 2014, an Ex-Combatant Satisfaction Survey and compilation
of all documents and lessons learned from the pilot for use by the NDDRC in the future. In addition the
team will pilot the Victimization Survey and will be conducting consultative discussions for a potential
JSDF grant on Vocational Training to strengthen the capacity of the vocational training sector in South
Sudan for the benefit of future DDR populations as well as the general citizenry.

2. KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT
2.1     STUDIES
TDRP continued work on two major studies that will be published in the third quarter of 2014. These
studies will be published with TDRP’s new report and study format in line with the program’s new
communications and outreach strategy. TDRP studies are also available at United Nations DDR Resource
Centre (www.UNDDR.org)

A COMPARATIVE STUDY OF EX-COMBATANT REINTEGRATION               IN THE   AFRICAN GREAT LAKES REGION:
TRAJECTORIES, PROCESSES, AND PARADOXES

TDRP will be launching its biggest study of 2014 - a comparative study exploring dynamics and results of
reintegrating ex-combatants in five different countries (Uganda, Rwanda, Democratic Republic of Congo,
Republic of Congo, and Burundi) of the Great Lakes region. This study uses a cross-country comparative
approach capitalizing on survey data collected between 2010 and 2012 from nearly 10,000 ex-
combatants and community members across the Great Lakes. This is the first time that such a large



                                                   12
                                                                                              April – June 2014



sample of data on ex-combatants across multiple countries has been systematically compared and
analyzed, thus the study represents the cutting edge of empirically driven quantitative research on the
reintegration processes of ex-combatants.

An important component of the analysis of ex-combatant reintegration processes revolves around their
position relative to the broader community. As such, this study compares the reintegration processes of
ex-combatants with those of community members and therefore, explores in turn the ways in which
these two types of reintegration processes interact with each other. This study presents a snapshot of the
social and economic dimensions of the overall reintegration process of ex-combatants and community
members. However, the conceptual discussion and analysis of empirical evidence consolidates key
knowledge and understanding about the broad trends of ex-combatants’ reintegration processes across
the GLR. Further, the findings no doubt carry weight for understanding ex-combatants’ reintegration
processes in contexts beyond the GLR. The English version of the study is scheduled to be published
online on July 2, with a French version of its main body to follow in late July.

UGANDA: CHILDREN AND DDR STUDY

The use of child soldiers and children associated with armed forces or armed groups (CAAF/G) is an
unacceptable practice that continues to this day, despite the devastating impact on the children, their
families, communities and countries. The purpose of this study was to capture lessons learned and key
challenges encountered in the provision of support targeted to CAAF/G in Uganda, in an effort to provide
better understanding for policy makers and service providers working on CAAF/G programming
elsewhere. Further, this study had the following specific objectives: (i) understand the effectiveness and
efficiency of D&R programs’ institutional arrangements with agencies working with child and youth ex-
combatants, by focusing on program implementation modalities between the Uganda Amnesty
Commission and implementing partners working with children in Reintegration programs, (ii) assess
whether agencies working with child and youth ex-combatants were sufficiently capacitated to efficiently
undertake the necessary activities both at an operational and administrative level; and (iii) document the
experiences of the implementing partners and agencies working with child and youth ex-combatants for
the purposes of using these learnings for future D&R Programming.

2.2     CONFERENCES AND WORKSHOPS
A key component of TDRP’s knowledge management activities is disseminating knowledge on conflict and
post-conflict issues through workshops and conferences. In this quarter, in addition to the activities
carried out under AU DDRCP, TDRP participated in the following workshops and events:

INTER-AGENCY WORKING GROUP ON DDR

TDRP continues to be very involved in the United Nations Inter-Agency Working Group (IAWG) on
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR). The group is co-chaired by the DDR units of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and the United Nations Development Program (UNDP).
TDRP’s participation reflects the importance and emphasis the World Bank, AFTCS and TDRP places on
coordination, best practices and information sharing among partners. This quarter the TDRP participated
in the multi-organizational high-level meeting held in April 2014 in New York to reaffirm the international
commitment and approve the updated work plan. As part of this renewed work, TDRP will be co-leading




                                                    13
                                                                                               April – June 2014



the IAWG’s development of IDDRS modules on Communications, Monitoring & Evaluation and Dealing
with Third Country nationals (mercenaries) in DDR Operations.

UNDP 5TH JOINT MEETING DPKO-UNDP SENIOR DDR OFFICERS
NEW YORK, USA (JUNE 24, 2014)

TDRP participated an inter-agency meeting on DDR in New York and gave a brief presentation on the
changes in the World Bank and the operations and activities of TDRP. TDRP’s contributions to the field of
DDR was recognized by the participants as it was highlighted that TDRP has the capacity to provide
flexible, fast and efficient technical support for documents and advise on financing. DPKO DDR officers
from countries including Somalia, Libya and Cote D’Ivoire noted that there is potential for collaboration in
the near future on the DDR in these countries.

WORKSHOP: EVOLVING OPERATIONAL PERSPECTIVES ON ARMED GROUP MANAGEMENT & VIOLENCE REDUCTION
OSLO, NORWAY (APRIL 2-4, 2014)

In April 2014, DPKO's Office of Rule of Law and Security Institutions Disarmament, Demobilization and
Reintegration Section (OROLSI DDRS), with the support of Norwegian Defence International Centre
(NODEFIC), brought together a select group of twenty-two practitioners and academics to Oslo, Norway
who specializes in a range of DDR activities. The TDRP was represented at this workshop. The intention
was to validate what still works in DDR as mandated by the Security Council in peace operations around
the world, in an environment which is increasingly different from that where DDR was previously
practiced. The purpose of the workshop was to develop new training materials for a DDR Planners Course
that is held annually, for the past seven years, for Peace Keeping forces.

It had been recognized for some time now that there was a need to retool DPKO's DDR staff, beyond
what was prescribed in the International DDR Standards (IDDRS), to better meet some of the new
challenges that they are facing in the field. The outputs of the workshop, however, reflected a consensus
on the more overarching need for a careful re-think of the entire approach to DDR as it has been
practiced over the past twenty-five years to be more in line with some of the present realities concerning
armed groups in the field. Not all the specialists that participated in the workshop were practitioners of
DDR per se, but were specialists - lawyers, researchers and military personnel, in areas related to some of
the emerging issues that are affecting areas where armed conflict is taking place, including, inter alia,
legal issues (e.g. detention, Sharia), extremist movements, counterinsurgency and counterterrorist
actions, and criminal networks. The workshop was opened by UN peace operations staff from Mali,
Somalia and Libya who explained what they were facing when requested, for example, to canton
separatist Tuaregs with links to Al Qaeda and intricate criminal networks, assist and protect 'disengaging'
Al Shabaab fighters whose former brothers-in-arms continued to be involved in a pitched military battle
(symmetric and asymmetric) for control of swaths of Somali territory; and to simply engage
'Revolutionary Fighters' who deposed Col Gadhafi and are now essentially holding the state hostage
through their monopoly of military force in Libya. What was made clear is that these mandated tasks,
under the rubric of DDR, went far beyond what was required to demobilize these rebel armies.

What was realized from the beginning of the workshop is that, although we generally understand that
today's armed violence and post-conflict environment is much more complex requiring new approaches
and skill sets, what we remains a challenge is how to address these complexities in a coherent manner.




                                                    14
                                                                                                  April – June 2014



New material was generated during the workshop; but still much remain that needs to be done to find
solutions to the new challenges. A report of the workshop is due for July 2014.

2.3     PILOT PROGRAMS

LOGICA FAMILY STUDY

TDRP has continued to provide assistance to the Learning on Gender and Conflict in Africa (LOGiCA) trust
fund with the conduct of a comprehensive qualitative and quantitative study examining the intersection
of family dynamics and the social and economic reintegration of demobilized ex-combatants in Burundi,
Rwanda and Uganda. This family study investigates: (i) the impact of departure, absence and return of ex-
combatants on their families, with a particular focus on spouses, and (ii) the role of the family in the social
and economic reintegration of ex-combatants. The study approach has combined qualitative and
quantitative methodologies as implemented over the course of 3 phases: (i) an in-depth anthropological
Phase I that extended from September 2012 to August 2013; (ii) a Phase II quantitative phase that
entailed conduct of surveys targeting spouses and mothers of ex-combatant, or other family members
identified as important to the ex-combatant; and (iii) a follow-up qualitative Phase III targeting key
informants, practitioners and other relevant stakeholders. The purpose of Phases II and III were to test
and validate findings emerging from the anthropological Phase I while also exploring further key issues or
themes that arose and required deeper investigation.

Field research for Phase II was conducted between January and February with data capture and analysis
taking place in February, while Phase III field activities took place between March and April 2014. The
quantitative survey captured a total of 202 families in Uganda, 409 in Burundi and 417 in Rwanda. In total,
2190 individuals were surveyed during Phase II. Phase III combined a range of methodologies, including
key informant interviews, focus group discussions and workshops with relevant government partners and
other key stakeholders. Working sessions were also conducted with the respective country research
teams in both Paris and London to discuss emerging findings and outline requirements for final reporting.
Individual country reports for Phases II and III have been finalized and are undergoing internal review. The
final report for all three phases is under development and being prepared for peer review and
presentation to a collection of sector experts both internal and external to the Bank. This presentation is
anticipated for September/October 2014.


3. PROGRAM MANAGEMENT
STAFFING
TDRP currently has 7 staff and 12 consultants who maintain constant contribution to its work.

                                                  TDRP Staff
         Staff
         Abderrahim Fraiji                        TDRP Manager
         Aki Stavrou                              Senior Conflict and Development Specialist
         Harald Hinkel                            Senior Social Development Specialist
         Benjamin Burckhart                       Operations Officer
         Caroline Guazzo                          Program Assistant



                                                      15
                                                                                                                                                                                  April – June 2014



        Alexandra Burrall Jung                                                         Operations Officer
        Daksha Shakya                                                                  Operations Associate
        Consultants
        Adeel Zafar                                                                    Management and Information Systems Specialist
        Chan Moses                                                                     DDR Specialist (South Sudan)
        Duina Reyes                                                                    Web and Graphic Designer
        Elisabeth Maier                                                                Social Development Specialist
        Jinghua Zhou                                                                   Operations Associate
        Lina Imran                                                                     Operations Associate (AU/Ethiopia)
        Linda Kiriinya                                                                 Social Development Consultant
        Maisoun Badawi                                                                 Private Sector Specialist
        Mohamed Abdel-Razig                                                            Social Development Consultant
        Murat Onur                                                                     Conflict and Development Specialist
        Olivier Mukarji                                                                DDR Specialist
        Valérie Molina                                                                 DDR Specialist


4. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT
The total disbursement reached 93% of the trust fund amount, or US$32,330,808 million as compared to
87% the previous quarter.


 $32,000,000
 $30,000,000
 $28,000,000
 $26,000,000
 $24,000,000
 $22,000,000
 $20,000,000
 $18,000,000
 $16,000,000
 $14,000,000
 $12,000,000
 $10,000,000
  $8,000,000
  $6,000,000
  $4,000,000
  $2,000,000
          $0
                                                                                                                   Dec-12
                                          Dec-10




                                                                              Dec-11




                                                                                                                                                       Dec-13


                                                                                                                                                                         Jun-14
               Mar-10




                                                   Mar-11




                                                                                        Mar-12




                                                                                                                            Mar-13




                                                                                                                                                                Mar-14
                        Jun-10




                                                            Jun-11




                                                                                                 Jun-12




                                                                                                                                     Jun-13
                                                                                                                                              Sep-13
                                 Sep-10




                                                                     Sep-11




                                                                                                          Sep-12




                                                                                             16
                                                                                          April – June 2014



The assessment carried out by the Government of Sweden for a new contribution to the TDRP has been
completed and a new contribution of SEK 10,000,000 (USD1.5 million equivalent) has been allocated. The
new contribution will be reflected in the next quarterly report


5. OUTLOOK FOR NEXT QUARTER
Planned Activities in the upcoming quarter (July – September 2014)

   Planned Activity                                                                   Date
   Mali DDR Technical Assistance Mission                                          September 2014
   Trust Fund Committee Meeting (Berlin, Germany)                                 September 2014
   South-South Exchange on DDR: Somalia and Rwanda                                September 2014
   South-Sudan Project Completion                                                   October 2014

Status of Planned Activities from the Previous Quarter (January – March 2014)

    Activity                                                                           Status
    Publication of new studies                                                      In progress
    Libya DDR Mission                                                               Completed
    Mali DDR Mission                                                                Completed
    Consolidation Phase in South Sudan                                              In progress
    DRC DDR III Global Plan                                                         In progress

The third quarterly report of 2014 will be issued on October 13, 2014.




                                                    17
                                                                                       April – June 2014




ANNEX I: TDRP MULTI-DONOR TRUST FUND STATUS
                                          Trans.
                DONOR                                 Amount in trans. Curr   Amount in US$
                                          Curr.
  AfDB                                     UA                 14,000,000           $22,280,860
  Finland                                  EUR                  2,500,000           $3,592,051
  Germany                                  EUR                  2,000,000           $2,635,810
  Italy                                    EUR                    500,000            $711,176
  Norway                                   NOK                15,000,000            $2,534,350
  Sweden                                   SEK                15,000,000            $2,106,356
  Belgium MDRP Surplus                     USD                   $405,399            $405,399
  Finland MDRP Surplus                     USD                    $50,009              $50,009
  France MDRP Surplus                      USD                    $76,658              $76,658
  Italy MDRP Surplus                       USD                    $63,214              $63,214
  Norway MDRP Surplus                      USD                   $253,562            $253,562
                                                      Investment Income              $526,693
                                              TOTAL as of June, 30th 2014          $35,236,138


                          Items                                 Allocated   Disbursed        Rate
Support to D&R Operations                                      $15,751,711 $13,989,716         89%
      CAR Community Reintegration Project                       $8,600,000 $7,252,887          84%
      Rwanda Emergency Demobilization Project                   $4,500,000 $4,490,578         100%
      South Sudan - Pilot Reintegration Project                 $2,651,711 $2,246,251          85%
Support to D&R Regional Activities                              $8,907,745 $8,595,169          96%
      Cross-Border Stabilization and Recovery                   $5,017,240 $4,798,349          96%
      Quality Enhancement and Innovation                        $3,890,505 $3,796,820          98%
Technical Assistance Activities                                 $4,751,917 $4,625,799          97%
      African Union                                             $1,700,000 $1,628,717          96%
      Country Programs, Pilots & Knowledge Management           $3,051,917 $2,997,082          98%
Program Management & Supervision                                $4,708,255 $4,373,247          93%
Money Allocated to LOGICA                                         $400,000    $400,000        100%
Trust Fund Administration Fees*                                   $346,877    $346,877        100%
Total Disbursements 30 June 2014                                 $34,709,445 $32,330,808        93%
*Trust Fund Administration Fee is deducted upon receipts of the funds




                                                 18
