                                     October  –  December  2014




                                               102588




TDRP Quarterly Report

  FY15: October – December 2014




                             1	  
     	                                                                                                                              October  –  December  2014   




C O N T E N T S   
1.  Operational  Activities  and  Technical  Assistance  . ..........................................  1   
   1.1    Regional  Activities  . .......................................................................................  1   
    African  Union  DDR  Capacity  Program  (AU  DDRCP)  ....................................................................  1  
   1.2    Country  Activities  . ........................................................................................  3   
    Central  African  Republic  ....................................................................................................................  3  
    Dem ocratic  Republic  of  Congo  .........................................................................................................  3  
    Burundi  .....................................................................................................................................................  4  
    M ali     ........................................................................................................................................................  4  
    Republic  of  South  Sudan  ....................................................................................................................  5  
    Republic  of  Congo              .................................................................................................................................  9  
2.  Knowledge  Management   ............................................................................  9   
   2.1    Conferences  and  W orkshops  . .......................................................................  10   
                                              ...........................................................................................  10  
    Inter-­‐Agency  W orking  Group  on  DDR   
    South-­‐South  Exchange  on  DDR:  Experience  Exchange  between  Rwanda  and  Som alia  10  
            Inception  M eeting  of  Technical  W orking  Group  (TW G)  on  the  Confluence  of  Urban  
            Safety  and  Peace  Building  Practice  ..............................................................................................  12  
3.  Program  Management  . .............................................................................  1 3  
           ..............................................................................................................  13   
   Staffing  
4.  Financial  Management  .............................................................................  1 4  
5.  Outlook  for  Next  Quarter  .........................................................................  1 4  
Annex  I:  TDRP  Multi-­‐Donor  Trust  Fund  Status  . ...............................................  1 6  
  




                                                                                    i	  
     	                                                                                                                            October  –  December  2014   




1 .    O P E R A T I O N A L    A C T I V I T I E S    A N D    T E C H N I C A L    A S S I S T A N C E   
  

1.1   R EGIONAL   A CTIVITIES   
  
A F R I C A N    U N I O N    D D R    C A P A C I T Y    P R O G R A M    ( A U    D D R C P )                                                        
  
The  African  Union  DDR  Capacity  Program  continued  its  progress  this  quarter  through  support  to  member  
states,  DDR  knowledge  development  and  website  development.    
In   regard   to   support   to   member   states   the   AU   supported   both   Somalia   and   Sudan   this   quarter.      In  
October,  the  AU  hosted  a  follow-­‐up  discussion  on  DDR  in  Sudan.    The  meeting  was  held  between  AU,  the  
Sudan   Disarmament,   Demobilization   &   Reintegration   Commission   (SDDRC)   and   Partners,   from   21-­‐22  
October  2014  in  Addis  Ababa,  Ethiopia.  A  draft  implementation  matrix  was  developed  during  the  meeting.  
This   plan   serves   as   a   tool   to   facilitate   the   implementation   of   the   recommendations   made   by   the   Joint  
assessment  team  following  the  DDR  mission  to  Khartoum  15-­‐17  April  2014.  
To  support  the  advancement  of  DDR  efforts  in  Somalia,  from  11  to  12  December  2014,  the  Defense  and  
Security   Division   (DSD)   convened   a   training   workshop   in   Addis   Ababa   on   the   AU   DDR   Guidance  
documents   and   the   Standard   Operating   Procedures   (SOP)   for   the   Reception   and   Handover   of   Children  
Separated  from  Armed  Groups  in  Somalia.  This  training  was  attended  by  AU  staff  from  the  Commission  
and  the  liaison  offices,  IGAD,  AMISOM  and  Somali  Officials.  The  workshop  provided  participants  with  the  
opportunity  to  be  oriented  on  the  AU  DDR  Guidance  documents  (Children  in  DDR,  Detention  and  National  
frameworks)   as   well   as   learn   from   the   implementation   of   the   SOP   for   the   Reception   and   handover   of  
Children   Separated   from   Armed   Groups   in   Somalia,   as   they   plan/   implement   program   for   disengaged  
fighters  including  DDR  that  cater  for  children.  Participants  at  the  panel  discussion  identified  the  existing  
challenges  that  are  faced  at  various  levels  particularly  in  implementing  national  ownership,  enhancing  the  
capacity   and   coordination   of   the   government   ministries.   Subsequently,   key   activities   to   support   were  
proposed   to   unravel   issues   of   coordination   (Government,   partners   and   bi-­‐laterals),   knowledge  
management  of  governance  arrangements  regarding  DDR;  capacity  and  institutional  building,  establishing  
linkages   with   National   Program   for   Disengaged   fighters   including   DDR   and   develop   child   sensitive  
procedures.  This  DSD  session  supporting  Somalia  in  their  DDR  preparations  built  upon  a  TDRP  organized  
Joint  WB-­‐UN-­‐AU  South-­‐South  Experience  Exchange  (SSE)  that  is  outlined  more  fully  below.      
Additionally,   AU   DDR   attended   the   Meeting   of   the   AU-­‐Regions   Steering   Committee   on   Small   Arms   and  
Light  Weapons,  and  Disarmament,  Demobilization  and  Reintegration  which  was  held  from  8-­‐9  December  
2014   in   Lusaka,   Zambia.   The   Commission,   in   partnership   with   the   EU   developed   a   new   pilot   arms-­‐for-­‐
development  project  which  was  launched  by  the  President  of  the  Commission  in  August  2014.  Working  
with  partners,  the  Commission  has  also  included  DDR  in  Security  Sector  Governance  Reform  that  is  going  
on   in   its   two   peacekeeping   missions   in   Guinea   Bissau   and   in   Mali.      In   the   area   of   Small   Arms   and   Light  
Weapons,   the   meeting   reviewed   the   activities   of   the   Members   implemented   through   the   year.   The  
meeting  considered  success  stories  and  highlighted  what  could  be  replicated  in  the  coming  year.  It  also  
discussed  the  challenges  encountered  by  the  members,  and  focus  on  lessons  learned.  There  was  a  focus  
on   cooperation   and   synergy   between   the   members   in   the   course   of   implementation   of   the   various  
activities.   The   meeting   considered   the   planned   activities   for   2015   and   provided   an   opportunity   for  
discussion   on   how   best   to   ensure   effective   cooperation   and   coordination   in   their   implementation.   The  
meeting   (i)   received   comprehensive   reports   from   the   Members,   highlighting   key   achievements   and  



                                                                                1	  
  	                                                                                                          October  –  December  2014   



lessons   learned   in   the   implementation   of   SALW   and   DDR   activities   through   the   year;   (ii)   discussed   and  
agreed   on   a   way   forward   to   strengthen   the   success,   and   how   to   mitigate   the   challenges   to   Member  
States  in  the  implementation  of  the  various  activities;  (iii)  agreed  on  approaches  to  strengthen  assistance  
to   Member   States   on   the   implementation   of   the   ATT   following   its   imminent   entry   into   force;   (iv)  
exchanged   views   and   make   proposals   on   strengthening   cooperation   for   consideration   by   the   Ad   Hoc  
Committee  on  AFRIPOL;  and  (v)  identified  priority  areas  of  engagement  within  the  DDR  Capacity  program.    
In  the  area  of  DDR  Knowledge  Development  and  Sharing,  this  quarter  saw  additional  movement  on  the  
DDR   Operational   Guidance   Notes   (OGN).   This   work   is   tailored   to   the   African   context,   reflects   the   DDR  
experience  of  the  five  regions  in  Africa  and  is  specifically  designed  to  assist  practitioners  in  the  field.  The  
OGNs  are  intended  to  complement  and  build  upon  the  comprehensive  work  undertaken  by  the  UN  which  
has  produced  the  International  DDR  Standards  (IDDRS)  and  many  DDR  Guidance  Notes.  To  date  the  AU  
DDR  division  has  drafted  five  OGNs:  Frameworks  for  National  DDR  initiatives,  Detention,  Children  in  DDR,  
Women  in  DDR,  and  Reintegration.  The  documents  are  being  finalized  and  translated  into  all  operational  
languages  of  the  AU.      
To  capture  and  learn  from  the  rich  history  of  DDR  on  the  continent,  efforts  are  underway  to  develop  an  
AU  DDR  Compendium.  This  will  serve  as  a  compilation  of  DDR  experiences  and  provide  researchers  and  
policy  makers  with  material  to  provide  comparative  analysis  of  the  different  DDR  experiences.  The  DDR  
Compendium  will  present  a  comprehensive  analysis  of  the  diverse  DDR  experiences  in  Africa.  In  analyzing  
national  DDR  programs,  the  studies  will  describe  how  African  DDR  processes  were  adapted  to  the  specific  
context  and  how  the  driving  forces  of  the  conflict  and  the  parties  to  the  conflict  have  shaped  both  how  
the  DDR  process  was  formulated  and  how  it  was  adapted  during  implementation.    This  compendium  will  
specifically   reflect   the   experiences   of   DDR   in   Africa   by   highlighting   African   Voices   in   this   work.   Case  
studies  will  be  used  to  highlight  political,  security,  administrative  and  financial  obstacles  and  assess  how  
national   authorities   and   partners   attempted   to   address   them.   They   will   also   take   into   account   that   in  
many   of   the   situations   faced   today   that   DDR   processes   are   non-­‐linear   and   have   to   be   undertaken   in  
complex  and  fragile  security  and  political  contexts.  This  knowledge  product  will  assess  whether  and  how  
DDR   processes   were   linked   to   the   process   of   national   reconciliation   and   to   security   sector   reform   in  
regards  to  the  national  security  services  incorporating  other  rebel  forces.  The  Compendium  will  be  used  
not   only   to   identify   lessons   learned   and   be   a   resource   for   policy   makers,   but   it   will   showcase   the   rich  
social  capital  in  the  African  context  which,  when  utilized  appropriately,  assisted  in  the  success  of  many  of  
the  DDR  processes.    
A   consultant   was   contracted   in   November   2014   and   is   currently   working   on   a   first   draft   that   identifies  
main   trends   and   themes/lessons   learned   on   the   African   continent.   A   two-­‐day   workshop   is   planned   for  
February  2015  to  review  the  draft  compendium  results,  and  to  get  input  from  the  centers  of  excellence,  
REC/RM,  Academics  and  National  DDR  commissions.  Concurrently,  a  one  day  workshop  will  be  organized  
on   the   Non-­‐State   Armed   Groups   (NSAG)   to   review   the   study   undertaken   in   five   countries   as   Joint  
Collaborative   Engagement,   enhance   a   better   understanding   of   how   to   approach/engage   with   NSAGs   in  
advancing  stabilization,  DDR,  border  security,  and  development  interventions  on  the  African  continent.  
Finally,  the  team  made  significant  progress  in  this  quarter  in  the  development  of  the  AU  DDR  division’s  
new   website,   a   critical   tool   for   knowledge   sharing.   The   website   will   include   information   about   the   AU-­‐
DDR  division’s  work,  events  and  partners.  It  will  also  be  a  source  of  information  about  the  Defense  and  
Security  Division  overall  and  offer  an  online  searchable  resource  center  and  links  to  related  information.  
The   development   of   the   AU   DDR   website   has   gone   through   four   demo   phases   with   the   latest   demo  
presented  to  the  steering  committee  meeting  in  Lusaka  for  further  inputs  and  endorsement.  The  Site  is  
currently  under  the  process  of  migration  to  the  Peace  and  Security  Department’s  website.  The  site  will  be  
ready  to  launch  in  February  2015.    



                                                                     2	  
       	                                                                                                                               October  –  December  2014   



  

1.2   C OUNTRY   A CTIVITIES   
  
C E N T R A L    A F R I C A N    R E P U B L I C   
  
Following  the  cessation  of  hostilities  between  warring  groups  in  the  CAR,  the  country  is  now  engaged  in  a  
promising  political  peace  process.  As  part  of  the  key  outcomes,  is  to  develop  a  post-­‐conflict  DDR  strategy.  
TDRP  has  been  asked  to  offer  technical  and  financial  support  in  first  designing  and  later  implementing  a  
comprehensive  national  DDR  strategy  for  the  country.    
TDRP  is  also  in  the  process  of  designing  a  pilot  project  that  seeks  to  provide  support  to  conflict-­‐affected  
communities   straddling   Chad   and   CAR   border   to   become   better   economically   and   socially   networked  
through   support   to   socio-­‐economic   associations   and   cooperatives   particularly   youth   and   women  
associations.  The  lessons  learned  from  this  program  will  be  used  to  develop  a  wider  program  to  support  
longer  term  development  in  the  region.    
	  
D E M O C R A T I C    R E P U B L I C    O F    C O N G O   
  
D D R    I I I   
TDRP’s   work   as   part   of   DDRIII   in   this   quarter   focused   on   (i)   preparation   of   a   World   Bank   International  
Development  Agency  (IDA)  financed  project,  including  the  development  of  a  Project  Appraisal  Document  
(PAD),   and   (ii)   the   establishment   of   a   new   multi-­‐donor   trust   fund   (MDTF)   through   which   donor  
contributions   to   DDRIII   will   be   channeled.   In   November   and   December,   two   TDRP   missions   visited  
Kinshasa  and  worked  with  DRC’s  DDR  Commission  and  United  Nations  Organization  Stabilization  Mission  
in   DRC   (MONUSCO)   on   the   details   of   the   implementation   of   DDRIII   and   preparation   of   DDRIII   project  
activities.  In  mid-­‐December,  the  TDRP  DDRIII  project  team  finalized  the  first  draft  of  the  Project  Appraisal  
Document  and  a  draft  concept  note  for  the  establishment  of  a  new  programmatic  MDTF  that  will  undergo  
a  process  of  informal  and  formal  reviews  by  a  group  of  World  Bank  staff  and  specialists.  It  is  expected  that  
the  overall  DDRIII  Program  will  cost  USD$88  million.  The  Government,  MONUSCO,  a  number  of  donors,  
and  the  World  Bank  will  contribute  to  the  financing  of  the  program.  
J a p a n    S o c i a l    D e v e l o p m e n t    F u n d    ( J S D F ) :    S o c i a l    C o h e s i o n    a n d    L i v e l i h o o d    S u p p o r t   
P r o j e c t    i n    P r o v i n c e    O r i e n t a l e      
TDRP   received   a   Seed   Fund   Grant   from   the   Japanese   Social   Development   Fund   (JSDF)   to   carry   out  
community  consultations  in  DRC’s  Province  Orientale  in  order  to  determine  the  needs  at  the  community  
level.   Based   on   the   findings   of   the   consultation   which   were   undertaken   in   April   2014,   TDRP   staff   is  
currently   in   the   process   of   designing   a   project   titled   Social  Cohesion  and  Livelihoods  Support  Project  in  
Province  Orientale-­‐  DRC.    
The   overall   Proposed   Development   Objective   (PDO)   is   to   improve   access   to   livelihoods   and   social  
cohesion   in   communities   affected   by   conflict   and   violence   in   Province   Orientale’s   Dungu   Territory,  
Northeastern  DRC.  It  is  envisaged  that  improved  income  generation  activities  and  community  structures  
will  provide  a  solid  base  for  the  stabilization  and  rehabilitation  of  the  target  communities.  




                                                                                     3	  
     	                                                                                                 October  –  December  2014   



The  specific  objectives  of  the  project  are:  a)  to  enable  members  of  2500  households  to  generate  income  
through   associative   work;   b)   to   promote   sustainable   livelihoods   of   the   target   households   through   the  
provision   of   production   inputs   and   technical   support;   and   c)   to   build   the   capacity   of   communities   to  
successfully   withstand   shocks   due   to   changing   security   or   economic   conditions   by   enhancing   social  
cohesion  and  the  perception  of  security.  
The   team   has   finalized   a   draft   of   the   proposed   project’s   concept   note   which   is   currently   being   peer  
reviewed.  The  formal  World  Bank  concept  note  review  meeting  for  the  proposed  project  is  planned  for  
mid-­‐January  2015.    
  
B U R U N D I   
  
Between  May  and  December  2014,  TDRP  provided  technical  assistance  for  the  completion  of  the  World  
Bank   Implementation   Completion   Report   (ICR)   for   the   Burundi   Emergency   Demobilization   and  
Transitional  Reintegration  Project  (PDRT)  which  closed  on  30  June  2014.    
PDRT  demobilized  members  of  the  National  Liberation  Forces  (FNL)  and  the  National  Liberation  Forces  –  
dissidents   (FNL-­‐D),   and   provided   socioeconomic   reintegration   support   to   said   members   following  
demobilization,  as  well  as  to  ex-­‐combatants  demobilized  under  the  previous  Emergency  Demobilization,  
Reinsertion,  and  Reintegration  Project  (EDDRP),  with  a  particular  focus  on  the  provision  of  such  support  
to   female,   child,   and   disabled   ex-­‐combatants.   The   two   projects   supported   the   demobilization   and  
reintegration  of  8,682  ex-­‐combatants  and  child  soldiers  in  Burundi.  
TDRP   assisted   the   World   Bank   ICR   team   leader   in:   i)   procuring   and   analyzing   project   documents   and  
implementing  partner  documents  (such  as  additional  studies/evaluations),  ii)  undertaking  an  assessment  
of  the  four  project  components  including:  assessment  of  actual  activities  carried  out  as  well  as  a  process  
evaluation   of   the   activities   including   reconciliation   of   recommendations   and   findings   of   aide   memoirs,  
beneficiary  surveys,  and  the  project's  records  (particularly  through  quarterly  reports  and  interviews  with  
project  staff),  iii)  documentation  of  results  achieved  (including  results  framework  targets  as  well  as  other  
unintended   outcomes),   and   iv)   completion   of   the   relevant   ICR   sections   based   on   the   analytical  
assessments.    
The  ICR  was  completed  mid-­‐December  2014.    
  
M A L I   
  
In  this  quarter  TDRP  continued  to  provide  technical  assistance  to  the  Mali  DDR  Working  Group  that  has  
been   tasked   by   the   Government   to   develop   a   DDR   Program.   As   part   of   the   ongoing   assistance,   a   TDRP  
mission  traveled  to  Bamako  in  November  to  (i)  brief  the  CMU  on  the  technical  assistance  that  has  been  
completed   to   date,   discuss   the   plans   moving   forward,   and   identify   options   for   Bank’s   engagement   by  
exploring   assistance   areas   through   existing   operations   or   new   pilot   projects;     (ii)   seek   clarity   on  
Government’s  plans  and  request  for  further  assistance  from  the  Bank  on  identifying  a  clear  counterpart  
for  future  DDR  activities;  (iii)  engage  with  the  Government  and  UN  to  explore  the  potential  of  setting  up  a  
pilot  operation  in  preparation  of  a  fully-­‐fledged  DDR  program;  and  (iv)  update  already  completed  work  on  
(a)  potential  DDR  international  partners,  (b)  UN  programs  and  collaboration,  and  (c)  engage  and  explore  
potential  donors  on  future  funding  DDR  options.  The  TDRP  team  worked  with  the  DDR  Working  Group  on  



                                                                 4	  
     	                                                                                                                                              October  –  December  2014   



formulating   clear   work   plans   for   specific   components   of   the   overall   DDR   Operations   Plan,   including  
Children  Associated  with  Armed  Forces,  Women  Associated  with  Armed  forces,  Disabled  ex-­‐combatants,  
psychologically   traumatized   ex-­‐combatants,   and   Families   of   ex-­‐combatants   and   Community   Members.  
The   TDRP   and   DDR   Working   Group   teams   met   in   a   follow-­‐up   videoconference   in   December   2014   to  
discuss  the  next  steps.  At  the  request  of  the  Government,  the  TDRP  will  develop  a  DDR  Roadmap/Options  
Brief   that   outlines   potential   programming   areas   and   a   timeline.   This   document   will   be   shared   with   the  
government  and  further  discussed  at  the  Government’s  DDR  Seminar  that  will  take  place  in  January  2015.    
  
R E P U B L I C    O F    S O U T H    S U D A N                        
  
D D R    P i l o t    R e i n t e g r a t i o n    P r o j e c t   
In  this  quarter,  TDRP  concluded  the  Pilot  Reintegration  Project  of  the  Republic  of  South  Sudan.  The  pilot  
was   funded   by   the   Republic   of   Germany’s   KfW   to   test   the   nation’s   new   DDR   approach,   provide   lessons  
learned  and  prepare  tools  that  could  be  used  to  scale  up  to  a  larger  DDR  when  the  circumstances  allowed.  
The  pilot  was  received  very  positively  and  the  preparatory  work  is  only  that  much  more  critical  given  the  
current   civil   conflict   in   the   country.   To   ensure   the   lessons   and   experiences   of   the   pilot   were   effectively  
shared  with  stakeholders,  the  TDRP  and  NDDDRC  together  presented  the  project  results  in  two  meetings  
in   Juba,   South   Sudan   in   November   2014.      For   key   DDR   stakeholders,   a   presentation   of   the   external  
evaluation,  together  with  a  discussion  of  the  TDRP  key  learning  and  next  steps,  was  hosted  by  the  World  
Bank  on  November  25.    The  event  was  co-­‐chaired  by  the  World  Bank  Country  Director,  Ms.  Bella  Bird  and  
World   Bank   Head   of   Country   Office,   Mr.   Nicola   Pontara   and   was   attended   by   representatives   of   (i)   the  
embassies   of   Germany,   Sweden,   the   United   Kingdom   and   the   United   States,   (ii)   relevant   government  
entities   including   Ministry   of   Defense-­‐SPLA,   Veterans   Affairs,   Ministry   of   Finance   and   Ministry   of   the  
Interior  inclusive  of  representatives  from  the  Police  and  Fire  Brigade  and  (iii)  UNMISS,  IOM  and  UNESCO.  
NDDRC  leadership  was  also  in  attendance  along  with  the  World  Bank  TDRP  team,  the  external  evaluator,  
and  the  Bonn  International  Center  for  Convergence  (BICC).  The  session  highlighted  the  important  role  of  
DDR  in  the  achievement  of  stability  and  long-­‐term  development  and  opened  a  conversation  on  potential  
next  steps  in  preparation  for  a  large-­‐scale  DDR  program.  
  




                                                                                                                                                                                  
  
Additionally,   a   lessons-­‐learned   workshop   for   the   National   DDR   Commission   (NDDRC)   was   conducted   on  
November   24,   2014   together   with   the   NDDRC   leadership,   the   external   evaluator,   and   BICC.   The   all-­‐day  




                                                                                               5	  
     	                                                                                                October  –  December  2014   



session  was  attended  by  35  staff  of  the  NDDRC  including  management,  state  directors,  members  of  the  
Project  Management  Unit  (PMU)  and  Information,  Counseling  and  Referral  System  (ICRS)  caseworkers.        
The  goal  of  the  pilot  was  to  test  the  modalities  and  tools  while  also  garnering  actionable  lessons  learned.    
To   this   point,   all   aspects   of   the   project   were   carefully   assessed   and   documented   throughout   the   Pilot  
Reintegration  Project  including  the  final  external  evaluation  and  a  TDRP  Key  Learning  Report.  The  series  
of   materials   including   lessons   learned,   process   and   activities,   technical   assistance   manuals,   curriculum  
and  training  materials  were  published  and  are  now  available  to  the  public  on  the  TDRP  website.  The  full  
set  of  documentation  has  also  been  distributed  in  hard  and  soft  copy  to  the  NDDRC  for  use  in  future  DDR  
programming.    The  reporting  includes:  
Lessons  and  Findings  from  the  Pilot  -­‐  Project  Management  Documentation  
    • Foreword  by  NDDRC  Chairperson  William  Deng  Deng  
    • Pilot  Reintegration  Project:  TDRP  Key  Learning  Report  
    • External  Final  Evaluation  of  the  Pilot  Reintegration  Project  
    • Ex-­‐Combatant  Satisfaction  Survey    
    • Pilot  Reintegration  Project  Document  
Detailed  Process,  Lessons  and  Findings  -­‐  Implementing  Partner  Documentation  
   • Livelihoods  Support    -­‐  UNICON  Ltd    
   • DDR  Community  Support  Projects  -­‐  IOM  South  Sudan    
   • Capacity  Building  and  Monitoring  and  Evaluation  -­‐  Adam  Smith  International    
Tools  for  Future  Use  -­‐  Livelihoods  Support  Training  Materials  and  Start-­‐Up  Kit  Report  
   • Entrepreneurship,  Cooperatives  and  Financial  Literacy  Training  of  Trainers  Curriculum  &  Training  
         Manual  
   • Agriculture  Methods  and  Business  Skills  Training  of  Trainers  Curriculum  &  Trainer’s  Handbook  
   • Livelihood  Start-­‐Up  Kits  Summary  &  Reflection  
Tools  for  Future  Use  -­‐  ICRS  and  M&E  Manuals  
   • Information  Counseling  and  Referral  System  User’s  Manual  
   • Monitoring  &  Evaluation  Manual  




  




                                                                6	  
     	                                                                                                                            October  –  December  2014   



J a p a n    S o c i a l    D e v e l o p m e n t    F u n d    ( J S D F ) :    E c o n o m i c    E m p o w e r m e n t    T r a i n i n g    f o r   
C o n f l i c t -­‐ A f f e c t e d    Y o u t h    P r o j e c t   
Through   the   DDR   work   in   South   Sudan,   it   has   become   clear   that   there   is   a   need   for   additional   training  
capacity  in  the  country  including  a  lack  of  trainers  and  a  lack  of  targeted  relevant  curriculum  specific  to  
this  group.  Based  on  the  findings  of  the  field-­‐assessment  conducted  earlier  in  the  year,  this  quarter  the  
TDRP   drafted   the   concept   note   for   an   Economic   Empowerment   Training   for   Conflict-­‐Affected   Youth  
Project   which   will   be   reviewed   in   the   first   quarter   of   2015.   The   project   aims   to   develop   the   training  
capacity  through  adjusting  curriculum  to  be  relevant  for  conflict-­‐affected  youth  and  former  combatants  
and   expanding   the   pool   of   trainers   to   be   utilized   in   a   full   DDR   program.      Additionally,   in   preparation,   a  
mapping   of   vocational   training   centers   (VTCs)   in   South   Sudan   was   conducted   by   the   National   DDR  
Commission  in  partnership  with  the  TDRP  through  the  remaining  exploratory  funding  from  the  JSDF.  The  
mapping  exercise  was  undertaken  simultaneously  in  all  but  one  of  the  states  (it  was  not  possible  to  gather  
information  from  Upper  Nile  State  due  to  ongoing  conflict).  48  fully  operational  VTCs  were  found  during  
the   process.   Areas   of   information   collected   on   all   the   centers   include   the   names   and   locations   of   the  
centers,   operational   status,   the   type   of   institution,   ownership   and   funding,   vocational   training   fees,  
number  of  trainers,  training  courses,  capacity  of  the  centers,  etc.    
  
J u b a    V i c t i m i z a t i o n    S u r v e y   




                                                                                                                        
  
The  nexus  between  ex-­‐combatants  and  crime  and  violence  is  central  to  post-­‐conflict  discourse  but  there  
are   rarely   any   operational   linkages   between   DDR   programs   and   crime   and   violence   policy   planning,  
particularly   at   the   local   government   level.   In   post-­‐conflict   settings   where   government   institutions   are  
weakened   by   war,   violent   actions   that   were   part   of   the   war   may   continue   after   the   war   ends   but   may  
manifest   as   criminal   activities.   This   is   largely   due   to   the   proliferation   of   arms   and   a   security   vacuum   in  
former  opposition  controlled  area  that  is  often  left  out  by  the  government.  These  criminal  activities  may  
or  may  not  be  associated  to  the  previous  conflict,  conflict  parties  or  post-­‐conflict  politics.  Ex-­‐combatants  
are  particularly  vulnerable  to  being  drawn  into  such  activities  either  due  to  limited  livelihood  strategies  or  
an   opportunity   for   quick   profit   through   criminal   activity.   Further,   there   may   be   motivational   factors   for  
engaging  in  criminal  activities  not  associated  with  the  economic  rationale  but  rather  psychosocial  reasons  
as  ex-­‐combatants  may  struggle  to  adapt  to  the  mundane  normality  of  peace.    



                                                                                  7	  
  	                                                                                                          October  –  December  2014   



The   erosion   of   livelihood   and   economic   opportunities   following   conflict   results   in   an   absence   of   viable  
alternatives  for  generating  sufficient  subsistence  or  income  which  potentially  increases  the  probability  of  
creating  conditions  for  criminal  activities.  This  is  not  necessarily  limited  to  ex-­‐combatants.  However,  given  
ex-­‐combatants’   familiarity   with   weapons   and   violence   as   compared   to   the   average   civilian   there   is   a  
higher   propensity   for   their   involvement.   Additionally,   post-­‐conflict   social   pressures   resulting   from  
stigmatization  to  outright  exclusion  may  further  propel  them  towards  criminal  activities  as  an  expression  
of  achievement  and  dissatisfaction  with  the  post  conflict-­‐status  quo.    
There   is   a   vigorous   debate   within   economics,   sociology,   social   psychology   and   criminology,   albeit   with  
little   consensus   and   empirical   evidence,   on   the   linkages   between   social   and   economic   opportunities  
available   to   ex-­‐combatants   and   the   causes   of   crime   and   violence.   The   implication   that—should   DDR   be  
conducted  properly—crime  and  violence  will  reduce  is,  therefore,  simply  a  conjecture  that  has  yet  to  be  
proven  in  impact  evaluations  of  DDR  programs.  Neither  has  the  opposite  hypothesis  been  proved  that  a  
poor  DDR  social  and  reintegration  program  will  inevitably  lead  to  increased  crime  and  violence.  What  is  
known,   however,   is   that   crime   and   violence   tends   to   increase   in   almost   all   post   conflict   regions   and  
countries  as  a  product  of  the  transition  to  peace  and  stability  suggesting  that  at  best  DDR  programs  may  
not   be   sufficient   to   reduce   post-­‐conflict   crime   and   violence,   either   locally   or   nationally,   and   must   be  
complemented  by  a  local  crime  and  violence  prevention  intervention.    
TDRP  is,  therefore,  actively  seeking  to  take  a  lead  in  creating  operational  linkages  between  DDR  programs  
and   crime   and   violence   policy   planning,   particularly   at   the   local   government   level.   TDRP   received   a  
request   from   the   South   Sudan   National   Disarmament,   Demobilization   and   Reintegration   Commission  
(NDDRC)   to   explore   levels   and   understand   the   dynamics   of   crime,   fear   of   crime,   crime   prevention,   and  
victimization  in  Juba  in  order  to  better  support  NDDRC  in  preparing  young  ex-­‐combatants’  reintegration  
into  productive  civilian  lives  that  is  free  from  crime  and  violence,  either  as  perpetrators  or  as  victims.  As  a  
first   step,   TDRP   in   collaboration   with   NDDRC   decided   to   undertake   a   crime   and   victimization   survey   in  
Juba.   The   survey   report   will   also   inform   the   design   of   the   Juba   City   Safety   Plan   project   by   UN-­‐Habitat.  
TDRP  collaborated  with  UN-­‐Habitat  colleagues  from  the  first  step  of  survey  design  and  will  continue  the  
partnership  through  the  design  and  implementation  of  a  crime  and  violence  prevention  project  in  Juba,  
South  Sudan.  
From   November   17   to   November   20,   2014   a   TDRP   team   in   collaboration   with   the   NDDRC   conducted   a  
rigorous   enumerators’   training   to   conduct   the   tablet-­‐based   Juba   Victimization   Survey   in   Juba,   South  
Sudan.  The  team  of  16  enumerators  comprised  of  caseworkers  from  NDDRC  and  social  workers  from  the  
Central   Equatoria   State   Department   of   Social   Development   and   Gender.   The   TDRP   team   trained   the  
enumerators  on  undertaking  tablet  based  surveys,  survey  techniques,  interviewer  skills,  and  the  research  
methodology.   Further,   the   enumerators   received   additional   training   on   administering   the   Sexual   and  
Gender  Based  Violence  (SGBV)  sections  of  the  survey  questionnaire.  A  lead  social  worker  from  the  Sexual  
and  Gender  Based  Violence  unit  of  the  Ministry  of  Social  Development  and  Gender  led  a  training  session  
on  the  SGBV  referral  pathway  employed  by  the  Ministry  in  Central  Equatoria  State.    
The  team  liaised  with  the  National  Bureau  of  Statistics  (NBS)  to  acquire  maps  for  sampled  Enumeration  
Areas   (EAs)   as   well   as   census   data   for   those   EAs.   Between   22   November   and   25   November,   the   team  
initiated   the   survey   in   seven   of   the   33   EAs   (Map   1)   sampled   in   the   payam   of   Juba   Town   in   order   to  
validate   the   survey’s   smooth   operation   on   the   tablets.   The   TDRP   team   confirmed   that   all   enumerators  
administered  the  survey  with  no  technical  issues.    
The   enumerators   continued   with   the   survey   in   the   selected   EAs   in   Juba   Town,   Kator,   and   Munuki   for   a  
period  of  four  weeks.  Between  22  November  and  17  December,  the  team  completed  1158  interviews  in  
the  33  EAs.  The  Juba  Victimization  Survey  Report  is  expected  to  be  finalized  by  February  2015.    




                                                                     8	  
     	                                                                                                                                     October  –  December  2014   



  
Map:  33  EAs  sampled  for  the  Juba  Victimization  survey  




                                                                                                                                                                          
  
R E P U B L I C    O F    C O N G O                                
  
J a p a n    S o c i a l    D e v e l o p m e n t    F u n d    ( J S D F )   
TDRP   also   received   a   Seed   Fund   Grant   from   the   Japanese   Social   Development   Fund   (JSDF)   to   carry   out  
community  consultations  in  RoC’s  Pool  Region  in  order  to  determine  the  needs  at  the  community  level.  
Based  on  the  findings  of  the  consultation  which  were  undertaken  in  April  2014,  TDRP  staff  is  currently  in  
the   process   of   designing   a   project   titled   Support   for   Sustainable   Livelihoods'   Promotion   Project   in   the  
Pool  Department-­‐RoC.    
The  overall  Proposed  Development  Objective  (PDO)  is  to  improve  access  to  sustainable  livelihoods  in  the  
Department   of   Pool,   RoC.   It   is   envisaged   that   the   PDO   will   contribute   to   peace   consolidation   and  
promotion   of   sustainable   development   in   the   Department   of   Pool   through   strengthened   community  
structures,   improved   income   generation   activities,   and   sustainable   energy   use   with   emphasis   on  
livelihood  support  activities.  
The  team  is  currently  finalizing  the  proposed  project’s  concept  note.  The  formal  World  Bank  concept  note  
review  meeting  for  the  proposed  project  is  planned  for  mid-­‐February  2015.    

2 .    K N O W L E D G E    M A N A G E M E N T                                                                                                          


                                                                                 9	  
     	                                                                                                                               October  –  December  2014   



  

2.1   C ONFERENCES  AND   W ORKSHOPS     
  
A   key   component   of   TDRP’s   knowledge   management   is   disseminating   knowledge   on   conflict   and   post-­‐
conflict  issues  through  workshops  and  conferences.  
  
I N T E R -­‐ A G E N C Y    W O R K I N G    G R O U P    O N    D D R                                                                                                   
  
TDRP   continues   to   actively   engage   in   the   United   Nations   Inter-­‐Agency   Working   Group   (IAWG)   on  
disarmament,   demobilization   and   reintegration   (DDR).   The   group   is   co-­‐chaired   by   the   DDR   units   of   the  
Department  of  Peacekeeping  Operations  (DPKO)  and  the  United  Nations  Development  Program  (UNDP).  
This   quarter,   the   TDRP   team   participated   in   a   special   IAWG   meeting   on   September   10th,   in   which   the  
Deputy  Chairperson  of  South  Sudan  National  DDR  Commission  (NDDRC)  presented  the  South  Sudan  Pilot  
DDR   Reintegration   Project   and   outlined   the   draft   Harmonized   Reinsertion   and   Reintegration   Strategy.  
Besides,  the  TDRP  team  also  joined  the  IAWG  meeting  held  in  December  2014  and  learned  from  UNDIR  
on  their  Evidence  Based  Design  Prototype  for  reintegration  programming.    
  
S O U T H -­‐ S O U T H    E X C H A N G E    O N    D D R :    E X P E R I E N C E    E X C H A N G E    B E T W E E N    R W A N D A    A N D    S O M A L I A                 
  
From   November   2   to   8,   2014,   a   delegation   from   the   Federal   Government   of   Somalia   consisting   of   four  
officials  from  the  National  Programme  on  Disengaged  Combatants  visited  Kigali,  Rwanda  from  November  
3   to   7,   2014,   to   meet   with   their   counterparts   from   the   Rwanda   Demobilisation   and   Reintegration  
Commission   (RDRC)   in   a   South-­‐South   Knowledge   and   Experience   Exchange   Study   Tour.   The   study   tour  
delegation   included   participants   from   United   Nations   Assistance   Mission   in   Somalia   (UNSOM)   and   the  
African   Union   Mission   in   Somalia   (AMISOM).   A   team   of   World   Bank/Transitional   Demobilization   and  
Reintegration  Program  (TDRP)  staff  facilitated  the  workshop  and  made  joint  presentations  with  RDRC  on  
various   DDR   thematic   areas.   The   activity   was   designed   and   implemented   by   the   TDRP   in   close  
collaboration  with  the  RDRC  and  World  Bank  Rwanda  Country  Office,  and  financed  by  World  Bank  South-­‐
South  Exchange  Trust  Fund.    
The  Study  Tour  consisted  of  two  main  activities:  (i)  a  five  day  workshop,  including  joint  presentations  by  
RDRC   and   TDRP   on   a   number   of   thematic   DDR   areas,   and   roundtable   discussions,   and   (ii)   site   visits   to  
RDRC  project  sites  and  DDR  centers.  
The  first  day  of  the  workshop  focused  on  providing  background  information  on  participating  organizations,  
namely   the   RDRC,   World   Bank/TDRP,   AMISOM,   UNSOM   and   Somalia’s   National   Programme   on  
Disengaged   Combatants;   workshop   objectives;   and   planning   for   a   national   DDR   program   and   pre-­‐DDR  
activities.   The   presentations   on   the   first   day   covered   a   wide   range   of   topics   including   Rwanda  
Demobilization  and  Reintegration  Program;  the  history  and  experience  of  DDR  in  Africa;  the  African  Union  
DDR   Capacity   Program;   and   the   National   Programme   on   Disengaged   Combatants.   In   addition,   various  
thematic   areas   were   discussed   such   as   planning   and   design   of   DDR   programs;   financing   mechanisms,  
mapping  of  stakeholders  and  reintegration  opportunities;  and  development  of  national  DDR  strategy  and  
framework  documents.  




                                                                                         10	  
  	                                                                                                     October  –  December  2014   



The   second   day   of   the   study   tour   focused   on   demobilization   and   reinsertion   activities.   The   discussions  
covered   various   topics   including   communications,   sensitization,   and   public   information   in   DDR;  
verification  of  ex-­‐combatants  and  beneficiaries;  and  application  of  a  management  information  system  in  
DDR.   Following   presentations   and   theory   discussions,   the   study   tour   delegation   visited   RDRC  
Demobilization   Center   in   Musanze,   Northern   Province.   There,   the   participants   had   the   chance   to   meet  
and   interact   with   recently   demobilized   ex-­‐combatants,   visited   the   facilities   including   the   skills   training  
workshops,  and  given  the  list  of  training  syllabus  and  information  on  training  modalities  by  the  RDRC  staff.      
The   third   day   covered   reintegration   by   particularly   focusing   on   socio-­‐economic   assistance   approaches  
such   as   vocational   training;   projects   for   vulnerable   groups;   and   overall   reintegration   program  
management.   Following   discussions   on   reintegration,   the   study   tour   visited   a   number   of   RDRC   project  
sites   including   a   project   for   disabled   ex-­‐combatant   and   ex-­‐combatant   and   community   cooperatives   in  
Kigali,  and  a  vocational  training  center  in  Kayonza,  Eastern  Province.  There,  the  Somalia  delegation  gained  
an  insight  into  the  types  and  modalities  of  vocational  training  in  DDR.    In  addition,  the  participants  noted  
the   sustainable   management   of   the   vocational   centers   in   producing   competitive   graduates   that   fits   the  
labor   market.   At   the   project   site   for   disabled   ex-­‐combatants,   the   participants   learned   about   the  
importance   of   special   projects   for   vulnerable   groups   and   addressing   the   needs   of   disabled   people  
alongside  community  members  as  a  key  component  of  DDR  programs.      
The   fourth   day   of   the   study   tour   covered   vulnerable   groups   and   psycho-­‐social   issues   in   DDR.  
Presentations   by   the   RDRC   and   TDRP   provided   theoretical   background   and   facilitated   the   exchange   of  
firsthand  experience  of  RDRC  and  World  Bank  staff  in  the  contexts  of  Rwanda  and  Somalia.  Following  the  
discussions,  the  participants  visited  a  housing  project  for  vulnerable  female  ex-­‐combatants  in  Kigali  and  
met  with  a  female  ex-­‐combatant.  The  delegation  later  visited  the  RDRC  headquarters  and  met  with  RDRC  
senior   management   and   program   staff   working   on   a   number   of   different   areas.   There,   the   RDRC  
explained  the  importance  of  having  a  foolproof  records  system  for  ex-­‐combatants.  The  technical  staff  also  
illustrated  how  the  management  information  system  and  the  database  work  by  taking  the  participants  on  
a  step-­‐by-­‐step  process  from  registration  to  updating  the  database  for  individual  ex-­‐combatants.    
The  last  day  of  the  study  tour  included  roundtable  discussions  on  the  highlights  and  main  takeaways,  and  
identification   of   specific   lessons   and   experiences   from   Rwanda   that   can   be   applied   in   Somalia.   RDRC  
senior   management   highlighted   that   the   Rwanda   DDR   Commission   would   welcome   further   requests   to  
exchange  its  knowledge  and  experience  with  their  counterparts  from  Somalia.  Following  an  inquiry  by  the  
Somalia  DDR  team  on  the  type  of  assistance  that  the  World  Bank  can  provide,  it  was  highlighted  by  the  
Bank   participants   that,   pending   official   request   by   the   Government   and   clearance   by   the   country  
management   unit   and   senior   management   of   the   World   Bank,   the   TDRP   can   provide   assistance   in   the  
form  of  (i)  implementation  of  a  follow-­‐up  exchange  activity  with  the  aim  of  providing  capacity  support  to  
the  DDR  team  in  Somalia  within  the  scope  of  current  South-­‐South  Exchange  Facility  Trust  Fund  activity;  (ii)  
organizing   a   high   level   sensitization   workshop   on   DDR   that   includes   the   Government,   donors,   and  
international   and   local   stakeholders;   and   (iii)   technical   assistance   on   the   development   of   national   DDR  
Strategy  and  strategic  DDR  documents  that  would  form  the  DDR  framework.  
At  the  end  of  the  study  tour,  the  following  areas  have  been  identified  as  the  main  conclusions  noted  by  
the  participants:      
         •   DDR   alone   cannot   solve   political,   social   and   economic   issues;   however   with   political   will   and  
             national   ownership,   it   can   provide   a   window   of   opportunity   for   post   conflict   stabilization   and  
             recovery,  and  broader  security  sector  reform;  




                                                                 11	  
     	                                                                                                                           October  –  December  2014   



            •   There  is  no  single  model  of  DDR  that  can  be  applied  successfully,  however  based  on  country-­‐
                specific   experiences,   lessons   learned   can   be   applied   to   the   local   context   accompanied   by  
                inclusive  national  development  strategies  to  ensure  a  successful  outcome;    
            •   A   legal   framework   endorsed   by   the   Government   is   needed   to   spearhead   the   planning   and  
                implementation  of  a  national  DDR  process;  
            •   There  needs  to  be  a  national  consensus  on  DDR,  which  should  be  based  on  a  national  strategy  
                that  is  owned  by  the  Government  with  an  implementation  roadmap;    
            •   A  number  of  pre-­‐DDR  activities  need  to  take  place  as  underlined  during  the  workshop,  including  
                (i)   development   of   a   sensitization   and   communications   strategy;   (ii)   assessment   of   socio-­‐
                economic  realities  on  the  ground  and  identification  of  push  and  pull  factors  that  lead  people  to  
                join   armed   groups;   (iii)   formulating   de-­‐radicalization   strategies   within   a   broader   development  
                and   recovery   strategy   targeting   the   youth;   and   (iv)   conducting   stakeholder   assessments   to  
                identify  various  local,  national,  regional  and  international  actors.    
            •   DDR  must  ensure  equal  treatment  of  all  ex-­‐combatants  regardless  of  their  affiliation  and  build  
                trust  and  confidence  among  all  stakeholders,  including  ex-­‐combatants  and  families;  
            •   It  is  critical  to  ensure  national  ownership  and  leadership  in  design  and  implementation  of  a  the  
                program  with  support  of  the  international  actors;  
            •   Adequate   financial   management   mechanisms   have   to   be   adopted   to   oversee   the   National  
                Programme  for  Disengaged  Fighters,  and  the  future  national  DDR  process;    
            •   Finally,   a   number   of   areas   were   underlined   with   regards   to   reintegration:   (i)   applying  
                community-­‐based  approaches  within  the  wider  national  recovery  strategy  can  ensure  support  
                for  the  program  and  promote  cohesion;  (ii)  cooperatives  and  associations  have  been  successful  
                in   consolidating   positive   results   from   socio-­‐economic   reintegration   activities   and   can   be  
                implemented   in   Somalia;   (iii)   vocational   training   can   give   skills   to   ex-­‐combatants,   however  
                training   should   be   designed   and   implemented   as   part   of   a   national   strategy   for   recovery   and  
                development,   and   in   close   coordination   between   the   government,   private   sector   and  
                development  partners,  and  (iv)  disability  and  psycho-­‐social  issues  should  be  integrated  into  the  
                program  in  the  design  stage  to  build  capacity  of  national  institutions  that  will  provide  continued  
                support  to  vulnerable  people.  
The  South-­‐South  Exchange  on  DDR  between  Rwanda  and  Somalia  is  financed  by  the  World  Bank  South-­‐
South  Experience  Exchange  Trust  Fund.  As  part  of  the  Trust  Fund  objectives,  the  Bank  team  will  produce  a  
short   video   of   showing   the   highlights   from   the   study   tour   and   a   results   story.   Both   the   video   and   the  
results   story   will   be   shared   by   the   South-­‐South   Experience   Exchange   Trust   Fund   to   provide   lessons   on  
designing  and  implementing  south-­‐south  exchange  activities.  The  National  Program  coordination  unit  will  
share   with   the   World   Bank   team   the   draft   Implementation   Plan,   Communications   and   Reintegration  
strategies,  and  other  programmatic  documents  for  coordination.  The  National  Program  coordination  unit  
will   consult   with   the   Federal   Ministry   of   National   Security   to   identify   areas   that   may   need   technical  
assistance  in  the  short-­‐term.  Pending  request  by  the  National  Program,  the  World  Bank/TDRP  will  work  
on   preparing   a   follow-­‐up   activity   together   with   RDRC   to   consolidate   the   learning   and   experience  
exchange  outcomes  as  part  of  the  ongoing  south-­‐south  exchange  activity.    
  
I N C E P T I O N    M E E T I N G    O F    T E C H N I C A L    W O R K I N G    G R O U P    ( T W G )    O N    T H E    C O N F L U E N C E    O F    U R B A N   
S A F E T Y    A N D    P E A C E    B U I L D I N G    P R A C T I C E                                                                                                


                                                                                12	  
     	                                                                                                     October  –  December  2014   



  
From  November  5-­‐6,  TDRP  participated  in  the  inception  meeting  of  the  Technical  Working  Group  (TWG)  
on  the  Confluence  of  Urban  Safety  and  Peace-­‐building  organized  by  the  United  Nations  Office  at  Geneva  
(UNOG),  UN-­‐Habitat’s  Safer  Cities  Program  and  Geneva  Peace-­‐building  Platform  in  Geneva,  Switzerland.  
Focused   at   the   expert   level,   the   overarching   objective   of   the   inception   meeting   was   to   discuss   the  
technical   and   process   related   items   of   the   TWG,   including   the   ambition   and   scope   of   the   TWG,   key  
methodologies,  and  the  key  elements  of  work  plan  for  the  TWG.    
During  the  meeting,  participants  underlined  the  need  and  timeliness  of  the  TWG  and  agreed  that  realistic  
and  achievable  goals  need  to  be  set  with  respect  to  the  intellectual  and  analytic  scope  of  the  TWG  while  
considering   the   relationship   between   ambition   and   funding.   In   terms   of   work   plan,   there   are   needs   for  
conceptual   clarification   and   expanding   the   evidence   base   on   the   confluence   of   urban   safety   and   peace  
building.   Participants   also   highlighted   various   expectations   in   the   TWG,   including   city   case   studies  
especially  in  countries  like  South  Sudan,  Mali,  knowledge  exchange  on  practice,  tools  and  strategies,  etc.    
The   first   TWG   meeting   will   take   place   in   Corregidora,   Mexico,   from   March   23-­‐25,   2015.   This   will   be   an  
opportunity  to  present  preliminary  findings  from  the  evidence  gathering  process.  
  

3 .    P R O G R A M    M A N A G E M E N T               
  

S TAFFING              
  
            Staff  
            Abderrahim  Fraiji                   TDRP  Manager,  Nairobi,  Kenya  
            Aki  Stavrou                         Sr.  Conflict  and  Development  Specialist,  Washington  
            Harald  Hinkel                       Senior  Social  Development  Specialist,  Kigali,  Rwanda  
            Caroline  Guazzo                     Program  Assistant,  Washington    
            Benjamin  Burckhart                  Social  Development  Specialist,  Washington  
            Alexandra  Jung                      Operations  Officer,  Washington    
            Daksha  Shakya                       Operations  Associate,  Washington  
            F/T  Consultants  
            Jonathan  Sandy                      Sr.  Advisor,  AU,  Addis  Ababa,  Ethiopia  
            Elisabeth  Maier                     Sr.  Operations  Officer,  Various  
            Olivier  Mukarji                     Sr.  Advisor,  Copenhagen,  Denmark  
            Murat  Onur                          Conflict  and  Development  Specialist,  Washington  
            Chan  Moses                          DDR  Specialist,  Juba,  South  Sudan  
            Lina  Imran                          Operations  Associate,  AU,  Addis  Ababa,  Ethiopia  
            Linda  Kiriinya                      Social  Development  Consultant,  Nairobi,  Kenya  
            Kate  Zhou                           Jr.  Operations  Associate,  Washington  
  
TDRP  currently  has  seven  staff,  and  eight  full-­‐time  consultants  who  maintain  constant  contribution  to  its  
work.  The  TDRP  staff  and  consultants  are  now  mapped  under  Global  Practice  13:  Social,  Urban,  Rural  and  




                                                                   13	  
     	                                                                                                                                                                            October  –  December  2014   



Resilience.   Staff   are   located   at   Washington,   Nairobi,   and   Kigali;   Consultants   at   Abidjan,   Addis   Ababa,  
Copenhagen,  Juba,  Nairobi,  and  Washington.  
  

4 .    F I N A N C I A L    M A N A G E M E N T                                                                                                                                 
  
The   total   disbursement   reached   92%   of   the   trust   fund   amount,   or   US$33,964,312   million.   (As   of  
December  31,  2014).  
In  this  quarter  TDRP  received  a  new  contribution  from  the  Government  of  Sweden  in  the  amount  of  SEK  
49,000,000  (USD  6.4  million)  to  support  directly  the  new  DRC  DDR  phase  III  program.  

            $34,000,000
            $32,000,000
            $30,000,000
            $28,000,000
            $26,000,000
            $24,000,000
            $22,000,000
            $20,000,000
            $18,000,000
            $16,000,000
            $14,000,000
            $12,000,000
            $10,000,000
             $8,000,000
             $6,000,000
             $4,000,000
             $2,000,000
                     $0
                           Mar-10
                                    Jun-10
                                             Sep-10
                                                      Dec-10
                                                               Mar-11
                                                                        Jun-11
                                                                                 Sep-11
                                                                                          Dec-11
                                                                                                    Mar-12
                                                                                                             Jun-12
                                                                                                                          Sep-12
                                                                                                                                        Dec-12
                                                                                                                                                  Mar-13
                                                                                                                                                           Jun-13
                                                                                                                                                                     Sep-13
                                                                                                                                                                               Dec-13


                                                                                                                                                                                                 Jun-14
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Sep-14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Dec-14
                                                                                                                                                                                        Mar-14




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            	  

  
5 .    O U T L O O K    F O R    N E X T    Q U A R T E R                                                                                                                       
  
Planned  Activities  in  the  upcoming  quarter  (January  –  March  2015)  
            Planned  Activities                                                                                                                                                              Date  
            Juba  Victimization  Survey  Report                                                                                                                                            February  2015  
            African  Union  Operational  Guidance  Notes                                                                                                                                   February  2015  
            AU   DDR   Compendium   Desk   review   and   consultative   meeting   on   the                                                                                                February  2015  
            compendium  and  Non-­‐State  Armed  Groups  
Status  of  Planned  Activities  from  the  Previous  Quarter  (July  –  September  2014)  




                                                                                                   14	  
       	                                                                                               October  –  December  2014   




              Activities                                                                                      Status  
              South-­‐Sudan  Project  Completion                                                                Completed  
              South-­‐South  Knowledge  Exchange  on  DDR:  Somalia  and  Rwanda                                Completed  
              Mali  DDR  Technical  Assistance  Mission                                                         In  progress  
              DRC:  DDRIII  Mission                                                                             Completed  
              African  Union:  DDR  Training                                                                    Completed  
              South  Sudan:  Pilot  Lessons  Learned  Events                                                    Completed  
	  
The  third  quarterly  report  of  FY15  will  be  issued  on  April  16,  2015.  




                                                                15	  
     	                                                                                              October  –  December  2014   




A N N E X    I :    T D R P    M U L T I -­‐ D O N O R    T R U S T    F U N D    S T A T U S   
  
               Donor  Nam e                Currency          Amount  in  Contr  Curr                  Amount  in  USD  
     AfDB                                    USD                           22,280,860                     22,280,860  
     Finland                                 EUR                             2,500,000                     3,590,850  
     France                                  EUR                                 40,000                         51,782  
     Germ any                                EUR                             2,000,000                     2,640,000  
     Italy                                   EUR                                500,000                       705,300  
     Norway                                  NOK                           15,000,000                      2,534,054  
     Sweden                                  SEK                           74,000,000                      9,932,200  
     Belgium   M DRP  Surplus                USD                                405,399                       405,399  
     Finland  M DR  Surplus                  USD                                 50,009                         50,009  
     France  M DRP  Surplus                  USD                                 76,658                         76,658  
     Italy  M DRP  Surplus                   USD                                 63,214                         63,214  
     Norway  M DRP  Surplus                  USD                                253,562                       253,562  
                                                                   Investment  Income                         530,902  
                                                    Total  as  of  December  31,  2014                    43,114,790  
  
  
  
  




                                                             16	  
