                                                                      102687
                                                                    KNOWLEDGE
                                                                    NOTE SERIES

                                                                    03



PROMOTING GREEN GROWTH
THROUGH WATER RESOURCES MANAGEMENT:
THE CASE OF REPUBLIC OF KOREA
MIKIO ISHIWATARI WATER GLOBAL PRACTICE GROUP, WORLD BANK GROUP; EIKO WATAYA CLIMATE
CHANGE CROSS-CUTTING SOLUTIONS AREA, WORLD BANK GROUP; TAESUN SHIN; DAEIL KIM;
JISEON SONG; SEYI KIM KOREA WATER RESOURCES CORPORATION (K-WATER)


INTRODUCTION

Water is a multidimensional resource, which is obviously very important
to humans and to the environment. Water security and water quality
affect numerous economic sectors and areas: agriculture, energy, disaster
management, and others. This multi-dimensional aspect makes water
resources management complex, and countries need balanced and integrated
approaches for water management that are economically, environmentally,
and socially sustainable.

                                                             Water security
                                                             and water quality
                                                             affect numerous
                                                             economic
                                                             sectors and areas:
                                                             agriculture,
                                                             energy, disaster
                                                             management,
                                                             and others.
    Like many countries, Korea faces multiple water-related issues. A half
    century of rapid economic growth and urbanization created significant water
    management challenges, and Korea’s climate and topography add to the
    complexity. Climate change has presented further threats to Korea’s ability
    to secure and manage water supply. Rising sea levels and droughts degrade
    water quality, and climate change increases the frequency and severity of
    droughts and floods.

    Korea’s integrated water resources management approach, a key component
    of Korea’s national economic development since the 1960’s, has evolved
    in response to these issues. Korea’s water management and policy initially
    focused on increasing water supply, generating hydropower, and decreasing
    flood damages to seek balance between environmental and development
    goals. The Korea Government faced continued pressure from increasing
    public demand for higher quality of life, cleaner environment, and
    preservation of natural resources. Korea’s water management approach
    responded by shifting from a technical focus to be more adaptive, inclusive,
    and innovative. Korea’s policies since the 1990s reflect a new “green” climate-
    resilient development path to Korean water management.

    To deal with diverse water resources management issues and challenges, the
    Korean Government designed the “Four Major River Restoration Project
    (4MRRP)”, a multi-purpose, green-growth infrastructure initiative to secure
    quality water resources, decrease droughts and floods, manage rivers, and
    improve the environment and Korean quality of life. The project involves
    five ministries and 78 local authorities, using a comprehensive and integrated
    approach. A key challenge is to implement large-scale infrastructure efficiently
    and effectively. This involves overcoming institutional, legislative, and
    governance issues, in addition to technical and financial hurdles, requiring
    innovative approaches to overcome. Collaboration and partnerships
    among key actors and stakeholders is critical. The 4MRRP, a key initiative
    that has broadened Korea’s green growth outlook, showcases key lessons
    for successful operation of multipurpose “green” and sustainable water
    infrastructure projects.
2
                                                                                                          Korea’s water
                                                                                                          management
                                                                                                          approach
                                                                                                          responded by
                                                                                                          shifting from a
                                                                                                          technical focus
                                                                                                          to be more
                                                                                                          adaptive, inclusive,
                                                                                                          and innovative.




1. CHALLENGES FOR KOREAN WATER RESOURCES MANAGEMENT

WATER SECURITY
Water resources in Korea are extremely vulnerable due to the country’s topography and climate. Korea
experiences uneven rain throughout the year and some topographical features, such as rivers with
short reaches and steep channel slopes, have contributed to frequent historical flooding. Annual rainfall
is 1,277mm, higher than the world average of 807mm, but 70% of Korea’s annual rain occurs in a
concentrated timeframe, from June to September. Steep mountains in the Northwest and flat areas in
the Southeast cause 74% of water to evaporate, encouraging floods and leading rainfall to flow directly
into the ocean, leaving only 26% of rainfall available for use. Since Korea is densely populate, annual
precipitation per capita is only 2,705m3 only about 10% of the world average of 26,800m3 per capita.

HYDROMET-RELATED DISASTERS
Korea’s topographical and climate trigger major “hydromet-related” disasters, such as floods and droughts.

1. Droughts
Frequent droughts reduce the stability of Korean water supply. Eighteen droughts have occurred over the
last 100 years, with severe droughts occurring in seven-year cycles since 1994 (see Table 1).

TABLE 1. DROUGHTS AND DAMAGES SINCE 1990S


   YEAR              DA M AG E S
   1994-1995         Limited water supply for 222,000 persons in 86 cities and counties
   2001              Limited water supply for 304,815 persons in 86 cities and counties
   2002              Limited water supply for 92,838 persons in 23 cities and counties
   208-2009          Limited water supply for 228,068

Source: MLTM (Ministry of Land, Transport and Maritime Affairs). 2012b.




                                                                                                                            3
    2. Floods
    Due to intense summer downpours, floods in Korea are common with damages amounting to an annual
    average of about 1.5 billion USD (1.5 trillion KRW) over the last decade (see Figure 1). Short and steeply
    sloped rivers increase inland flood damage, contributing to accumulation of sediment of 30.5% in the
    four main riverbeds. Rapid flow and increased floods damage flood control facilities, making flood
    control more difficult.

    FIGURE 1. KOREAN FLOOD DAMAGE OVER THE LAST DECADE


                                                           YEONGSAM/
                           HAN RIVER                  GUEM SEOMIJIN  OTHER

    Damage




                            2.883




                                                      903


                                                                 710

                                                                               6,492
    (million
    USD)



    Affected
                            73,896




                                                                       7,044
                                                                                9,808

                                                                                         104,979
    People




    Human
                            164




                                                            44


                                                                         25

                                                                                       302
    Fatalities



                           0%                  20%                         40%                     60%   80%            100%


    Source: MLTM 2012b.


    Climate change increases disaster risks. According to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
    Change’s (IPCC) 4th Assessment Report in 2007, global warming and climate change will increase
    the average temperature of the Earth by approximately 2-3.8 degrees Celsius; temperatures in East
    Asia will rise about 3.0 degrees. The rate of evapotranspiration will also increase, which will decrease
    water availability and threaten water security. Furthermore, floods and droughts are likely to become
    more frequent, unpredictable, and damaging. According to a report by the Korea Meteorological
    Administration, the number of days with heavy rain of over 80 mm or more in Korea increased from an
    annual average of 20 in 1952 to 51 in 2003.

    Korea faces approximately 2.36 trillion USD in damages this century without a response to climate
    change. From 2061 to 2090, the frequency of droughts would multiply 3.4 times, while frequency of
    heavy rainfall (over 100 mm/day) would increase 2.7 times. Flood volumes would increase by 20%,
    testing the defense capability of dykes. Temperature rises by 2060 would cause a more than 33 billion
    ton-per-year water shortage for agricultural, domestic, and industrial use. Taking all of this evidence into
    account, Korea is in critical need of preventative countermeasures against droughts and floods.

    WATER QUALITY
    Maintaining adequate water flow for ecosystem maintenance is extremely difficult, especially during
    droughts. Besides droughts and floods, Korea water quality and river ecosystems have degraded. Point
    and non-point1 pollution has increased due to rapid industrialization and urbanization, while illegal,

    1
        Pollutants enter the water environment from two main types of sources. A point source is a single, identifiable source
         of pollution such as a pipe or a drain. Industrial wastes commonly discharge to rivers and the sea in this way. Non-
         point sources of pollution, often termed “diffuse” pollution, refer to those inputs and impacts that occur over a wide
         area, and not easily attributed to a single source.
4
unregulated agricultural practices pollute rivers. Non-point pollutant sources contribute approximately
68.3% of Korea’s entire pollution (based on BOD in2010), and this is expected to increase to 72.1% by
2020 if impervious areas increase without management of non-point pollutant sources.


LACK OF PRESERVATION AND SYSTEMATIC USE OF WATER ENVIRONMENT
Repeated draughts and floods, which worsen under Climate Change, created significant environmental
challenges in Korea, including ecosystem loss, habitat degradation, human causalities and displacement
of river residents. As Korea’s economy grew, people’s water needs diversified to include recreation and
ecosystem maintenance. Waterfront areas along rivers provide important public spaces for leisure, sports,
tourism and education. Koreans wanted river-polluting agriculture facilities relocated, and they wanted
the government to develop public spaces such as parks and bike paths.



2. OVERVIEW OF KOREA’S FOUR MAJOR RIVERS
RESTORATION PROJECT (4MRRP)
Korea’s hydrological characteristics—high concentration of annual rainfall over three months, high
rainfall loss, uneven rain distribution, low annual precipitation per capita, droughts, and increase
of incidents of heavy flood-causing rains, among others—contribute to complicate water resources
management in Korea. These challenges will increase due to the impact of climate change.

To resolve a range of water-related issues, the Presidential Committee on Regional Development initiated
the Four Major Rivers Restoration Project (4MRRP) as part of the “Green New Deal Project.” Korea
adopted “green growth” as a new economic growth paradigm to create a new engine of growth and
stimulate job creation through “green” technology and “greening” of industries. The Green New Deal
Project aims to redefine “progress” by simultaneously pursuing and balancing economic, environmental,
and social development, including generating revenues and job opportunities.


                                                                                                       The Green New Deal
                                                                                                       Project aims to
                                                                                                       redeﬁne “progress”
                                                                                                       by simultaneously
                                                                                                       pursuing and
                                                                                                       balancing economic,
                                                                                                       environmental, and
                                                                                                       social development,
                                                                                                       including generating
                                                                                                       revenues and job
                                                                                                       opportunities.




                                                                                                                           5
    GOALS OF THE PROJECT
    The goal of the 4MRRP was to restore South Korea’s major rivers. By doing so, 4MRRP adapted water
    resources to resolve water and environmental challenges, including effects from climate change. The
    project had five core tasks:

    i)   secure water;

    ii) protect from ﬂoods;

    iii) improve water quality and restoring ecology;

    iv) create public spaces ;

    v) promote river-oriented community development (see Figure 2).

    Task fifth task was part of Korea’s broader Korean Government Green New Deal Policy initiated in
    2009. The short-term objective of the green budget was to create economic stimulus and jobs during
    the global recession. Under the initiative, the government allocated a “green budget” of about 86 billion
    USD in total, equivalent to 2% of Korean annual GDP from 2009 to 2013. Out of this green budget, the
    government allocated about 20%, or 19.3 billion USD, for water-related tasks i, ii, and iii of the 4MRRP.


    FIGURE 2. 5 CORE TASKS OF THE 4MRRP




           TASK                    TASK                 TASK                TASK                  TASK

            1                      2                    3                    4                     5
         Securing              Protecting           Improving          Creating Public       River-oriented
          Water                  against          Water Quality          Spaces for           Community
                                Flooding           & Restoring           Residents           Development
                                                     Ecology



                                          MISSION
                      MULTI-PURPOSE CLIMATE CHANGE ADOPTION PROJECT
                                  5 CORE TASKS OF 4MRRP


    Source: K-water. 2014.




    SCOPE OF THE PROJECT
    The 4MRRP targeted four major Korean rivers: the Han, Nakdong, Geum, and Yeongsan (see Figure 3).
    To achieve the 4MRRP goals, five core tasks covered the following goals (see Table2).

    Secure water The 4MRRP secured an extra 1.17 billion of water, which largely mitigated the effects of
    droughts and water shortages. Building of 16 new moveable weirs, elevation of 93 agricultural reservoir
    banks, and construction of two small-to-medium-sized dams secured additional water storage for urban
    water supply, irrigation, and river environments.

    Protect against ﬂooding Dredging 450 million of deposits and sediment along 530 kilometers
    widened and deepened waterways and secured flood-flow capacity for main rivers and tributaries at the
    once-in-200-year flood level. Also, 4MRRP work along 131 Km of levees on the Han River, 335km on


6
the Nakdong River, 117km on the Geum River, 17km on the Yeongsan River, and 20km on the Seomjin
River included levee reinforcement and reconstruction, and removal of steep bank slopes widened river
channels. Use of green structures, such as soil and plants, created cultural and leisure spaces in sections
deemed low risk for erosion. These comprehensive flood-control measures resulted securing in 920
million m3 of flood storage capacity.

Improve water quality The project aimed to achieve the average of grade 2 of the national
environmental criteria by 2012, Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) level of 3 ppm or less. The project
relocated farmlands and vinyl greenhouses away from rivers, and reinforced 207 wastewater treatment
facilities, 589 sewage sites, 31 livestock excretion treatment facilities, 545 TP treatment facilities, and
ecological reservoirs at 85 sites. The project also enlarged sewer pipes at 246 sites.

Restore Ecology Relocation of farmlands and vinyl greenhouses created 130 of new or renewed
wetlands. Eco-friendly fish-ways installed near the new weirs helped restore natural fish migration patterns.

Promote river-oriented community development Waterfront development aimed to support
regional economic development through job creation and local economic revitalization. Relocation of
facilities also created space for public recreation infrastructure, such as bike paths, sport facilities, and
campsites. Cultural Centers built near the four main rivers today help convey knowledge of regional
history as well as raise awareness of the significance of the river restoration projects. There was strong
socio-political will work behind the water environment restoration.


FIGURE 3. MAP OF 4MRRP


                                                                                                         Dam

                                             HAN RIVER
                                                                                                         Weir

                                  Ipo                                                                    Flood
                                                                                                         Detention Res.
                                    Yeoju
                                  Gangcheon


                 GEUM RIVER                                   Youngju

                             Sejong                                   Andong-Imha
                                                                       connection
                 Gongju                       Sangju
                                                           Nakdan Weir
                                 Baekje
                                                 Gumi           NAKDONG RIVER

                                                Chilgok                   Bohyeonsan

                                              Gangjeong
                         SEOMJIN RIVER        Goryeong        Dalseong


              Damyang                                         Hapcheon
                                                             Changnyeong

                                                       Changnyeong
                                                          Haman
                          Seoungchon

                        Juksan      Hwasun


       YEONGSAN RIVER




Source: K-water. 2012

                                                                                                                          7
    TABLE 2. PROJECT SCOPES AND EFFECTS


     Securing         Movable weirs : 16                              Secure 1.17 billion m3
     water
                      Dams : 2

                      Elevating agricultural reservoir banks : 93




     Protecting       Dredging : 450 million                          Lower ﬂood water levels
     against                                                          (2-4m)
                      Detentions : 5 places
     ﬂooding
                      Reinforcing dilapidated levees : 784 km




     Improving        Wastewater treatment facilities: 207            Swimmable water
     water quality                                                    76% ➞ 86%
                      Sewage sites: 589
     & restoring
     ecology          Livestock excretion treatment facilities: 31

                      TP treatment facilities: 545

                      Ecological reservoirs: 85 sites

                      Enlargement of sewer pipes: 246 sites




     Creating         Ecological wetlands : 11.8 million m3           Improve natural ecology
     public spaces                                                    & promote eco-tourism
     for residents    Fish-ways : 33 sites




     River oriented   Bicycle paths : 1,757 km                        Better quality of life
     community
     development      Sport facilities : 454

                      Campsites : 1,529 (camping car parking : 520)

                      Cultural Centers : 5




     Job Creation     Job creation : 340,000                          Enhance economic
                                                                      well-being
                      17.3 persons per 1 billion KRW investment are
                      employed in construction business




    Source: MLTM 2012b.
8
3. IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PROJECT: THE MAIN ELEMENTS
As seen in the objectives and the scope of the 4MRRP, the project is a massive, large-scale infrastructure
project. For the success of such large investment projects, it is critical to establish a clear mechanism
for planning, designing, administrating, operating, and financing, while maintaining room for
innovation. We present some critical elements learned for successful multipurpose infrastructure project
implementation below.


LEGISLATIVE SUPPORT OF THE 4MRRP
Three different ministries—Ministry of Land, Infrastructure and Transport (MOLIT),2 Ministry of
Environment (MoE), and Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Rural Affairs (MoAFRA)—were
involved in the water project. They have different authorities and responsibilities: water quantity falls
under MOLIT, water quality falls under MoE, and agriculture-related issues fall under MoAFRA. The
Government enacted or amended a number of laws to implement the 4MRRP, which helped distribute
project benefits widely and ensure sustainability of the massive project.


National Finance Act
The purpose of this Act was to establish a framework for financial management and sound fiscal
operations. Legislators amended the Act to accelerate 4MRRP implementation by exempting disaster-
risk management projects from preliminary feasibility studies.


Act on Contracts to which the State is a Party
The purpose of this Act is to promote smooth administration of contracts by State government
organizations. Legislators amended the Act to spur local development by increasing the mandatory
participation share for local construction companies in joint ventures.


Special Act on the Utilization of Waterfronts
The purpose of this Act is to prevent ill-conceived development and to promote sustainable growth by
creating and using areas near national rivers. The Act promotes development of eco-friendly waterfront,
and prevents unregulated development.


River Act (Charge Ministry: MLTM, now MOLIT)
The purpose of this Act is to manage rivers to increase benefits from river use, encourage nature-
friendly maintenance and preservation of rivers, and to prevent damages from disasters. Amendment of
the act allowed Korea Water Resources Corporation (K-water), a public water resources management
company, to operate and maintain integrated facilities. Before the amendment, local governments
retained responsibility.




2
    In 2013, the Ministry was reorganized and newly named as the Ministry of Land, Infrastructure and Transport
     from the Ministry of Land, Transport and Maritime Affairs.


                                                                                                                  9
     INSTITUTIONAL SETTINGS

     A. Implementation coordination
     Successful coordination among key stakeholders and organizations was a very important element to
     4MRRP implementation. The project-based mechanism:

     i)     Coordinated various ministries and organizations at the national and river-basin level;

     ii) Collected expert views from academia and research institutions; and

     iii) Built project consensus among key stakeholders.

     The government established the Office of National River Restoration under the Ministry of Land,
     Transport and Maritime Affairs. Different ministries and local government association of the four rivers
     connected through the Office of National River Restoration. In addition, an Advisory Committee—
     comprised of about 1,000 experts, academics, policy advisors, and community organizations, among
     others—helped guide the project. The committee played a crucial role in collecting expert opinions,
     building public support for the complex project, and enhancing the consistency, efficiency, and
     transparency of project decision making and implementation.


     FIGURE 4. PROJECT ORGANIZATION STRUCTURE




              Presidential Committee on                     Presidential Committee on                    Presidential Committee on
            Regional Development                                Green Growth                             Architecture Policy




                                                            OFFICE OF
                                                            NATIONAL
                Association for
             Government Support                            RESTORATION                                  Advisory Committee
             Prime Minister’s Ofﬁce                     Ministry of Land, Transport
                                                            and Maritime Affairs

                                                                                                         Local Government
                                                                                                           Association of
                                                                                                          The Four Rivers




                                           Task Force Team in the              Task Force Team in the           Task Force Team in the
          Task Force Team in the                                                                                Ministry of Public
                                           Ministry for Food,                      Ministry of
              Ministry of                                                                                      Administration and
                                          Agriculture, Forestry                Culture Sports and
             Environment                                                                                             Security
                                             and Fisheries                          Tourism




     Source: Republic of Korea, 2013




10
B. Stakeholder participation
The project established a governance system to encourage stakeholder participation.

A huge project such as the 4MRRP is bound to create social conflicts. The project presented controversial
issues in areas such as modification of natural waterways, increasing weirs and their effects on water
quality, dredging and its effects on ecosystems, and effects on cultural artifacts, among others. Some
stakeholders questioned the reliability of environmental assessments, the suitability of processes, and
budget allocation decisions. Conflicts over how the country should use and allocate its water resources
added to complicated matrix of problems. The 4MRRP governance system had three main purposes:

i)   Collect expert opinions to address technical issues and facilitate public consensus;

ii) Allow stakeholder to participate in decision-making; and

iii) Raise awareness of the beneﬁts of the multipurpose project.

C. Specialized water management agency
One of the important success factors of the 4MRRP was that a specialized water resource agency
managed the project. K-water plays a crucial role in promoting both construction and operation of multi-
purpose water facilities in Korea. The Korean Government founded K-Water in 1967 in accordance with
the national development goals to develop heavy and chemical industries and facilitate modernization of
the national industrial structure. The Ministry of Land, Infrastructure and Transport (MoLIT) regulates
K-water. K-water brings experience and technology to provide Integrated Water Resources Management
(IWRM) and construction, operation, and management of water resources facilities, such as dams, weirs,
local water works and sewage facilities. K-water also builds industrial complexes and waterfront spaces,
along with developing and applying renewable water energy sources. K-water oversees 95% of South
Korea’s flood control capacity, 65% of water supply capacity, and 63% of hydropower under a unique
financial arrangement that combines government support with profit making.

K-Water served as operator and implementer under the 4MRRP to:

i)   Coordinate among stakeholders and facilitate involvement;

ii) Implement project components and onsite operation, including construction of large-
     scale multifunctional facilities and weirs;

iii) Establish central control systems, including use of innovative technologies; and
iv) Oversee the ﬁnancial arrangement.




KEY TECHNOLOGIES
K-Water developed innovative and integrated technologies to manage water resources. The management
of rivers and adapting to changing characteristics requires river-basin level integration. K-water uses
information communication technology (ICT) to optimize dam and weir operation to avoid water use
conflicts among environment, flood control, and transport needs.


A. ICT-based data collection and monitoring
Use of converging state-of-the-art ICT technologies is central to river basin, real-time mobile data
collection and monitoring. ICT applications, such as satellite weather forecasting, rainfall forecasting,
and real-time floodgate information support weir-dam integration. The integrated operating system
transmits and stores data for each weir, reservoir, and facility unit into an integrated database, allowing
water quantity and quality predictions and facility use optimization.
                                                                                                              11
     B. Macro-analysis system for river ﬂow management
     K-water developed a macro-analysis system to support joint dam-weir river flow management and
     flood control. Operating these facilities requires analyzing a variety of monthly and daily hydro-
     meteorological conditions data, such as river and reservoir water quality and quantity. The system
     has five models: dam-weir joint operation, water quality, rainfall runoff, hydrology analysis, and an
     agricultural reservoir-connected model (see Figure 5). Integrating these models into one system enables
     operators to easily collect information, and perform real-time simulations of river discharges from weirs.
     Based on hydro-meteorological predictions, the operators control the quantity and quality of rivers
     (factoring for hydro-meteorological uncertainty).


     FIGURE 5. MACRO-ANALYSIS SYSTEM FOR RIVER FLOW MANAGEMENT



                                                 Rainfall-runoff model
                                                   (SSARR, TANK)




                                                                                               Agricultural reservoir
     Water quality model                                                                       connected module
              (QUAL2E)                                                                         (AROM)

                                                       RIVER FLOW
                                                      MANAGEMENT
                                                         SYSTEM




                         Hydrology
                                                                                    Dam-weir joint
                     analysis model
                                                                                    operation model
                                                                                    (COWMOM)



     Source: K-Water, 2012



     ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL ISSUES
     Beneﬁt-cost analysis Use of benefit-to-cost analysis, along with an analytic hierarchy process (AHP)3 ,
     helped examine ecological river restoration projects, bicycle path and dam construction, and agricultural
     reservoir rehabilitation. AHP, a decision-making method to help evaluate alternatives, enables evaluation
     where different levels of preference among multiple decision-making goals or evaluation criteria exist.
     Any project rated over “1” in benefit cost ratio (B/C), or over 0.5 for AHP, rates as worth implementing
     for the project. The B/C ratios of two multipurpose dams constructed rated 1.02 and 1.27. AHPs for all
     projects, including bicycle paths, agricultural reservoirs and ecological restorations rated over 0.50.



     3
         The analytic hierarchy process (AHP) is a structured technique for organizing and analyzing complex decisions,
         based on mathematics and psychology. It provides a comprehensive and rational framework for structuring a
         decision problem, for representing and quantifying its elements, for relating those elements to overall goals, and
         for evaluating alternative solutions.


12
A. Cost sharing across ministries (total project cost)
The 4MRRP had numerous goals, including increasing domestic, industrial and agricultural water
security, and improving flood control and environmental protection. Ministries in charge of these
different areas shared construction costs accordingly.


TABLE 3. TOTAL COSTS OF 4MRPP SHARED AMONG MINISTRIES (BILLION USD)4


                                           2009           2010             2011           2012        Total


             MLTM for ﬂood
             control and water                 0.63        5.87            6.14           0.89         13.5
             resource development


             MIFAFF for agricultural
             reservoir                         0.07        0.43            0.99            1.07         2.6



             MOE for ecological                0.78         1.17           0.86           0.53          3.3
             river restoration



             Total                             1.48        7.48            7.99           2.49         19.4



Source: Special Committee on Budget and Accounts, 2011



B. The project investment scheme on ﬂood damage prevention
The cost of this comprehensive preemptive disaster protection project was significantly lower than
Korean historical costs for flood damage prevention and recovery. As can be seen from Table 4, the total
investment cost for the 4MRRP is 13.5 billion USD was much smaller than the accumulated 2002 to 2006
damage, restoration, and protection costs for Korea5. This implies a very good benefit-cost for the 4MRRP.


TABLE 4. 4MRRP INVESTMENT COST (MOLIT ONLY) AND DAMAGE COSTS




     TOTAL                   DAMAGE                   RESTORATION                 PROTECTION
 INVESTMENT                12.1 billion USD            18.9 billion USD           4.9 billion USD
     MOLIT                (2.4 billion/year)          (3.8 billion/year)          (1 billion/year)
13.5 billion USD6

Source: K-water. 2014.



4
    Average currency for each year, Economic Statics System (1USD is equivalent to 1279.91 KRW (2009), 11057.04
    KRW (2010), 1108.19 KRW (2011), 1126.58 KRW (2012) http://ecos.bok.or.kr/
5
    Costs calculated based on flood simulation and historical damage data.
6
    Average currency from 2002 to 2006 (1USD is equivalent to 1113.52 KRW) http://ecos.bok.or.kr/

                                                                                                                  13
                   B. Cost Recovery
                   K-water established a unique financial scheme for the 4MRRP, which recovers project investment
                   from both government sources and from the private sector. The government provides some financial
                   support, but K-water also earns revenue from sale of water and electricity provided by the multipurpose
                   dams. The company also captures land value appreciation from the project by selling improved lands.
                   These financial arrangements reflect a very innovative approach compared to usual financing where
                   government allocates infrastructure construction budgets.

                   K-water invested 7.07 billion USD out of 13.5 billion USD for the 4MRRP, with the MLTM
                   (now MOLIT) sharing the remainder of the investment cost. K-water will cover the investment from
                   the following:

                   •   Gains from development of waterfront areas;

                   •   Proﬁt from water supply and hydropower generation from Yeongju and Bohyunsan
                       dams (water tariff from municipalities: 10 – 45cents/m3

                   •   Government budgetary support for some shortfalls

                   •   Support from government budget to subsidize loan interest.



        Korea maintained
      stable water supply
         to users near the
         four river basins,
       largely because of
     stored water in dams
     and weirs. Before the
      project, emergency
     downstream requests
         for water release
         had occurred 20
       times over the past
       10 years, but there
           have not been
       requests for water
             release since
            completion of
              the project.




14
4. 4MRRP PERFORMANCE
While only several years have passed since project completion, 4MRRP has already demonstrated
results, as shown below.


TASK 1 SECURING WATER
The project resolved water shortages for domestic, industrial, and agricultural uses in most regions.
A severe, record-breaking drought occurred in May and June 2012, when Korea experienced the
highest temperature in record and the lowest nationwide rainfall since 1908. Thirty-one cities and
counties suffered from water shortage. Over 4,898 hectares of agricultural land, and 5,160 people,
required emergency water supply. Korea maintained stable water supply to users near the four river
basins, largely because of stored water in dams and weirs (see Table 5). Before the project, emergency
downstream requests for water release had occurred 20 times over the past 10 years, but there have not
been requests for water release since completion of the project.


TABLE 5. EFFECTS ON SECURING WATER


    Location             Current level     Before 4MRRP                              After 4MRRP
                         elevation in
                                           Water level   Water level   Lowest        Water level   Water level   Lowest
                         meters
                                           during        during dry-   water level   during        during dry-   water level
                                           drought       season        observed      drought       season        observed



    Gancheon weir        38.0              36.2          35.3          35.6          1.8 ↑         2.7 ↑         2.4 ↑
    Han River



    Changnyeong          5.0               2.7           1.0           1.5           2.3 ↑         4.0 ↑         3.5 ↑
    Hamahn weir
    Nakdong River


    Baekje weir          4.2               2.7           2.4           2.6           1.5 ↑         1.8 ↑         1.6 ↑
    Geum River



Source: K-water. 2014.


TASK 2 PROTECTING AGAINST FLOODING
Facilities constructed for the 4MRRP substantially decreased flood damage. Many regions would have
suffered floods from 2011 to 2012 without 4MRRP. The project strengthened land resources to protect
them from natural disasters. After the project, flood risk reduced in 85.1% of basin lowlands, with 8.6% of
these areas rendered completely free from risks. In total, flood risks decreased in 93.7% of basin lowlands.

Dredging led to a 2 to 4 m reduction of the water level in each river. Flood water levels in the Han,
Nakdong, Geum, Seomjin and Youngsan rivers decreased by 5.8m, 4.0m, 1.6m and 1.2m respectively in
2013 (see Table 6). Flood damage costs decreased by about 821 million USD7. Estimated flood damage
costs in the four major rivers during 2011 monsoon season of 8.52 million USD were less than one-tenth
the damage costs caused by similar floods in 1998 (1.1 billion USD8) and 2006 (1.6 billion USD9).




7
     Average currency in 2013 (1USD is equivalent to 1094.98) http://ecos.bok.or.kr/
8
     Average currency in 1998 (1USD is equivalent to 1403.18)
9
     Average currency in 2006 (1USD is equivalent to 955.34)

                                                                                                                               15
     TABLE 6. FLOOD CONTROL EFFECTS IN RIVERS BY DAMS 2013


      Location                         Rain Event          Rainfall   Flood control effect           Reduced
                                                           (mm)       Dam        Weir     Dams-      damage
                                                                                          Weirs      (billion KR)




     Han River         Yeoju           12–17 July           128       3.2m       5.8m        5.8m          690




     Nakdong River Jindong             2–8 July              137       2.1m     4.0m         4.0m          170




     Geum River        Guemnam         2–8 July              90        1.2m      1.6m        1.6m             –



                                                                                 No
     Yeongsan River Naju               2–8 July             225        1.2m     Weirs        1.2m           30



                                                                       No
     Yeongsan River Naju               2–8 July             252       Dams       1.7m        1.7m            10



     Source: K-water. 2014.


     Figure 6 demonstrates 4MRRP improvements during the heavy 2011 rainfall year. Flooding in
     farmlands, households, and public facilities reduced significantly. The pictures show how 4MRRP
     protected parks in 2011 (“After” picture to the right) even though rainfall was as high as in the 2006
     flood-affected year (“Before” picture to the left).


     FIGURE 6. EFFECTS ON FLOODING BEFORE AND AFTER 4MRRP



     BEFORE JULY, 2006                                          AFTER JULY, 2011




     Rainfall during the rainy season (mm):                     Rainfall during the rainy season (mm):
     Dalseong 277, Youngcheon 244                               Dalseong 290, Youngcheon 220


     Source: K-water. 2014.



16
TASK 3: IMPROVING WATER QUALITY AND RESTORING ECOLOGY
Increased water allowed better maintenance of river flows, which improved the quality of water and
ecosystems in river basins. Relocating farmlands (6,578 ha), and clearing deserted waste around the
river (2,860,000 tons), significantly reduced pollutant flows into rivers and tributaries. Expansion of
environmental infrastructure resulted in improved BOD level and reduced total-phosphorus TP (30 –
40%) for all major rivers. The project also created 147 wetlands representing 12,538,000 m2. Wetlands
promote biodiversity and add flood-control capacity. Thanks to ecological stream restoration projects,
the government forecasts that water quality and biodiversity will continue to improve.


TASK 4: CREATING PUBLIC SPACES FOR RESIDENTS
Facilities along the rivers provide public recreation. Integrated with the national road system, bike paths
along the rivers have promoted a biking culture (see Figure 7). Eco-parks, camping sites, landmarks,
and other new public facilities are also popular. Five new, multifunction “Cultural Pavilions” provide
space for public enjoyment of culture and arts, or for the public to hold meetings, seminars, lectures, and
exhibitions. The spaces are easily accessible and intended to build appreciation for beauty and harmony
between landscape, humans, and the environment.


FIGURE 7. BIKE PATHS AND WATERFRONT AREAS AFTER THE 4MRRP




Photo: K-Water


TASK 5: RIVER-ORIENTED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
The 4MRRP created an estimated 88,400 jobs in 2009 and 2010, with 16,523 people directly employed
and 71,877 indirectly employed. The employment effects amount to 7.37 trillion KRW for two years
from 2009 to 2010. Increased cultural and tourism activities create even more jobs. Amendment of
the Act on Contracts to which the State is a Parity increased the percentage of compulsory local joint
contracts to more than 20%, and the participation of local companies in the project reached 37.5%.
According to Construction and Economy Research Institute of Korea research, 4MRRP created 17.3
persons jobs per 1 billion KRW spent. In total, 4MRRP created 340,000 jobs, producing economic
benefits of about 40 trillion KRW.


OTHER OUTCOMES
Micro hydropower plants installed on all weirs produce approximately 2.7 hundred million Kwh of
green (clean) renewable energy each, enough to power 58,000 households for an entire year.



                                                                                                              17
     5. LESSONS LEARNED AND RECOMMENDATIONS
     TO DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
     Korea’s 4MRRP project shows that integrated water resources management
     can improve water resources management, restore ecosystems, and help manage
     disaster risks, including managing the many risks posed by climate change. The
     4MRRP also has been an economic growth engine, stimulating local economic
     development and jobs. Lessons applicable to other countries include:
     Preventive water resources management—as opposed to prior damage recovery modes—is
     necessary to mitigate risks and uncertainties, including the increased risks stemming from
     climate change.
     Preemptive investment in the river system in Korea, such as 4MRRP, represents a major shift from post-
     disaster damage recovery approaches to preventive management. Total investment cost of the project
     amounts to Korean damage recovery costs for only five years. In other words, prevention is extremely
     cost-effective.

     Water is a cross-cutting resource, requiring integrated water resources management.
     Although ministries have different functions and jurisdictions, coordinating their efforts optimizes
     project implementation and operation. Along with ministries, various stakeholders from academia,
     the public sector, the private sector, and from civil society united under Korea’s “4MRRP Promotion
     System”. The system enables collection of expertise and data to enhance effectiveness of complex and
     challenging water and environment multipurpose projects.

     Consensus building and full stakeholder participating in decision-making is essential.
     It is necessary to raise public awareness and inform the public on project progress. Cooperative
     partnerships established in Korea involved politicians, experts, environmental organizations,
     local communities, and civil society organizations. These partnerships help negotiate conflicting
     needs and interests during the project.

     The river basin is an appropriate unit for water management.
     4MRRP shows that river basins can serve as the principal unit of measurement and operation for
     integrated water management. Coordinating the range of needs at the river-basin level can optimize
     facility benefits and planning coordination. The project improved all river channels in equal measure to
     increase flood-flow capacities across the river basins. Offices established at each river basin operate these
     facilities, collecting hydro-meteorological water quantity and quality data to share among basins.

     Information and Communication Technology optimizes water resources management.
     Korea uses Information and Communication Technology to operate dams and weirs and manage water
     supply and flood risks. Authorities can easily monitor, share, and store hydro-meteorological data and
     operate facilities using advanced Information and Communication Technology. Integrated simulation
     models use Information and Communication Technology to predict scenarios in water quantity and
     quality, and optimize operation of dams, weirs and other facilities.

     Institutional setting to procure sustainable ﬁnancing and public support is necessary.
     It is impossible to implement projects without legal and institutional support and governance. Korea
     quickly completed the large-scale 4MRRP, and maximized the benefits from the project, by modifying
     laws to minimize duplication or excessive procedures that delay projects and increase budgets.



18
Water resources management for climate change adaption can foster green growth.
The negative effects of climate change on water affect a range of other areas—energy, disaster
management, agriculture, and ecosystems, among others. 4MRRP shows that climate change adaptation
for water can contribute to sustainable local economic development. The 4MRRP addressed climate
change-related water challenges while creating jobs and generating clean energy.

A specialized water agency can promote multi-purpose infrastructure projects.
K-water played a crucial role in implementing 4MRRP on the “hard” construction side of the project,
but also on the “soft” coordination aspects. Large projects face operational, management, infrastructure,
and coordination challenges across various national and local government organizations and private
companies. Korea’s state company K-water’s over 40 years of experience in building and managing
multi-purpose facilities allowed the company to coordinate the wide range of inevitable stakeholders
concerns. K-water is now operating facilities that coordinate multiple water-uses, and K-water built
these facilities under the 4MRRP using innovative project financing that does not rely solely on
government budget support. This success is the result of establishing, funding, and staffing of dedicated
institutions with proper arrangements, appropriate legislation, and sufficient capacity to coordinate
multi-stakeholders and to implement and manage water resources projects.




                                                                                                            19
     REFERENCES
     4MRRPAC (Four Major Rivers Project Assessment Committee under the Prime Minister). 2014. The
     Assessment Report on the Four Major Rivers Project (in Korean)

     Jo, Ji incheol, et. al., 2012, Korea’s development experience modularization – water resource
     development policy in Korea, Korea Research Institute for Huma Settlements

     Jong Ho Ahn, et. al. 2015. Water and Sustainable Development in Korea: A Country Case Study, Korea
     Environment Institute

     K-water. 2012. Four Major Rivers Restoration Project: Technical Note

     K-water. 2014. Four Major Rivers Restoration Project for Climate Change Adaptation. Knowledge Note
     Series 1.

     K-water, http://english.kwater.or.kr/eng/about/sub02/history01Page.do?s_mid=1101

     Ministry of Land, Transport and Maritime Affairs (MLTM), 2012a, Four Rivers Restoration Project

     Ministry of Land, Transport and Maritime Affairs (MLTM), 2012b. The River Revitalization of Korea:
     The Four Rivers Restoration Project, Investing in a Safe and Sustainable Korea, Now and in the Future

     Ministry of Land Transport and Maritime Affairs (MLTM), 2011, Water & Green Growth, The 4 Major
     Rivers Restoration Project, Office of National River Restoration, Korea

     Ministry of Government Legislation: http://www.moleg.go.kr/english/korLawEng?pstSeq=52772

     Ministry of Land, Infrastructure and Transport (MOLIT) http://english.molit.go.kr/USR/
     WPGE0201/m_35387/DTL.jsp

     National Finance Act: http://webcache.googleusercontent.com/search?q=cache:Smc1TQuKjJEJ:pimac.
     kdi.re.kr/eng/mission/pdf/National_Finance_Act(2011).pdf+&cd=1&hl=en&ct=clnk

     Act on Contracts to which the State is a Party: http://elaw.klri.re.kr/eng_mobile/viewer.
     do?hseq=28879&type=new&key=

     Special act on utilization of water front: http://elaw.klri.re.kr/eng_mobile/viewer.
     do?hseq=25287&type=part&key=35

     River Act 2009 (English translated version): http://www.moleg.go.kr/english/korLawEng?pstSeq=52772

     ROK (Republic of Korea). 2013. The Lee Myung-bak Administration White Paper, 2008.2-2013.2: The
     Green New Deal Four Major Rivers Restoration Project and Reviving the local economy. (in Korean)

     Ministry of Land, Infrastructure and Maritime Affairs, Green Growth Korea, K-Water, World Water
     Council: Water and Green Growth Edition 1-March 2012

     Sang Dae Choi, 2013. The Green Growth Movement in the Republic of Korea: Option or Necessity?
     Green Growth in Action, Korea Green Growth Knowledge Notes Series No. 1

     Special Committee on Budget and Accounts (Republic of Korea), 2011, Report on the Budget for 2011

     Yoon Jung Cha, Myung-Pil Shim, and Seung Kyum Kim, 2011. Office of National River Restoration,
     The Four Major Rivers Restoration Project, UN-Water International Conference Water in the Green
     Economy in Practice: Towards Rio +20

     Acknowledgement: This Note was edited by Aldo Morri, Korea Green Growth Trust Fund

20
ANNEX
Korea’s water resources management policy transformation




                                                           21
     THE HISTORY

     To address innate geographic, and evolving challenges over time, water
     resources management strategy and policy in Korea has undergone several
     transformations. Effective water resources management supported Korea’s
     rapid economic growth, despite difficult conditions. The “Miracle of the Han
     River” would not have been possible without successful water resources
     management. Since the 1960s, Korean water and development policies
     changed to suit the needs and contexts at different stages.

     Water policy underwent four main stages: 1) quantity, 2) quality, 3) climate
     change adaptation, 4) Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM).
     This section will explain how policy progressed through these stages since
     the 1950s.




22
1965–1990:
In 1965 Korea was able to escape absolute poverty, following exponential export-oriented growth. The
Korean War from 1950 to 1953 had destroyed almost everything, with most infrastructure, including
water supply networks, demolished. After the war, Korea was one of the poorest countries with the
income per capita of 64 USD. Exacerbating these limitations, most water supply networks, built during
the Japanese colonial period, were in North Korea.

Korea focused on construction of physical infrastructure to support economic growth. Water-related
plans, laws, and organizations devised during this period—namely the 10-Year National Water
Resources Plan and Department of Water Resources—resolved fundamental water challenges, such
as securing water and food supply. In 1967, the Government of Korea established the Korea Water
Resources Department Corporation (now K-water, Korea Water Resources Corporation) as a specialized
agency for water resources development.

The comprehensive 1970s river basin development plan formulated for the four major rivers—Han,
Nakdong, Geum and Yeongsan—included construction of major domestic and agricultural water supply
infrastructure: irrigation, hydropower, flood control, and multipurpose dams and facilities. The main
purpose of this infrastructure was to secure water to support export-oriented growth industries, a trend
that continued until the 1980s. The efforts reduced flood damage by half, increased service ratio of the
water supply from 30% to 65%, and irrigated some 600,000 hectare of agricultural areas.


1991-2001:
By the 1990s, the construction of multipurpose dams halted. Rapid urbanization, which saw city
dwellers increase from 13% of the South Korean population in 1945 to 78.5% in 1995, required more
water treatment facilities. During this same period, the water service rate increased from 18% to 82.9%,
which also implied an imminent need to expand sewerage facilities.

In 1991 public concerns over water quality came to a head when a factory accidentally spilled phenol
into the Nakdong River, polluting drinking water in Daegu, Korea’s 4th largest city. This incident
marked a turning point for water policy in Korea, shifting the focus from water quantity to water
quality. The government enacted and began to enforce stricter environmental standards, and the
government established environmental committees to manage river quality at the river basin level.


2001–PRESENT:
Since the late 1990s, Korean water policy has undergone yet another major shift. No longer limited to water
quality, the government has managed water resources in a sustainable manner that respects both human
and environmental needs. The Korean public demands quality water, but policies now reflect a balanced
approach to satisfy the three pillars of sustainable development: economy, environment, and society.

Fulfilling various water user demands will become even more complicated as water resources feel the
effects of climate change. Korean water management is again evolving in response, as demonstrated in
the Four River Restoration Project (4MRRP).




                                                                                                              23
Korea Green Growth Partnership
The World Bank
1818 H St. NW, Washington, D.C., 20433
kggtfsecretariat@worldbank.org



The Korean Green Growth Trust Fund
(KGGTF)—a partnership between the World
Bank Group (WBG) and the Republic of
Korea)—promotes, creates, and communicates
knowledge about Green Growth approaches
and projects based on the real-world
experience of policy makers and Green Growth
technical practitioners in Korea. The KGGTF
seeks to strengthen and expand the World
Bank’s green portfolio by sharing evidence-
based practical knowledge with WBG staff,
WBG client countries, and other interested
parties. In partnership with the WBG,
KGGTF activities disseminate knowledge
and promote the creation of a green growth
knowledge network to help WBG clients
design, plan, and implement green growth
strategies and investments.

“Green Growth in Action,” the “KGGP
Knowledge Note (KNs) Series” is intended
to serve as showcase of green growth
operationalization from projects and
programs with key operational knowledge
and lessons learned.
