                                                 102612
                                          MINISTRY OF FINANCE
                                PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF CHINA




Subnational Debt Management
      and Restructuring
    LESSONS FROM INTERNATIONAL EXPERIENCE


                                                    EDITORS

                          Satu Kahkonen and Sudarshan Gooptu




    SUMMARIES AND PRESENTATIONS
                      i
The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those of the author(s) and should
  not be attributed in any manner to the World Bank, to its affiliated organizations or to members of its Board of
                                 Executive Directors or the countries they represent.




                                                         ii
                                                              Table of Contents




Acknowledgement ...................................................................................................................................... vii
Foreword...................................................................................................................................................... ix
Introductory Remarks at the Seminar ......................................................................................................... xi
Introduction ................................................................................................................................................ xv
Agenda .......................................................................................................................................................... 1
SECTION I - Getting the Context Right .......................................................................................................... 4
   China’s Subnational Debts: Problems and Suggestions ............................................................................ 5
   System Characteristics and Reform Logic of China’s Subnational Debts................................................ 15
SECTION II - Looking at the Past through Country Experiences .................................................................. 16
   The United States: Regulatory Systems of Subnational Debt and Markets............................................ 17
   Subnational Debt Management in Brazil and Mexico ............................................................................ 18
   Subnational Debt: The Case of the Russian Federation .......................................................................... 25
   Subnational Debt Restructuring in India ................................................................................................. 30
   Fiscal Rules and Debt Restructuring: The EU Experience ....................................................................... 35
SECTION III - Addressing Subnational Indebtedness Problems – Distilling Lessons from Country
Experiences ................................................................................................................................................. 42
   Priorities in the Short and Medium-term for China’s Subnational Government Debt: Good Practices
   and Options ............................................................................................................................................. 43
   Debt Restructuring, Institutions and Markets ........................................................................................ 57
   Lessons for Borrowing Policy and Subnational Risks Management ....................................................... 58
   Fiscal Adjustment and Subnational Borrowing Regulations ................................................................... 73
SECTION IV - Roundtable Discussion on Options and Subnational Reform Priorities for China - Learning
from Cross Country Lessons........................................................................................................................ 91
   Round-table Discussion: “Options and Subnational Reform Priorities for China - Learning from Cross
   Country Lessons” .................................................................................................................................... 92
SECTION V - Concluding Remarks ............................................................................................................... 95
Authors’ Biographies................................................................................................................................. 101




                                                                                iii
Section I: Getting the Context Right
      “China’s Subnational Debts: Problems and Suggestions”. Dr. Liu Shangxi, Director of Research
       Institute for Fiscal Science, Ministry of Finance, China
      “System Characteristics and Reform Logic of China’s Subnational Debts”. Dr. Qiao Baoyun, Dean
       of China Academy of Public Finance and Public Policy, Central University of Finance and Economics
Section II: Looking at the Past through Country Experiences
      North America (USA) – “The United States: Regulatory Systems of Subnational Debt and Markets”.
       Dr. Lili Liu, World Bank, Governance Global Practice, EFI Vice-Presidency
      Emerging Markets: “Subnational Debt Management in Brazil and Mexico”. Dr. Fernando Blanco,
       World Bank, Macroeconomics and Fiscal Management Global Practice, EFI Vice-Presidency
      Emerging Markets: “Subnational Debt: The Case of the Russian Federation”. Dr. John Litwack,
       World Bank, Macroeconomics and Fiscal Management Global Practice, EFI Vice-Presidency
      Emerging Markets: “Subnational Debt Restructuring in India”. Ms. Abha Prasad, World Bank,
       Macroeconomics and Fiscal Management Global Practice, EFI Vice-Presidency
      European Union (EU): “Fiscal Rules and Debt Restructuring” (Greece and Ireland). Dr. Christoph T.
       F. Ungerer, World Bank, Macroeconomics and Fiscal Management Global Practice, EFI Vice-
       Presidency
Section III: Addressing Subnational Indebtedness Problems – Distilling Lessons from
Country Experiences
      “Priorities in the Short and Medium-term for China’s Subnational Government Debt: Good
       Practices and Options”. Prof. Roy Bahl, Regents Professor of Economics and Dean, Emeritus,
       Andrew Young School of Policy Studies, Georgia State University, USA
      “Debt Restructuring, Institutions, and Markets”. Dr. Lili Liu, World Bank, Governance Global
       Practice, EFI Vice-Presidency
      “Lessons for Borrowing Policy and Subnational Risks Management”. Dr. Sudarshan Gooptu and
       Dr. Karlis Smits, World Bank, Macroeconomics and Fiscal Management Global Practice, EFI Vice-
       Presidency
      “Fiscal Adjustment and Subnational Borrowing Regulations”. Prof. Jorge Martinez-Vazquez,
       Andrew Young School of Policy Studies, Georgia State University, USA
Section IV: Roundtable Discussion on Options and Subnational Reform Priorities for
China - Learning from Cross Country Lessons
      Dr. Qiao Baoyun, Dean of China Academy of Public Finance and Public Policy, Central University
       of Finance and Economics, USA
      Prof. Roy Bahl, Andrew Young School of Policy Studies, Georgia State University, USA
      Prof. Jorge Martinez-Vazquez, Andrew Young School of Policy Studies, Georgia State University,
       USA


                                                  iv
      Dr. Satu Kahkonen, Director for Asia and Europe, World Bank, Macroeconomics and Fiscal
       Management Global Practice, EFI Vice-Presidency
Section V: Concluding Remarks
      Mr. Chen Xinhua, Deputy Director-General, Budget Department, Ministry of Finance, China
      Dr. Satu Kahkonen, Director for Asia and Europe, Macroeconomics and Fiscal Management Global
       Practice, EFI Vice-Presidency, World Bank
      Mr. Xu Xiang, Deputy Director-General of Human Resources Development Centers, Ministry of
       Finance, China




                                                v
vi
                                        Acknowledgement

     First and foremost, we would like to appreciate the long-standing cooperation between the Ministry
of Finance and the World Bank Group in China in thinking through and working together to tackle the
most complex and pertinent economic policy issues facing the country at various junctures of its highly
successful development experience. We are honored to have this opportunity to jointly co-host this
Subnational Debt and Restructuring Summit with the Ministry in Nanning, and for the rapid production of
this e-book to synthesize its proceedings and make it widely available to all. We look forward to many
such joint knowledge sharing activities and joint research activities in future. We would like to thank our
hosts in Nanning, the Department of Finance of Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region, especially DG Huang
Weijing and his staff who warmly welcomed us there, and to Messrs. Wu Zhenpeng, Xu Xiang, Chen
Xinhua, Mao Wenyong and Gu Ming from the Ministry of Finance and their staff in Beijing, who worked
very effectively together with us to make this Summit a success. The event and e-book would not have
been possible without the instruction of H.E. Mr. Xu Hongcai, Assistant Minister of Finance, and the
excellent cooperation from the Department of Budget, Department of International Cooperation,
Department of International Economic and Financial Cooperation, Human Resources Development Center
of Ministry of Finance, as well as the contributing expert panelists, thought leaders on the subject from
China and abroad, and from officials from the Government and the World Bank experts who helped make
the discussions at the summit highly relevant and substantive to the issues at hand. Contributions by our
colleagues Chorching Goh, John Litwack, Karlis Smits, Lili Liu and Christoph Ungerer in designing the event
agenda and helping with its delivery along with Mmes. Yu Jinhong, who provided translation services, and
Wang Lin, who helped with coordination, are greatly appreciated. Mmes. Yang Lin and Ivana Ticha worked
together as a seamless team with all the administrative support during the entire process to make both
the Nanning Summit and e-book a reality from the World Bank’s side.



                                                                                           Satu Kahkonen
                                                                                        Sudarshan Gooptu




                                                    vii
viii
                                                Foreword
Jan Walliser
Vice-President, Equitable Growth, Finance and Institutions (EFI) Practice Group Vice-Presidency, World
Bank


    The Global Financial Crisis made clear that debt can spiral out of control in both developed and
developing countries. An important lesson from this and previous crises has been that it is much less costly
to manage debt levels before the onset of a crisis than after the crisis has already hit. In a country as large
as China, the debt of cities, provinces, and other subnational governments is important. It has been
important for growth: subnational loans have financed roads, bridges, utilities infrastructure and other
public investment that has driven GDP growth and drastically reduced poverty in China in the last decade.
But as the economy is shifting to new growth drivers, managing debt that previously catalyzed the
economy is the next, crucial step. It is vital to the country’s – and, some might argue, the world’s –
economic stability.

     The Government of China is now looking into ways local government can streamline and make more
effective the management of public finances and subnational debt. One significant step toward a modern
fiscal system is the Budget Law, signed in August 2014. This law lays the foundation for the overhaul of
the fiscal system. It aims to improve the quality of budget management, encourage local governme nts’
debt sustainability, and facilitate the channeling of debt in local government financing vehicles to more
transparent bond markets. These measures will also support efforts by the central government to align
local governments' objectives more directly with an agenda for effective and efficient public service
provision in China.

    Subnational debt problems are not unique to China or to developing countries. They have recently
been observed in the U.S. – in Puerto Rico, a U.S. territory, and Detroit, a major U.S. city – and in the
United Kingdom (City of London, Scotland), among others. This e-book provides examples to help
policymakers in heading off those situations. It chronicles international experiences and lessons learned
on how countries have successfully managed their subnational debt. It looks at how they undertook
effective fiscal adjustment measures - not only to restructure the troubled subnational debts but also to
adjust their subnational economies through better fiscal and debt management - with varying levels of
involvement from the central government.

    Notable examples of successful measures include policies that reformed tax collection and
administration, as well as monitoring and managing fiscal risks from contingent liabilities, which can be
particularly important in a country such as China, where state-owned enterprises make such risks more
complex. The e-book also addresses changing intergovernmental fiscal relationships, and tactics that
involve imposing fiscal rules in order to maintain fiscal and debt sustainability over time.

    The materials in this e-book were first presented at the “Subnational Debt Summit” held in Nanning,
China on October 22, 2015. I am confident that readers will benefit from the rich, international


                                                      ix
experiences presented in this work. I hope these lessons help inform China’s practices and thinking
towards its own reforms going forward.




                                                 x
                          Introductory Remarks at the Seminar
Wu Zhenpeng
Director-General, Human Resources Development Center, Ministry of Finance, People’s Republic of China



          Learn from International Experience, Enhance Local Government Debt Management
                                          (October 22, 2015)

     Distinguished experts domestic and from overseas, ladies and gentlemen, Good Morning!

     Currently, local government debt issue is a generalized economic challenge among countries of the
world. Governments are facing the threat of increasing local debt risks. Today, the Department of Budget,
Department of International Cooperation, Department of International Economic and Financial
Cooperation, Human Resources Development Center of Ministry of Finance along with the World Bank
are jointly holding this Local Debt Management International Seminar to discuss how to better exert the
fiscal policy role and enhance local government debt management. I think that it’s very meaningful. In
accordance with the seminar schedule and instructions from Mr. Xu Hongcai, Assistant Minister of
Finance, also delegated by the Department of Budget, I will provide a brief introduction to China’s local
government debt situation for your reference.

I.   Basic condition of local government debt management

    With over 30 years of reform and opening-up, our local governments through financing platform
company and other debt finance methods have speeded up the urban and rural infrastructure
construction and urbanization process, and spurred the development of public undertakings in education,
culture, and health. However, local government debt over the years has been beset by problems mainly
manifested in the lack of management standard, high financing cost, irrational maturity structure and risk
potential in some regions and industries.

    In recent years, Chinese Government, with highly responsible attitude, has always taken measures to
enhance local government debt management arrangement. On one hand, by cleaning up local
government financing platform companies to regulate its borrowing practice; on the other hand, by
issuing local government bond while seeking to establish standardized local government financing
mechanism with some effect. At the same time, Ministry of Finance along with the National Development
and Reform Commission, the People's Bank of China, the National Audit Office and the China Banking
Regulatory Commission has earnestly implemented the arrangement of the State Council, actively
researched and issued policies and measures on enhancing local government debt arrangement, and
regulated local government financing platform company and local government debt management,
obtaining considerable progress. The moves taken have played a positive role in successfully coping with
the international financial crisis, managing inflation, implementing structural adjustment and advancing
sustainable and healthy economic and social development.



                                                    xi
    After filtering out and screening by the end of 2014, the total balance of local government debt stood
at 15.4 trillion yuan; it’s estimated that by the end of 2015 national local government debt ratio will reach
86%, which matches with what Premier Li Keqiang pointed out in his speech at the 9th Summer Davos
Forum held in September 2015 that Chinese governmental debt “risk is controllable.”

II. Overall systems arrangement for local government debt management

    As the local government debt impacts the overall situation, the Chinese Government has attached
great importance to it. In June 2014, the Central Government deliberated and approved the “Deepening
Reform of Fiscal and Taxation System Overall Scheme,” setting forth the general requirements for
regulating local government debt management. The amended Budget Law deliberated and approved by
the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress (NPC) in August 2014 gave green light to local
governments to borrow at a proper level, while making a systematic arrangement for local government
debt management from the aspects of debt entity, borrowing methods, scope control, budget
management, use of borrowed money, risk control, and accountability. In September 2014, the State
Council published an important document titled “Opinions on Strengthening Management of Local
Government Debt,” further clarifying the overall system arrangement for local government debt
management. Grant permission to local government to raise fund in accordance with law. Provincial- level
government can borrow within the scale approved by the State Council. Prefecture-level and county-level
governments can commission the provincial- level governments to borrow, if necessary, to regulate local
governments’ debt financing behavior. Local governments can issue municipal bonds to remove
government financing function from financing platform company; at the same time, they can actively
promote the cooperation mode between the government and social capital (via public-private partnership
(PPP)) to attract social capitals participating in investment and operation of public welfare undertaking.
To regulate local government debt borrowing procedures and use of fund, local government debt
borrowing must be approved by the local Standing Committee of the People's Congress. Fund raised must
be used for public welfare expenditure. To prevent and defuse local government debt risk, local
government debt must be categorized and included in the management of local government budget. Set
up risk assessment and early warning mechanism, emergency response mechanism and accountability
system. The Opinion clearly marks the beginning of a major new initiative to cap and control the local debt
problem by establishing an unified “borrowing, use and repayment” local government debt management
mechanism, effectively playing a positive role in local government borrowing, and having an impact on
guarding against budgetary financing risk and promoting sustainable and healthy development of
economy.

III. Key measures of regulating local government debt management

    Since this year, the Ministry of Finance has taken the following steps to regulate local government
debt management. Along with relevant departments, it conducted an inventory and screening on total
local government debt by the end of 2014 and reported to the State Council and NPC Standing Committee.
In August 2015, The Standing Committee of China’s National People’s Congress approved a 16 - trillion-
yuan debt for the local governments; and Ministry of Finance timely allocated the approved regional debt
quota. The amount made available via a special bond program has been increased to 600 billion yuan,
which was mainly to finance government-subsidized housing like shanty town revamping, ordinary

                                                     xii
highway projects, and other key areas designated by the State Council. It expanded a local-debt
refinancing quota to 3.2 trillion yuan to lower interest burden. Under this program, China’s local
governments can swap new bonds for high-interest local debt, giving them more breathing room to meet
their obligations and concentrating capital on key project construction.

    At present, China is at the phase of “rapid urbanization” while the conflict of capital demands for local
infrastructure building and local government budget constraint gets more acute; short-term response and
long-term system building must be implemented simultaneously, combining release and block, so as to
establish long-term mechanism of regulated local government debt financing. Next step, the Ministry of
Finance will research and enact related systems and methods of risk assessment & early warning, total
debt incorporated into budget management or other debt management to insure the implementation of
policies.

    Now the Party Central Committee, State Council and Party Group of the Ministry of Finance have put
forth higher demands for local government debt management. Finance and budgetary colleagues have a
long way to go. Therefore, I hope that finance department at various levels should enhance awareness,
shoulder responsibility and press ahead with the implementation of local government debt management
policy in a steady and incremental fashion.

    Under the backdrop of accelerating globalization, interactions among countries has become ever
more frequent; as a result, it is critically important to strengthen exchange and collaboration on the
knowledge and academic field. The Ministry of Finance has a great tradition, that is, they often listen to
experts’ opinion to enhance the scientific and effective nature of financial policy. The main purpose of the
seminar jointly held by the Ministry of Finance and the World Bank is to listen to your insightful opinions.
I hope that experts and attendees presented here will take this opportunity to conduct in-depth discussion
on key theoretic and real-life issues regarding governmental debt, freely exchange ideas, make
suggestions and offer your knowledge and wisdom to advance scientific arrangement of local government
debt.

     In recent years, Human Resources Development Center in synch with the new round of finance and
taxation system reform has been dedicated to co-develop international knowledge communication
platforms with international organizations like the World Bank to serve the core tasks of finance and foster
the development of fiscal cadres. My colleagues at the Human Resources Development Center all hope
to make their own contribution to the frontline area of local government debt management. Through
international cooperation, forge “knowledge base” for China’s finance and taxation system reform, it will
become a “think tank” of top-level policy design and “refueling station” for financial workers to borrow
from global experience and enhance their own overall quality, spur the implementation of key reform at
budget department and related departments, and push forward development of the new round of finance
and taxation system reform. I remember Wei Zheng, the famous Tang Dynasty court official and politician
once said: “The difficult thing is not just to know something, but to do it; the difficult thing is not even to
do something, but to be persistent in doing it”. This reminds us of not only dedication to learning but also
application theory to practice, bold in action; instead of doing things by halves, we should persist to the
end as “greatness shines from start to finish”. The more precious quality of a scholar is his practice instead
of learning. Thus, I hope that all attendees will value this opportunity to draw insights from international

                                                      xiii
experience, and gain new ways of thinking. More importantly, we can apply knowledge learned to future
work, realizing “gain from learning and use from learning.”

    At last, on behalf of organizer of the seminar, I convey my sincere thanks to the World Bank which has
lent time-tested support for China’s reform process, to experts domestic and overseas in attendance, and
to the Department of Finance of Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region that has made meticulous
preparations for this seminar. I wish a great success to “local debt management international seminar.”




                                                   xiv
                                            Introduction

Bert Hofman
Country Director for China, Korea and Mongolia, World Bank

    In the aftermath of the global financial crisis, policymakers around the world are focusing once again
on government debt sustainability. In China, subnational government debt is an important part of total
government debt, and therefore deserves the attention that policymakers have paid to the topic.
Subnational debt has played an important role in financing China’s impressive infrastructure that is the
envy of the world. And subnational debt was instrumental in the economic stimulus that China so
effectively staged after the global financial crisis, through which China maintained high levels of economic
activity. Now that China’s economy has entered a “New Normal” a reassessment of the levels of
Subnational Debt, the mechanisms by which such debt is accumulated and managed, and the
sustainability of subnational debt are being debated in China. It is with this in mind that we were honored
to co-host this joint International Workshop with the Ministry of Finance and the Department of Finance
of Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region on Subnational Debt Management and Restructuring in the
beautiful City of Nanning in the Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region of China.

     Since the onset of Opening Up and Reforms in 1978, fiscal reforms have been an integral part of the
government’s overall reform program. The “Eating from Separate Kitchens” reform of 1980 unleashed the
initiative and enthusiasm of local governments, which drove many of the reforms that resulted in China’s
high growth and poverty alleviation. The Tax Sharing Systems reforms of 1994 allowed central
government to regain macroeconomic control, which was imperative in light of the runaway inflation of
those days. The Budget Law of 1995 defined the role of the budget in a socialist market economy, while
the inclusion of extrabudgetary funds in the budget at the end of the 1990s allowed governments at all
levels to manage their resources in a more comprehensive manner.

    It is no surprise that the reforms of the 3rd plenary session of 18th Central Committee in 2013, which
aim to “let the market play a decisive role in resource allocation” has major implications for fiscal policy
as well. The amendments of the Budget Law approved last year can be seen in the spirit of that reform in
China, and a crucial element of the new budget law is the way subnational government debt is defined
and managed. Undoubtedly, the new Budget Law requires local governments to adjust, to regularize their
use of debt finance, and more clearly distinguish between government and non-government debt.
Although China’s overall subnational debt levels are manageable, for some local governments, the new
budget law and the “New Normal” will also mean adjustment so that their debt remains sustainable and
access to the capital markets to finance future growth is maintained.

    There is rich international experience on how countries have managed their subnational debt and
how subnational fiscal adjustment has been used to maintain sustainable debt levels. The conference
reviewed some of that experience, ranging from States in Brazil and Mexico and India to adjustment in
countries within the Eurozone. Beyond debt management and debt restructuring, the conference
discussed what changes in tax structure, revenue mobilization, expenditure assignment and revenue

                                                    xv
sharing could be used to ensure that subnational debt remains sustainable and subnational governments
can play their role essential in China’s national development.

    This e-book starts with a summary and presentation of the Chinese perspective on this subject of
Subnational Debt in their own words (Session 1). In doing so, this session at the Nanning workshop
provided a good opportunity for foreign experts present there to learn, and the over 200 Chinese officials
from subnational levels of government to exchange views and share their own perspectives during and
after the sessions. Session 2 introduced some international cases which are highly relevant to the current
situation in China. Session 3 brought these international case studies and experts’ perspectives together
to arrive at syntheses that narrowed down key issues which China needs to consider going forward in
subnational debt management and restructuring. The roundtable discussion among international and
Chinese experts on the way forward for China in Session 4 provided an illuminating discussion of this issue.
We hope that this will inform specific policies that will be formulated to help local governments in China
manage their subnational debts. In this way, fund raising by local governments can be ensured and will
continue to play a role in China’s development.

    The international experiences and policy recommendations discussed in the workshop are relevant
for many countries around the world, and I hope that with the publication of this e-book we will be able
to support those countries in making their own policy choices in the context of their specific policy
challenges and circumstances.




                                                    xvi
                                               Agenda
                       World Bank-Ministry of Finance, China Joint Workshop on

    SUBNATIONAL DEBT MANAGEMENT and RESTRUCTURING
             October 22, 2015. Nanning, Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region, P.R. CHINA

9:00 a.m. - 9:30 a.m. Opening Remarks

Moderator: Mr. Chen Xinhua, Deputy Director-General, Budget Department, Ministry of Finance

       Mr. Wu Zhenpeng, Director-General, Human Resources Development Center, Ministry of Finance,
        China
       Mr. Huang Weijing, Director-General, Finance Department of Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous
        Region
       Dr. Bert Hofman, Country Director for China, Korea and Mongolia, World Bank

9:30 a.m. - 10:00 a.m. Session 1: Getting the Context Right

Introductory presentation by Chinese Govt./Researchers on “Current Subnational Debt Situation and
related-Emerging Policy Issues” – (i) Central Government Perspective and (ii) Provincial/local Government
Perspective

Moderator: Mr. Xu Xiang, Deputy Director-General of Human Resources Development Center, Ministry of
Finance, China

       “China’s Subnational Debts: Problems and Suggestions”. Dr. Liu Shangxi, Director of Research
        Institute for Fiscal Science, Ministry of Finance
       “System Characteristics and Reform Logic of China’s Subnational Debts”. Prof. Qiao Baoyun, Dean
        of China Academy of Public Finance and Public Policy, Central University of Finance and
        Economics, USA

10:00 a.m. - 12:45 p.m. Session 2: Looking at the Past through Country Cases

This session will review good practices on Subnational Debt Management: Examples from Selected
Advanced and Emerging Economies. (With special emphasis on Subnational Debt Restructuring and
associated reforms undertaken in selected countries.)

Moderator: Dr. Mathew Verghis, Practice Manager for East Asia and the Pacific, Macroeconomics and
Fiscal Management, Equitable Growth, Finance and Institutions (EFI) Vice-Presidency, World Bank

       North America (USA): “The United States: Regulatory Systems of Subnational Debt and Markets”.
        Dr. Lili Liu, World Bank, Governance Global Practice, EFI Vice-Presidency
       Emerging Markets: “Subnational Debt Management in Brazil and Mexico”. Dr. Fernando Blanco,
        World Bank, Macroeconomics and Fiscal Management Global Practice, EFI Vice-Presidency


                                                   1
10:50 a.m. - 11:05 a.m. Break

       Emerging Markets: “Subnational Debt: The Case of the Russian Federation”. Dr. John Litwack,
        World Bank, Macroeconomics and Fiscal Management Global Practice, EFI Vice-Presidency
       Emerging Markets: “Subnational Debt Restructuring in India”. Ms. Abha Prasad, World Bank,
        Macroeconomics and Fiscal Management Global Practice, EFI Vice-Presidency
       European Union (EU): “Fiscal Rules and Debt Restructuring” (Greece and Ireland). Dr. Christoph T.
        F. Ungerer, World Bank, Macroeconomics and Fiscal Management Global Practice, EFI Vice-
        Presidency

12:45 p.m. - 2:00 p.m. Lunch Break

2:00 p.m. - 3:45 p.m. Session 3: Addressing Subnational Indebtedness Problems – Distilling Lessons
from Country Experiences

This session will provide a synthesis of key lessons that emerge from the selected country experiences on
subnational debt-related regulations, institutions, borrowing framework, capital market linkages,
insolvency regimes, fiscal rules and fiscal risk management.

       “Debt Restructuring, Institutions, and Markets”. Dr. Lili Liu, World Bank, Governance Global
        Practice, EFI Vice-Presidency
       “Lessons for Borrowing Policy and Subnational Risks Management”. Dr. Sudarshan Gooptu, World
        Bank, Macroeconomics and Fiscal Management Global Practice, EFI Vice-Presidency
       “Fiscal Adjustment and Subnational Borrowing Regulations”. Prof. Jorge Martinez-Vazquez,
        Andrew Young School of Policy Studies, Georgia State University, USA

3:45 p.m. - 4:00 p.m. Break

4:00 p.m. - 5:45 p.m. Session 4: Roundtable Discussion on Options and Subnational Reform Priorities
for China - Learning from Cross Country Lessons

Moderator: Dr. Bert Hofman, Country Director for China, Korea and Mongolia, World Bank

       Mr. Qiao Baoyun, Dean of China Academy of Public Finance and Public Policy, Central University
        of Finance and Economics
       Prof. Roy Bahl, Andrew Young School of Policy Studies, Georgia State University, USA
       Prof. Jorge Martinez-Vazquez, Andrew Young School of Policy Studies, Georgia State University,
        USA
       Dr. Satu Kahkonen, Director for Asia and Europe, Macroeconomics and Fiscal Management Global
        Practice, EFI Vice-Presidency, World Bank

5:45 p.m. - 6:00 p.m. Concluding Remarks

       Mr. Chen Xinhua, Deputy Director-General, Budget Department, Ministry of Finance, China
       Dr. Satu Kahkonen, Director for Asia and Europe, Macroeconomics and Fiscal Management Global
        Practice, EFI Vice-Presidency, World Bank


                                                   2
   Mr. Xu Xiang, Deputy Director-General of Human Resources Development Center, Ministry of
    Finance, China




                                           3
                     SECTION I - Getting the Context Right




   “China’s Subnational Debts: Problems and Suggestions”. Dr. Liu Shangxi, Director of Research
                         Institute for Fiscal Science, Ministry of Finance



“System Characteristics and Reform Logic of China’s Subnational Debts”. Prof. Qiao Baoyun, Dean of
  China Academy of Public Finance and Public Policy, Central University of Finance and Economics,
                                               USA




                                              4
                    China’s Subnational Debts: Problems and Suggestions
                                                            Liu Shangxi1



I. Introduction

Overall Situation

    The audit results given by China’s National Audit Office at the end of June 2013 show that subnational
debts comprise of three categories: The debts to be repaid by local governments, the debts guaranteed
by local governments, and the debts that may be relieved by local governments. As shown in Figure 1, the
debt levels verified at the end of June 2013 under these three categories were 10.8 trillion yuan, 2.6 trillion
yuan and 4.3 trillion yuan, respectively. The first category are direct debts of governments, while the
second and third categories are the contingent debts of governments. The direct debts are of a larger
scale than the contingent debts. Among contingent debts, the scale of contingent debts is smaller than
that of (moral) contingent debts.

              Figure 1. The overall scales of three categories of subnational debts (Unit: 100 million yuan)


           120000
                                      108859.17

           100000          96281.67


            80000

            60000
                                                                                                       43393.72
                                                                                            37705.16
            40000
                                                              24871.29 26655.77
            20000


                 0
                 Debts to be Repaid by Governments              Debts Guaranteed by
                                                     Contingent政府负有担保责任               Other Relevant Debts May be
                          政府负有偿还责任                                                           政府承担一定救助责任
                                                     Governments                      Relieved by Governments
                                                             2012年底
                                                     End of 2012            2013年6月底
                                                                     End of June 2013



Situations at different government levels

   Finding of the debt audit results as of the end of June 2013 show that the debts to be repaid by local
governments are mainly at municipal, district and county levels. Municipal level accounts for 44.5%,
county and township levels account for 39.2%, while provincial level only accounts for 16.3%. Table 1.
shows the main situation of debts to be repaid by local governments.




1
    Research Institute for Fiscal Science, Ministry of Finance.

                                                                  5
            Table 1. Debts to be re-paid by local governments as of June 2013 (Unit: 100 million yuan)

                                                                                  Balance of Debt
                                 Structure of Debt                                                     Percentage
                                                                                 (100 million yuan)
                            Debts to be Repaid by Governments                            108859.17       60.85%
         Structure of
                            Contingent Debts Guaranteed by Governments                     26655.77      14.90%
         Government
                            Other Relevant Debts That May be Relieved by
        Responsibilities
                            Governments                                                   43393.72       24.25%
                            Provincial-level government debts                             17780.84       16.33%
                            Municipal-level government debts                              48434.61       44.49%
        Tiered Structure
                            County-level government debts                                  39573.6       36.35%
                            Town/township-level government debts                           3070.12       2.82%
                            Financing Platform Companies                                  40755.54       37.44%
                            Departments and Institutions of Local Government              30913.38       28.40%
                            Institutions with Outlay Subsidies                            17761.87       16.32%
        Main Structure      Wholly State-owned or State Holding Enterprises               11562.54       10.62%
                            Self-sufficient Institutions                                   3462.91       3.18%
                            Public Institutions                                            1240.29       1.14%
                            Other Units                                                    3162.64       2.91%
                            Bank Loans                                                    55252.45       50.76%
                            BT                                                             12146.3       11.16%
                            Trust Financing                                                7620.33       7.00%
       Structure of Fund
                            Issuing Bonds                                                 11658.67       10.71%
            Sources
                            Loans from Other Units and Individuals                         6679.41       6.14%
                            Payable Payments                                                7781.9       7.15%
                            Others                                                         7720.11       7.09%
                            Payable Money                                                   7670.4       7.05%
                            Municipal Construction                                        37935.06       34.85%
                            Transportation Infrastructure Construction                    13943.06       12.81%
                            Land Expropriation and Reserve                                16892.67       15.52%
                            Science and Technology, Culture and Health                     4878.77       4.48%
       Structure of Fund    Construction for Agriculture, Forestry, Water
                                                                                                         3.75%
             Usage          Conservancy                                                    4085.97
                            Ecological Construction and Environmental
                                                                                                         2.96%
                            Protection                                                     3218.89
                            Low-income Housing                                             6851.71       6.29%
                            Industry and Energy                                            1227.07       1.13%
                            Others                                                        12155.57       11.17%
                            Repaid between July and December of 2013                      24949.06       22.92%
                            Repaid in 2014                                                23826.39       21.89%
                            To be Repaid in 2015                                          18577.91       17.07%
      Term Structure
                            To be Repaid in 2016                                          12608.53       11.58%
                            To be Repaid in 2017                                           8477.55       7.79%
                            To be Repaid in 2018 and thereafter                           20419.73       18.76%
                                       Total                                            108859.17        100%

Source: Compiled by Ministry of Finance in accordance with the Audit Results of Nationwide Government Debts (2013 No. 32).




                                                            6
  Figure 2. Composition of provincial-level, municipal-level and county-level subnational debts as of the end of
                                        June 2013 (Unit: 100 million yuan)


    60000


    50000


    40000


    30000


    20000


    10000


         0
              Repayment     Guarantee  Relief    Repayment       Guarantee        Relief       Repayment      Guarantee        Relief
               偿还责任 Responsibility
             Responsibility 担保责任 Responsibility
                                      救助责任 偿还责任 Responsibility 担保责任          救助责任
                                                                Responsibility            偿还责任
                                                                               Responsibility          担保责任
                                                                                              Responsibility        救助责任
                                                                                                             Responsibility Responsibility
                              省级
                              Provincial-level                       市级
                                                                   Municipal-level                          县乡级
                                                                                                    County- and Township-level



Source: Compiled by Ministry of Finance in accordance with the Audit Results of Nationwide Government Debts (2013 No. 32).

Situation of borrowers

    As for borrowers, apart from debts guaranteed by local governments, the debts incurred through
financing platform companies and shall be repaid or relieved by governments are of the largest scale. The
departments and institutions of local governments are the borrowers with the largest scale of guaranteed
debts.

    Figure 3 shows the three categories of debts by borrowers. It shows that subnational debts that are
financing platform companies as well as local government departments and institutions account for
approximately 66% of the total.




                                                                  7
                          Figure 3. Composition of main borrowers of subnational debts as of the end of June 2013
                                                          (Unit: 100 million yuan)

           45000
           40000
           35000
           30000
           25000
           20000
           15000
           10000                                                                                                                                    Repayment
                                                                  Repayment                                 Repayment                              Responsibility
            5000                                                 Responsibility                            Responsibility
                  0Repayment          Guarantee         Relief              Guarantee             Relief                Guarantee        Relief              Guarantee          Relief
                  Responsibility
                       偿还责任 Responsibility
                             担保责任 救助责任              偿还责任
                                           Responsibility     担保责任 救助责任
                                                          Responsibility             偿还责任
                                                                         Responsibility    担保责任 Responsibility
                                                                                         Responsibility 救助责任 偿还责任   担保责任Responsibility
                                                                                                                Responsibility 救助责任
                                                                  Departments and Institutions of           Institutions with Outlay Subsidies            Public Institutions
                                   融资平台公司
                                   Financing Platform                 地方政府部门和机构
                                                                       Local Governments
                                                                                                                  经费补助事业单位                                 公用事业单位
                                       Companies



          Source: Compiled by Ministry of Finance in accordance with the Audit Results of Nationwide Government Debts (2013 No. 32).
         Note: The debts of local government departments and institutions fall within the scope of debts to be repaid and guaranteed by
                                              governments, but not to be relieved by governments.
        Debt-repayment situation

            According to the audit results of 2013, the subnational debts to be repaid in 2015 and thereafter are
        shown in the following table. Overall, the three categories of debts that will mature in 2015 are of the
        largest scale in the coming three years.

             Table 2. Subnational debts that will mature in 2015 and thereafter (Unit: 100 million yuan)

                                      2015                                        2016                                           2017                               2018 and Thereafter
                       Amount              Percentage                Amount             Percentage                Amount               Percentage             Amount                 Percentage

To be Repaid by
                      18577.91                17.06%                12608.53               11.58%                 8477.55                  7.79%             20419.73                    18.76%
 Governments


Guaranteed by
                       3198.42                12.00%                 2606.26               9.78%                   2298.6                  8.62%             11706.75                    43.92%
 Governments


May be Relieved
                       5994.78                13.81%                 4206.51               9.69%                  3519.02                  8.11%             16669.05                    38.41%
by Governments



        Source: Compiled by Ministry of Finance in accordance with the Audit Results of Nationwide Government Debts (2013 No. 32).




                                                                                              8
    The consequences of these subnational debts are opaque risks and associated uncertainties arising
from them. As a result, markets, public opinion, and even the international community are making various
conjectures and predictions on China’s local government debt risks. This has enhanced the uncertainty
and public risk perceptions on the economy, society and even China’s development prospects. If debt is
likened to dynamite, the most terrible thing is not the dynamite itself, but the unclear explosive conditions
of the dynamite, or that the risk is obscured. Under such circumstances, the risk may be either
exaggerated, which will result in panic; or be underestimated, which could result in a crisis of unexpected
proportions. Both exaggeration and underestimation of risk means that the risk is out of control, the result
of which could be the accumulation and spread of risk and unrecoverable losses.

    The opaque risks of subnational debts mainly arise from the following:

            First, there are no regular statistics and release of subnational debt data.
            Second, there are no governmental accounting standards for the confirmation and
             measurement of subnational debts.
            Third, the debt risk management system is incomplete; there lacks an effective management
             system for identifying, analyzing, preparing for and responding to risks. In particular, there
             lack effective early warning and response tools for the management of liquidity risks.
            Fourth, the debt management system is incomplete; the authority over, control of and
             responsibility for risks are not very clear. The authorities and responsibilities between the
             central government and local governments, among local governments at various levels,
             between government and financing platform, and among government-controlled SOEs need
             to be clarified. The system of “risk egalitarianism” remains to exist.
            Fifth, there is no connection between local debt management and budget management. It is
             up to the central government to decide how much local governments can borrow by issuing
             bonds. Generally, the amounts can only be known after the NPC meetings. From the
             distribution of bonds issuance data to the completion of debt issuance, the earliest for the
             process to end will be May. It is not realistic to put existing subnational debts into budget
             management. The objects of budget management are revenue and expenditure flows, while
             the objects of debt management include not only flows but also stock, or the balance of
             debt. What can be put into budget management are the incremental part of debt balance
             and the interests paid during the year. And the contingent debts cannot be put into budget
             management.

II. Relationship between the Reform of Fiscal and Taxation Systems and the Improvement of Local Debt
Financing System

    Fiscal and taxation systems are a comprehensive concept, which include the fiscal relationship
between the central government and local governments (customarily called the “fiscal system”), budget
system and taxation system. Among them, the fiscal system is directly related to the financing of local
debts. Theoretically, a country’s fiscal system includes three key factors: administrative powers, financial
powers and financial resources. And the three corresponding aspects are: division between the
administrative powers of the central government and local governments to form their respective

                                                     9
expenditure responsibilities; division between the financial powers of the central government and local
governments, including taxation power, fee-collecting power and property power; and transfer payments
between governments.

     The financing system of subnational debts is based on the national fiscal system and focused on the
division of administrative powers between the central government and local governments. The specific
contents of the financing system of local debts are the arrangements for the borrowing, usage and
repayment of money among local governments at various levels. Looking from the tiered governance of
a country, China has two governance tiers: national (central) governance and local governance.
Correspondingly, there are also two levels in the fiscal system: One is the country’s fiscal system, defining
the fiscal relationship between the central government and local governments; the other is the local fiscal
system, defining the fiscal relationship among local governments at various levels. It is not difficult to see
that, the local financing system is a part of the local fiscal system, involving the division of administrative
powers among provincial-level, municipal-level, county-level and township-level governments.

    The financing system of local debts needs to be improved from two levels. One is to address what the
central government should do and should not do, so as to clarify what local governments should do and
should not do. These are the premise. The division of revenue on the basis of dividing administrative
powers between the central government and local governments, while the division of expenditure
responsibilities and the design of transfer payment system determine the financing needs of local debts.
The other challenge is to address what the provincial-level, municipal-level, county-level and township-
level governments should do and should not do. Local government is not a general concept. Contrary to
debts of the central government, those of the local governments are distributed at various levels, and so
are their debt-repaying responsibilities.

     In reality, the problems at the above-mentioned two levels have not been well addressed. Under the
overall governance mode where “the central government makes decisions and local governments
implement them”, local governments cannot decide what they should do or should not do, and must
follow the instructions from the central government. If local governments can decide what they should
do, they will generally do things that are favorable to localities. When coping with the international
financial crisis in 2008, the central government requested local governments to take initiatives together,
changing the past practice of the central government taking full responsibility in the 1998 financial crisis.
As a result, local financing platforms and large amounts of debts were created. In China, it is local
governments that drive the urbanization process; and urbanization-related infrastructure construction is
mainly financed by borrowing. It is local governments that make stable growth possible. Under the
circumstance of local fiscal expenditure accounting for 85% of nationwide fiscal expenditure, local
governments are the main player for implementing policies for expanding investment expenditure or
public consumption expenditure. The more central macro regulation relies on local governments, the
more local governments will rely on borrowing.

    Looking from local perspective, there shows a pressure transmission system among the relationship
of provincial-level, municipal-level, county-level and township-level governments. The pressure imposed
by the central government will be transmitted downward level by level. Since provincial-level
governments have more power, they can delegate many things to lower-level governments. Of local

                                                      10
debts, therefore, provincial-level governments account for less proportion than municipal-level and
county-level governments do. But the debt-repaying responsibilities are not symmetric. When the
municipal-level and county-level governments are unable to repay their debts, provincial governments
have the responsibility to repay the said debts. After all, they cannot let grassroots fiscal systems go
bankrupt. When the rural cooperative foundations went bankrupt in 1999, the provincial-level
governments took the responsibility of repaying their debts.

III. Local Government Debt Risk Assessment

     China’s subnational debts are accumulated over many years. Currently, the local government debt
risk is generally controllable. However, some subnational debts pose certain risks. To comprehensively
understand debt situation and risk, the National Audit Office of the People’s Republic of China (NAO)
conducts three special audits of subnational debts. According to the audit report issued on December 30,
2013, by the end of 2012, China’s total local liabilities amounted to 39.43% of GDP, lower than 60% of
public debt-to-GDP ratio, which is often noted as an international limit for debt control. Total debt was
113.41% of government fiscal revenue within the controlled debt ratio proposed by the International
Monetary Fund. It could be concluded that the risk of China’s government debt is controllable generally,
while the risk of government debts mainly lies in the local governments.

    Among subnational debts, municipal and county governments account for around 80%, financing
platform companies and local government departments and institutions make up about 66%, bank loans
and debts in disguised form account for about 82% and municipal construction, transportation, land
resource collection and reserve, science, education, culture and public health, and low-income housing
account for around 70%. The risks are larger in these areas.

    In terms of the growth of subnational debts, after June 2013, the growth of local government debt
slows down. In the first half of 2014, NAO surveyed the debt of 9 provinces and 9 cities between the end
of 2013 and the end of March 2014. The result showed that the growth rate of local government debt
slowed to 3.79%, down seven percentage points than the average growth rate in the first six months of
2013. The debt growth rate slows down2.

    Generally, the risk of local government debt is under control. However, the risk is expanded currently
due to increasing debt repayment pressure, and will in the future as a result of the rapid debt growth in
the past and poor debt management. Also, the risk of local government is further expanded with current
economic slowdown, declining the growth rate of financial income (including land income) and rigid
growth of expenditure.

IV. Countermeasures and Suggestions

Basic Ideas

    After the revised Budget Law was deliberated and adopted in 2014, the establishment of standard
local government debt financing system is orderly promoted in the whole country according to laws. The


2
    NAO: The Growth of Local Government Debts                Slows   with   Risks   under   the   Control:
http://money.163.com/14/0824/17/A4E8JB0300253B0H.html

                                                   11
revised Budget Law limits the rights of local governments to issue debts. Quota is applied to the issuance
of subnational debts. The authority and purpose of local governments are strictly controlled and the
subnational debts are included into the budget management and supervised by the People’s Congress.
The government financing function is separated from the financing platform companies. The liabilities of
government and enterprises shall be separated. It is prohibited from transferring the enterprise’s debts
to the government. The local government debt risk assessment and pre-warning mechanism shall be
established, as well as the emergency response mechanism and accountability system. The central
government adopts a non-aid principle. The institutional framework for the government and social capital
cooperation model has been established and related laws are also in drafting and formulating.

    The following efforts are needed to improve the local debt financing mechanism. We need to
complete the short-term tasks, control currently expanding debt scale and eliminate the threats on
China’s economic development, social stability and macro-management. Also, at the micro-level, we need
to establish and improve debt scale, and risk and efficiency control system. At the macro-level, we need
to make a coordinated reform in the aspects of economy, legal environment and financial system.

    In the short term, we urgently need to establish an accurate, comprehensive and timely local
government debt statistical system, internal reporting system and external disclosure system. We need
to improve local government debt issuance, repayment and management system, suitably expand local
government bond scale, transfer annual quota management to balance management and strengthen the
discretion of local government to issue and manage government bond. We will further regulate and
innovate the local government financing mechanism, and orderly promote the cooperation between
government and social capital. Some government assets will be revitalized through the securitization of
assets. We actively establish the fund system for government capital expenditure (e.g. government guide
fund and industry investment fund).

     In the aspect of medium and long-term, we need to actively play the role of legal regulation, rule
control and market constraint. The boundary of government function and behavior shall be clearly
distinguished. Through the legislation, we will regulate the administrative power, financial power, scope
of revenues and expenditures and expenditure responsibilities of government at all levels. The local
governments will be gradually granted controllable and flexible rights to borrow loans. The local
government debt financing management system will be established jointly supervised by the central
government, local authorities, people and market.

Specific Suggestions

    In line with China’s current situation, to control the local government debt risks, we need to consider
the following two aspects. On the one hand, we need to mitigate local government risks and ensure not
to affect the economic growth. Only economic sustainability could ensure the financial sustainability.
Thus, we need to expand investment and strengthen economic operation capacity so as to ensure to meet
preset economic growth targets through increasing debts in a certain time. On the other hand, we need
to improve government investment efficiency, control the growth rate of government debt and control
financial risk.



                                                    12
Integrate investment and financing, and focus on investment efficiency

    To control risk and ensure financial sustainability is a core issue for investment and financing.
Someone believes that the diversified financing channel is a source of local government debt risk. Actually,
we need to re-examine whether bond financing could eliminate risks. There are always risks, even we
solve the financing channel risks. If we consider financing and investment as a whole, the huge risks for
the local government lie in investment rather than financing. If the investment is poor, risks are still bigger
even borrowing less. If the investment is efficient, the risks could be mitigated even borrowing more.
Previously, many local governments invested in new emerging strategic industries, such as photovoltaic
industry. Such decision sounds alright for the local government. However, this strategy is wrong from the
aspect of the whole country as the local government rushed to launch photovoltaic projects, leading to
the bankruptcy of many photovoltaic enterprises. Therefore, it is important to innovate the investment
mechanism and investment methods. We need to improve investment efficiency and transparency. It is
much more important for regulating government investment behavior than regulating financing.

Attract non-public investors to invest in public sectors by fully using the market-oriented mechanism

     Traditionally, people consider that the investment in public sector shall be borne by the government.
However, public sector investment is still profitable. Now, we promote the PPP model (Public-Private
Partnership), aiming to introduce the social capital into the public service sector. Originated from the UK
in the 1970s, the PPP model has been widely applied in many countries across the world. Through sharing
interests and risks, this model could not only effectively provide public service and mitigate government
debt risks, but also provide stable profits for the social capital. In the long-term, the PPP model exhibits
great potential. Of course, we need to legalize and regulate the PPP model and avoid borrowing loans in
the name of PPP.

In addition, we could use the PPP mechanism to establish the fund cooperation model for the government
and social capital. Thus, we will actively establish the fund financing system for government capital
expenditure (e.g. government guide fund and industry investment fund). We will suitably introduce social
capital, expand the role of financial capital, and establish the new fund management mechanism featured
as the market-oriented management and high

Deepen budget reform and revitalize the financial stock fund

    Now, the problems we face are: on the one hand, the local government debt keeps growing with
increasing risks; on the other hand, the local governments have a large amount of idle funds, which are
mainly caused by fragmented budget and capital. The phenomenon of increasing idle capital while
keeping borrowing is quite common. Thus, we need to solve this issue through budget management
system.

Accelerate government accounting reform and provide a scientific basis for identifying and swapping debt
stock

   The current local government debt stock includes both government and corporate debts, which is
mainly a result of lacking the standard of recognizing government debts. The acceleration of the
government accounting reform is the only solution to solve this problem fundamentally. This is also a basis

                                                      13
to strengthen the foundation of local government debt management and identify the debt stock. In 2015,
the swapping quota of RMB 3 trillion is allocated to help to swap the debt due this year. In the future, we
need to accelerate the government accounting reform and establish the government debt standard to
accurately identify the swapping scale of local government debt stock.

Emphasize pre-warning management of local government debt risk and risk control plan

    On the whole, China’s local government debt risk is controllable. However, debt crisis may occur in
some regions. Thus, we need to pay attention to the pre-warning management and risk identification for
local government debt risks. The regional and systematic risks shall be earnestly prevented.

    Finally, liquidity risk is the main risk to be prevented for the prevention of government debt risks.
Thus, we need to examine related indicators of subnational debts that are due, pressure for repayment
of the principal and interest, re-financing space in the financial market, the establishment of redemption
fund, the financial revenue capacity and imbalance between revenue and expenditure in the current term.
We will design related management and control plan and hold the bottom lines to prevent regional and
systematic crises in China.




                      China's Subnational Debts:
                      Problems and Suggestions

                                                  Research Institute for
                                                  Fiscal Science, Ministry of Finance
                                                  Liu Shangxi




                                                    14
System Characteristics and Reform Logic of China’s Subnational Debts
                                   Qiao Baoyun




                   System Characteristics and
                    Reform Logic of China’s
                       Subnational Debts
                     Central University of Finance and Economics
                  China Academy of Public Finance and Public Policy
                                     Qiao Baoyun




                                         15
        SECTION II - Looking at the Past through Country Experiences




North America (USA) – “The United States: Regulatory Systems of Subnational Debt and Markets”.
            Dr. Lili Liu, World Bank, Governance Global Practice, EFI Vice-Presidency

  Emerging Markets: “Subnational Debt Management in Brazil and Mexico”. Dr. Fernando Blanco,
    World Bank, Macroeconomics and Fiscal Management Global Practice, EFI Vice-Presidency

Emerging Markets: “Subnational Debt: The Case of the Russian Federation”. Dr. John Litwack, World
       Bank, Macroeconomics and Fiscal Management Global Practice, EFI Vice-Presidency

   Emerging Markets: “Subnational Debt Restructuring in India”. Ms. Abha Prasad, World Bank,
         Macroeconomics and Fiscal Management Global Practice, EFI Vice-Presidency

European Union (EU): “Fiscal Rules and Debt Restructuring” (Greece and Ireland). Dr. Christoph T. F.
Ungerer, World Bank, Macroeconomics and Fiscal Management Global Practice, EFI Vice-Presidency




                                              16
The United States: Regulatory Systems of Subnational Debt and Markets
                                                   Lili Liu




              The United States: Regulatory Systems
                 of Subnational Debt and Markets

                                                  Dr. Lili Liu
                           Global Lead, Decentralization and Intergovernmental Finance
                                          Governance Global Practice
                            Equitable Growth, Finance and Institutions Vice-Presidency
                                                 The World Bank
                                                October 22, 2015




For further details see: Canuto, Otaviano; Liu, Lili. 2013. Until Debt Do Us Part: Subnational Debt,
Insolvency, and Markets. Washington, DC: World Bank. © World Bank. License: CC BY 3.0 IGO.
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/12597 Chapters 8, 9 and 14.




                                                     17
                Subnational Debt Management in Brazil and Mexico
                                              Fernando Blanco



                                                  BRAZIL
Subnational Debt Framework

    The fiscal behavior and indebtedness of state and municipal governments in Brazil have traditionally
been a major source of macroeconomic instability in the nineties. Spending obligations derived from the
decentralization fostered by the Constitution of 1988 and a profligate fiscal stance had been a common
characteristic among Brazilian subnational governments through the latter half of the 1990s.
Expansionary fiscal policies and the lack of effective indebtedness controls resulted in frequent
subnational debt crises. This resulted in three debt-refinancing operations (bailouts) by the Federal
Government to state government and 2 bailouts to municipalities between 1989 and 1997.

     The first subnational fiscal crisis and bailout took place in 1989, very soon after approval of the new
Constitution. The Federal Government assumed part of the states’ external debt, which totaled 2 percent
of GDP. It proved insufficient to address the state debt issue. In 1993, the Federal Government financed
another subnational debt bailout, this time refinancing the debt of states and municipalities amounting
to 7.2 percent of GDP, mostly with federal financing agencies. It also assumed some of the liabilities of
the states and municipalities with other financial institutions and contractors. The Federal Government
itself on some occasions restructured part of its liabilities to financial institutions, including international
financial institutions.

    Following the Real Plan of 1994, price stability was achieved at the cost of high domestic interest rates
which increased public sector indebtedness including the subnational one, making Brazil’s
macroeconomic situation vulnerable to external shocks such as the Asian and Russian financial crises in
1997/98. This spurred the Federal Government to make a stronger effort to address the issue of
subnational government indebtedness via a third comprehensive bailout in 1997 for states and in 2001
for municipalities with the National Treasury (STN) simply assuming the bond debt of state governments
and state financial institutions. The terms for the debt restructuring were as follows: repayment period at
30 years, interest rate at 6 percent plus inflation for most states and 7.5 percent plus inflation for a few
states, debt servicing on the refinanced debt, the so-called “intra-limite” debt, was capped at 13 percent
of a state’s net revenues (Receita Liquida Real - RLR), defined as the current revenue, net of transfers to
municipalities and earmarked revenues. Any debt service above the 13 percent cap was deemed residual,
and automatically recapitalized and added to the intra-limite debt stock. The accumulated residual debt
(debt service above the 13% ceiling) at the end of the contracts (in 2028 for states and 2032 for
municipalities) were to be paid off in 10 years.

    Unlike the two previous refinancing operations, the 1997/2001bailout was conditional. Each of the 25
states that had their debt rescheduled needed to sign a debt negotiation contract with STN, agreeing to
comply with a fiscal adjustment and structural reform program. These were specified in three-year rolling


                                                      18
Fiscal Adjustment Programs (Programas de Ajuste Fiscal – PAFs), which set annual targets or limits on
gross indebtedness, primary balances, personnel spending, own tax revenue collection, credit operations,
guarantees, and public investment, in order to assure a gradual decline in indebtedness. An important
objective was to ensure that the gross debt did not exceed net real revenues by 2028. The PAFs also
include structural reforms such as those relating to privatization and public sector modernization
initiatives.

    The controls on subnational fiscal performance were further strengthened by the approval of the
Fiscal Responsibility Law (Lei de Responsabilidade Fiscal – LRF) in 2000. The LRF institutionalized fiscal
discipline at all levels of government, incorporating hard budget constraints into a single unifying
framework. It explicitly prohibits debt refinancing operations between different levels of government,
thereby addressing the moral hazard problem in intergovernmental fiscal relations caused by sequential
bailouts. Complementary Senate resolutions also prohibit borrowing if: (i) the net consolidated debt
exceeds twice net current revenue (RLC – Receita Liquida Corrente); 3 (ii) new credit operations exceed 16
percent of RLC, and (iii) debt service exceeds 11.5 percent of RLC. Borrowing is also prohibited if it violates
the debt reduction schedules set by the debt renegotiation contracts under the Law 9496. Finally,
emission of subnational governments bonds is generally prohibited through 2016; however, states whose
net debt is less than net current revenue can issue bonds after 2011, although even here the Federal
Government retains to the option to review the decision to issue bonds.

    On top of these regulations, supply side constraints were also adopted. Subnational overall ceilings
for credit operations by federal financial institutions and domestic banks were established by a series of
Resolutions by the National Monetary Council (CMN) between 2001 and 2006. This further restrained the
access to credit by subnational governments as the ceilings were very low (around USS2 billion) for the
entire subnational sector.

     Strict observance of debt renegotiation contracts and the LRF have resulted in robust primary
surpluses in the state governments. These surpluses, which represented about 25 percent of the overall
fiscal adjustment effort of the Brazilian public sector, have been key to the improvement of the country’s
macroeconomic conditions. The prudent fiscal stance adopted by both states and municipalities,
combined with improved revenue growth performance, resulted in a significant decline in subnational
indebtedness and a pronounced improvement in subnational indebtedness indicators since 2003. This
system of controls has resulted in a substantial macroeconomic adjustment as evidenced by repeated
state and municipal surpluses—an adjustment that has continued through four federal administrations
and two presidents. After ten years of consolidating macroeconomic credibility, it is useful to assess how
the system has stood up under time and responded to changing domestic and international circumstances
and to consider how it might further be developed. Subnational debt fell from 18 percent of GDP in 2003
to 10 percent of GDP in 2010.


3
  The net real revenue (RLR) is defined as the total revenue less credit operations, asset sales, capital transfers,
transfers to municipalities, FUNDEF contributions, and the social security contributions of civil servants that opt out
of the state system. RLR is smaller than the RLC used in the PAF. Also, the debt contracts cover only the central state
governments while the LRF includes the consolidated state public sector. In the same vein, the debt renegotiation
contracts use gross debt for state indebtedness while the LRF uses the net consolidated debt.

                                                          19
   While a success overall, the controls embodied in the Fiscal Adjustment Programs (PAFs) and Fiscal
Responsibility Law (LRF) have also had the following consequences:

      The cap on debt service payments has led to a large build-up of capitalized interest by some major
       states and municipalities. Some of this debt may not be able to be paid when it comes due in 2028
       and 2032, which could lead to pressures for another bailout. They are already affecting the credit
       risks of some states as well as the Federal Government.

      The debt owed by states and municipalities to the Federal Government accounts for the bulk of
       the National Treasury’s assets and is an asset that the market values below its face value.

      Debt-service payments were heavily front-loaded for states with a low indebtedness level: for
       some of these states, projected payments in 2009 are roughly three times those in 2028, implying
       an uneven distribution of the debt burden. At the same time, the system of controls does not
       allow states to borrow in order to smooth out the tax burden or public investment stream. In
       some years there is no money for investment. In the future years, there will be excess of resources
       for investment.

      States and municipalities have exerted strong pressure on the Federal Government to ease up on
       restrictions via ad hoc measures. In 2010-14 and as part of the countercyclical policies adoped to
       address the global financial crisis, there has been a strong relaxation of the fiscal rules that were
       very costly to the Federal Government and sent the wrong signal on how best to manage
       subnational finances. The risks of political pressures for the adoption of ad hoc opaque measures
       materialized. As a result, without the previous hard budget constraints, subnational governments
       public finances strongly deteriorated and their debts interrupted their declining trend.




                                               MEXICO
Subnational Debt Framework

    Supporting a market approach Mexico’s subnational debt framework was substantially reformed in
2000. This reform have fostered the expansion of a domestic credit market for state and municipalities.
The previous framework was based on the concept of the mandato (mandates) which consisted in the
federal government acting as a trustee in servicing subnational debts that had been collateralized with
the unconditional revenue-sharing transfers known as participaciones. In practice, the mandato was
perceived by the markets as a guarantee by the federal government of subnational debt. This perception
of a very likely federal bailout created two problems: (a) banks had the incentive to provide lending to
subnational governments without assessing the borrower’s repayment capacity since they perceived
them to be risk free; and (b) subnational governments also had the expectation of a bailout since it was
not credible that the federal government would in fact reduce transfers in case of a debt crisis.

   The reforms regarding the new regulatory framework for subnational debt were based on two main
concepts: an explicit no-bail-out commitment by the federal government and a new system aimed at

                                                   20
enabling lenders to correctly assess idiosyncratic subnational risks. These objectives were pursued
through (a) the elimination of the mandatos and the creation of subnational governments’ Master Trust
Funds; (b) establishment of a link between the capital risk weighting of bank loans to subnational
governments and their credit rating; (c) and a requirement to register subnational loans with the Ministry
of Finance, conditional on being current on financial transparency requirements.

    The establishment of the Master Trust Fund (MTF) was a key factor to reduce risks and borrowing
costs. In March 2000, the federal government approved a Master Trust contract that regulated and
established payment procedures for debt issuances guaranteed by tax participations. Each subnational
government would establish its own master trust, adjusted to its specific legal environment. With the
enactment of this regulation and the creation of the master trust instrument, the central government
unveiled the first stage of development for subnational structured financing.

    The States transfer the flow of Participaciones to the master trust through an irrevocable instruction
to the federal treasury, while the municipalities transfer their tax participation flow through an irrevocable
instruction to their state treasury. There is an irrevocable transfer of present and future tax participations,
which facilitates the legal analysis of the securitized debt, as it allows the isolation of the payment source
from the issuer. The legal analysis is crucial to assess the probability that a state government will try to
deviate flows to cover expenses rather than the debt service of the issuances.

    Upon the establishment of the MTF, the legal and financial frameworks for subnational indebtedness
became an important aspect of the borrowing process. Some subnational governments also introduced
reforms in their debt laws and fiscal codes to meet the legal requirements harmonizing budgeting,
financial management, fiscal codes and debt regulations for the three levels.

    Supply side regulations were also strengthened. In August 2004, the National Banking and Securities
Commission (CNBV) introduced changes to the regulations for commercial and development banks on
loans to subnational entities. Loans granted to SNGs with outstanding amounts equivalent to or above
certain threshold had to be provisioned according to the risk level determined by the credit rating assigned
to the SNG by at least one external rating agency. If the SNG was rated by two rating agencies, the lowest
rating is the one considered. The new provisioning rule also took into consideration loans that benefit
from a credit enhancement mechanism provided by credit or financial assets, such as by the pledging of
tax participation revenues. The CNBV risk level was also adjusted depending on the credit, financial, and
legal strength of the structure or the guarantee mechanisms for the loan, and penalized the loan or the
underlying structured transaction by assigning a high risk level if the indebtedness was rated by only one
agency. In October 2011, the provisioning regulations were changed. Loans to SNGs no longer have to be
provisioned according to credit ratings but on the basis of expected losses, which depend on the payment
history of each entity and its present financial situation.

    Still, debt of public sector entities represents a high share of private banks’ assets. Eight out of the ten
larger debtors in the domestic credit market are public sector institutions (6 states and 2 parastatals).
Moreover, there are some banking institutions with loans that are extremely concentrated in the states
and 3 banks with loans to only one entity that are the equivalent of their base capital. It must be noted,



                                                      21
however, that the concentration of loans is by amount and does not consider the credit quality or the
guarantees of the financial structures.

    Credit ratings also reinforced the subnational indebtedness framework based on market discipline.
The use of credit ratings was encouraged by means of penalizing the reserve requirements of nonrated
borrowers, giving SNGs added incentives to keep a record of their finances. By 2010, all states and a
growing number of municipalities had been assigned credit ratings by at least one recognized rating
agency. As a result, SN public finances are subject to growing surveillance and scrutiny by private markets
and rating agencies. Despite this link being modified in 2011, credit ratings are still a factor in determining
the cost of borrowing for SNGs.

    The reforms described above have consolidated a market based approach for subnational lending.
This approach assumes that financial markets exert fiscal discipline deterring excessive indebtedness
through higher interest rates and exclusion from credit markets. For market-based fiscal discipline to
work, adequate information on the borrower’s outstanding debt and repayment capacity should be
available to potential lenders and there should be no perceived chance of a bailout by the central
government.

     One of the main weakness of Mexico’s subnational indebtedness framework is the lack of reliable and
uniform financial information. While Mexico adopted the General Governmental Accounting Law (LGCG)
in 2007, its implementation at the subnational level has been limited. The LGCG establishes general
criteria regarding the public sector accounts and the reporting of financial information of the public
entities with a view of achieving harmonization. The Law also establishes a Council (Consejo Nacional de
Armonización Contable) in charge of issuing the accounting norms and guidelines for the preparation of
financial information to be used by the public entities, including States and municipalities. However, a
large number of state and the majority of municipal governments have not adopted the uniform
accounting methodology for SNGs finances set in the LGCG. The draft bill for SNGs fiscal discipline law
mentioned above establishes requirements on establishing a sole Public Registry on debt which will
strengthen the quality and uniformity of available information on the indebtedness of these governments.
Moreover, compliance with this requirement will be a pre-condition to access federal guarantee on state
debt which is introduced by the draft bill.

Recent Initiatives to Enhance the Subnational Indebtedness Framework

    The possibility of debt restructuring operations conditioned to fiscal adjustment agreements has been
recently incorporated into the overall subnational indebtedness framework. Since 2013, seven state
governments have signed debt-restructuring operations with private banks conditioned to fiscal
adjustment plans agreed with the Ministry of Finance. As the existing indebtedness framework does not
encompass the participation of the federal government in the agreements, public banks participate in
these agreements as an indirect way in which the Ministry of Finance can influence the definition of fiscal
targets to the debt restructuring operations. These agreements seek to strengthen the fiscal position of
the states and reduce debt-restructuring costs.

   As a result of the increased indebtedness in some states, the federal governments has decided to
enhance the existing indebtedness framework by establishing hierarchical controls on subnational fiscal

                                                      22
performance and indebtedness. In February 2015, the National Congress approved a Constitutional
Amendment that was ratified by the majority of states Assemblies and came into effect in May 2015,
which grants authority to the federal level to enact laws regulating the finances and indebtedness of the
subnational governments (SNGs). Prior to the Amendment, the National Congress did not have the
authority to restrict or impose rules on the SNGs on contracting debt as they were sovereign in this
respect. In exchange for relinquishing this sovereignty, the SNGs will have the possibility of obtaining
federal government guarantees on their debt restructuring operations conditional on the acceptance of
their fiscal adjustment plans by the Ministry of Finance. This will provide the legal framework for the
participation of the federal government in the debt restructuring operations mentioned in the paragraph
above. Guidelines on registration of existing obligations have already been issued.

    The main changes introduced by the Amendment are:

       Fiscal responsibility. The amendment grants the authority to the national Congress to enact laws
        on fiscal responsibility and fiscal coordination; define the conditions for federal guarantees on
        debt and restructuring or refinancing operations; regulate the indebtedness of the SNGs, set limits
        and define modalities through which SNGs are permitted to earmark participaciones as collateral
        for financial obligations, require SNGs to register and publish all their loans and obligations in a
        Public Registry, in a timely and transparent basis; define an alert system regarding the debt
        management operations of the SNGs; define the sanctions to be applied to civil servants that do
        not comply with these regulations; establish a bicameral commission to examine the fiscal
        adjustment agreements; and enact laws based on the stability principle.

       Federal Guarantee of SNGs debt. The amendment grants the authority to the National Congress
        to define the conditions for federal guarantees on debt and restructuring or refinancing
        operations.

       Monitoring SNGs debt. The Court of Accounts (Auditorí    a Superior de la Federación – ASF) was
        given the authority to monitor SNGs debt, the federal guarantees on SNGs borrowing and the use
        of these loans, and to audit compliance with federal programs’ objectives.

       Responsibility of civil servants. Establishes responsibility for the civil servants in charge of the
        management of the SNGs’ public resources and debt. This measure will be reinforced by the
        enactment of the Anti-Corruption Law.

       Local legislatures. It adds to the responsibilities of the local legislatures the monitoring of the SNGs
        actions in regards to funds, local resources and public debt.

       Conditions for borrowing. Other than for productive investment, loans may be used for
        refinancing or restructuring of debt, and in the case of the states to provide guarantees on loans
        to municipalities, but never for current expenditure. Borrowing must be effected under best
        market conditions. Local legislatures are required to approve, by two-thirds majority, the ceilings
        for indebtedness, analyzing the purpose of the loans, payment capacity, the guarantee that is
        provided and the source of payment. SNGs may contract loans to cover short-term needs, without
        exceeding the limits and conditions of the Public Debt Law enacted by Congress. Short-term

                                                      23
        obligations must be repaid at least three months before the end of the SNG administration and
        no new obligations may be contracted during this three-month period.

    The next step regarding the fiscal and financial discipline of the SNGs will be the approval and
implementation of a Fiscal Responsibility Law for SNGs. In line with the Constitutional Amendment
enacted in May, a draft Bill on SNGs finances (Ley de Disciplina Financiera de las Entidades Federativas y
los Municipios - LDFEFM) was submitted to Congress in August 2015 and it is expect to be approved in
December 2015 to begin to be applied since 2016.

     The LDFEFM contains rules on: (i) fiscal balances and other indicators, procedural and numerical, and
escape clauses; (ii) budgetary norms; (iii) contracting of debt and other obligations, including short-term
obligations, and on the use of participaciones as collateral for borrowing; (iv) the role of the local
legislatures; (v) conditions on the fiscal adjustment agreements; (v) defining an alert system on debt
management by SNGs; (vi) requirements to register debt and other obligations in a Public Registry; (vii)
sanctions to civil servants that do not comply with the Law; and (viii) conditions to provide federal
government guarantees on borrowing by SNGs.




                                                            Subnational Debt
                                                            Management in Brazil and
                                                            Mexico
                                                                    Fernando Blanco
                                                                    Lead Economist
                                                                    Macroeconomics & Fiscal Management Global Practice
                                                                    Equitable Growth, Finance and Institutions Vice-Presidency
                                                                    The World Bank

       Presentation at Ministry of Finance, P.R.China-World Bank Summit on Subnational Debt Management and Restructuring,
       Nanning, Guangxi Province, P.R. China. October 22, 2015.




                                                               24
                 Subnational Debt: The Case of the Russian Federation
                                                  John Litwack

Background

    The Russian Federation consists of 85 Subjects of the Federation and thousands of municipalities and
districts. The fiscal federalist system in the Russia has evolved considerably since the breakup of the Soviet
Union, although managing and controlling subnational debt continues to be a challenge. In more recent
years, this problem reflects a growing imbalance between subnational revenues and expenditure
obligations in a number of Russian regions.

    There is a very high degree of formal centralization in the determination of subnational revenues and
expenditures in the Russian Federation. Over 85% of revenues at the subnational level consist of revenue
sharing from taxes that are set or tightly regulated by the Federal Government. Similarly, a high share of
expenditures at the subnational level correspond to mandates from Federal legislation or instructions.
However, regional and local governments in Russia have had a significant amount of largely informal fiscal
authority on their territories. The strong regulatory authority of regional administrations has underpinned
various forms of partnerships with firms and economic organizations for the conduct of quasi-fiscal
activities. The informal authority of subnational administrations was particularly strong before 2005.
Decisions in the second half of 2004 that changed the rules for election to Parliament and allowed for the
removal of regional governors by the President fundamentally altered the balance of power from regions
to the center, and particularly to the presidency.

The Russian experience in subnational debt

    The story of subnational debt in the Russian Federation can be divided usefully into three different
periods:

           1991-1998: During the 1990s, Russian regional administrations (Subjects of the Federation) had
            exceptionally large (mostly informal) authority on their territories. They were free to borrow
            under few constraints, and this was formalized in a Budget Law of 1993. Subnational debt in
            Russia accumulated rapidly, followed by the virtual insolvency of a large number of regions during
            the financial crisis of 1998-1999.

            1998-2000: In this difficult period, most Russian regions were severely liquidity constrained,
             with past debt obligations in arrears. In this context, regional budgets became demonetized. By
             1999, the majority of revenues and expenditures in the budgets of most Subjects of the
             Federation were in money surrogates such as barter, bills of exchange (veksels), or tax offsets.

            2000-2008: Until the oil price shock of late 2008, most Russian regions experienced steady
             improvements in their financial situation. Budgets again became monetized, past debts were
             worked out, mostly in a decentralized manner, and subnational debt fell steadily to under 2% of
             GDP. These improvements were facilitated by the stabilization of the macroeconomic situation
             in Russia, higher oil prices, economic growth, and budgetary reforms discussed below.



                                                       25
        2009-2015: Since 2009, Russia has once again faced the challenge of weaker oil prices, as well
         as the recent economic sanctions. Subnational revenues have been much lower than expected,
         reflecting slower growth, while expenditure obligations have been increasing rapidly.
         Subnational debt has steadily increased to 3.4% of GDP, a number of oblasts are experiencing
         serious difficulties, and loans from the Federal Government to Subjects of the Federation to
         relieve financial distress have grown significantly.

    A statistical assessment of subnational debt in Russia in the late 1990s is difficult, as comprehensive
data were not available at the time. A first relatively comprehensive survey was conducted in January,
1999, but limited to 53 Subjects of the Federation. It revealed that the explicit debt these regions had
reached 8.2% of GDP. This does not account for substantial additional expenditure arrears. Thirty five
percent of the explicit debt was delinquent (in arrears). There was no comprehensive bailout at the time
from the Federal Government, which was also in default in light of the crisis. But selective financial
support in the form of federal loans was extended to some regions. Loans from the federal government,
mostly to restructure debts and reduce arrears, reached 17% of subnational debt in these 53 regions.

    The Budget Code was first adopted in 2000, and has subsequently experienced some major revisions
and amendments. The enforcement of the Budget Code and other fiscal reforms proceeded in the context
of political changes that shifted much more power to Presidency and Federal Government. Some of the
most important components of the Budget Code introduced during 2000-2004 include:

        A major effort to better define and delineate assignments of revenues and expenditure
         responsibilities between budgets.

        Strict limits on external borrowing: only regions with credit ratings from at least two major
         agencies at the same level as that for the Federal Government are eligible to borrow externally.

        Limits on domestic borrowing by regions: (a) the stock of debt cannot exceed 100% of annual
         revenues (50% for regions highly dependent on transfers), (b) debt servicing cannot exceed 15%
         of new expenditures. Regions in violation of these conditions cannot issue new debt.

        Comprehensive budget accounting required, including for all subnational debt and guarantees.

        Equalization transfer formula made more stable (to combat soft budget constraints).

        No tax revenues can be received in money surrogates.

        Temporary financial management by higher level of government can be imposed on insolvent
         subnational administrations. This concerns regions with arrears on debt service exceeded 30%
         of own revenues.

    The period of 2000-2008 witnessed steady improvements in the financial situation of most Russian
regions. Higher oil prices and the first significant economic growth in Russia were important factors
behind the recovery, but the provisions of the Budget Code arguably also played a role. Russian regions
worked out or restructured their past debts in a largely decentralized manner, although the Federal



                                                    26
Government gave selective assistance in some cases. By 2008, subnational debt and guarantees in Russia
fell to less than 2% of GDP. Subnational budgets again became monetized.


                               Subnational Debt and Gurantees in
                                            Russia
                                                (Share of GDP)
                4.00

                3.00

                2.00

                1.00

                0.00
                        2006    2007   2008     2009   2010    2011   2012   2013   2014   2015
            +

    As illustrated in the figure above, the oil price shocks of 2009 and 2014 can be associated with new
increases in Russian subnational debt, which reached 3.4% of GDP by 2015. More favorable economic
conditions in 2012-2013 again contributed to a decline in subnational debt as a share of GDP, but debt
has risen at a fast pace in 2014-2015 in the context of the oil price shock, much slower growth (currently
recession), international economic sanctions, and higher expenditure obligations for the regions.
Significantly higher expenditure obligations in the social sphere can be traced to a serious of decrees and
instructions following the 2012 elections that called for greater financial commitments to heath,
education, and other social expenditures. A large share of this burden fell on regional budgets.

     On aggregate, subnational debt as a share of subnational own revenues (net of federal transfers) still
stood at only 34% in early 2015. But this aggregate figure masks huge differences between oblasts. In
early 2015, almost half (40) the Subjects of the Russian Federation reportedly had debts exceeding 60%
of own revenues. Furthermore, ten Subjects of the Federation are reportedly close to the limit specified
in the Budget Code of debt at 100% of own revenues.


                                  Subnational Debt and Guarantees in
                                                Russia
                                              (Share of Own Revenues%)
                   40

                   30

                   20

                   10

                    0
                           2011          2012           2013          2014          2015


                                                       27
    The below figure, which shows the evolution of the composition of Russian subnational debt, is
revealing of the current difficult situation. It shows that the recent growth in debt at the subnational level
in Russia has become increasingly concentrated in commercial bank credit and loans from the Federal
Government. Commercial bank loans are generally short-term and quite costly, implying an unfavorable
trend in the maturity structure and cost of subnational debt. Federal loans are granted largely as financial
assistance to more distressed regions that are struggling with debt servicing. The Federal Government
has also waived counting of federal loans to regions in calculating the debt ratio requirement (100% or
50% of own revenues) until 2017. As of January 1, 2015, bank credit accounted for 46% of subnational
debt, while federal loans accounted for 33%.

                              The Composition of Russian Subnational Debt
             2500.0
                                              (bn rubles)
             2000.0


             1500.0


             1000.0


              500.0


                0.0
                          2006     2007   2008     2009   2010     2011       2012   2013   2014    2015
                      Securities   Bank Credit   Guarantees    Foreign Debt    Credit From Federal Budget


Some lessons from the Russian experience

    The experience in Russia with subnational debt has been unique in some ways, given peculiarities of
the political, institutional, and economic situation during the last 24 years of building a market economy.
Nevertheless, some general lessons can be highlighted that are relevant for other countries as well.

    1) Recent pressures for the accumulation of subnational debt in Russia reflect a growing imbalance
       between subnational revenues and expenditure obligations. General balance between revenues
       and expenditure obligations is key to controlling the build-up of subnational debt.

    2) The threat of insolvency and temporary administration by a higher level of government has lacked
       credibility in Russia. Since Russian regions have little control over their own revenues and
       expenditure obligations, it is difficult to hold them responsible for controlling growth in debt .

    3) Subnational governments in Russia have primary responsibilities for social expenditures during a
       time of slower growth and lower revenues. Maintaining control of subnational debt in a time of
       changing economic circumstances can require fiscal adjustment.



                                                              28
                                                                      John Litwack
                                                                   Lead Economist
                                                                       World Bank


Prepared for P.R. Ministry of Finance-World Bank High-Level Summit on Subnational Debt Management and
Restructuring, October 22, 2015, Nanning, Guangxi Province, P.R. China




                                                 29
                          Subnational Debt Restructuring in India
                                                   Abha Prasad

The buildup of Sub-national Debt

     There have been three major phases in the evolution of fiscal indicators for subnationals in India. The
first episode, pre-1988 was one of sustainable debt and stable fiscal indicators. The second episode, which
lasted from FY2000 through FY2003 and may be deemed “fiscal slippage,” was characterized by high
nominal interest rates, low nominal rates of growth, and a rise in public sector remunerative expenses
following the recommendations of the Fifth Pay Commission in 1998.4 The third episode, which may be
termed “fiscal consolidation,” began in FY2004 after the central government adopted the Fiscal
Responsibility and Budget Management Act (FRBMA) in 2003 and the recommendations of the 12th
Finance Commission (FC) incentivized adoption of similar legislations at the State5 level in 2004.

     The period of fiscal consolidation was enforced with legislative changes introduced at the national
and subnational level. The central government enacted a Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management
Act in 2003 to ensure medium to long term fiscal sustainability of central finances, by imposing limits on
borrowings, debts and deficits. Fiscal consolidation by subnational governments was incentivized
following recommendations of the 12th Finance Commission.6 Recommendations of the 12th FC, for the
period 2005-2010, were released in 2004 and accepted in full by the government, proposed a debt
restructuring plan for the subnational governments wherein the proposed debt relief was explicitly linked
to rules-based legislative reforms. This was landmark in advancing fiscal reforms at the sub-national level
by linking availability of debt relief7 for central loans contingent upon the enactment of rule-based fiscal
responsibility legislations. All states were eligible to obtain relief from the year they enacted fiscal
responsibility legislation. Key features of the 12th FC recommendations include: 8

       Subnationals should be allowed to consolidate and reschedule their outstanding loans to the
        Centre (with a lower-than-market interest rate of 7.5 percent). The scheme was subject to
        enactment of Fiscal Responsibility Legislations (FRLs), which prescribe specific annual fiscal
        targets, elimination of current deficits by 2008-09, reduce fiscal deficits to 3 percent, and setting


4
  FY2000 refers to fiscal year ending March 31, 2001.
5
  States refer to state governments, also used for subnationals here.
6
  As per article 280 of the Indian Constitution, a union finance commission is constituted every five years to make
recommendations on resource transfers between different levels of the government. Revenue sharing is based on a
formula-based approach of the Finance Commission (FC) to allocate taxes and grants, with the objective of filling the
expenditure-revenue gap (deficit financing). The revenue sharing formula is motivated by the concepts of vertical
and horizontal equity: (i) vertical sharing between the centre and States whereby all central taxes and excise duties
are combined in a divisible pool of central taxes; (ii) horizontal sharing among States whereby the FC attempts to
correct the differentials in revenue capacity and cost factors inherent in the diversity of States.
7
  States have been provided debt relief since 2nd FC for loans extended by Centre with a view to aiding their debt
sustainability. These included (i) debt consolidation on common terms and reduction of interest rates, (ii)
rescheduling of loans to elongate repayment without changes in interest rates, (iii) moratorium on interest and
principal repayments for certain period, (iv) debt write-offs and (v) introduction of schemes that linked debt relief
to fiscal performance.
8
  Draws from Rangarajan and Prasad, World Bank (2012).

                                                         30
         up of guarantee redemption funds through earmarked guarantee fees, to meet contingent
         liabilities.

        Subnationals should be allowed to approach the market directly for borrowings. If some fiscally
         weak Subnationals are unable to raise funds, then they could borrow through on-lending from
         the Centre.

Institutional reforms

    To implement 12th FC recommendations, a Debt Consolidation and Relief Facility was introduced in
2005–06, which provided debt relief through consolidation, rescheduling repayments for a fresh term of
20 years, and lowering of interest rate on the debt to 7.5 percent. Fiscal correction was given an impetus
with introduction of a ‘debt swap scheme’ during 2003-04 to lower the existing interest burden and
increase market access. Loans from the Centre (with higher interest rates) were substituted with market
loans and small savings proceeds (at lower rates). In addition, repayments for 2005-10 on central loans
contracted up to March 31, 2004 (after consolidation and rescheduling) were eligible for write-off subject
to reduction in revenue deficits. This was also subject to containment of the fiscal deficit to the 2004–05
level. Further, if the revenue deficit was brought down to zero by 2008 –09, the entire repayments during
2005–10 were written off. In conjunction with state debt relief, the 12th FC also enforced that for future
lending the central government will not act as an intermediary, and states were to approach markets
directly (domestic). For external loans, same terms were passed on directly to states.

Outcomes are encouraging

    Following the adoption of the recommendations of the 12th FC, all Subnationals (except, Sikkim and
West Bengal) enacted their FRLs – which specified targets for deficits and debt ratios over the medium
term, but varied significantly across states in terms of time of enactment, targets for fiscal consolidation,
provisions for contingent liabilities and debt sustainability. Subsequently there was variation in terms of
the states’ fiscal performance.

    Table 1: Change in Subnationals’ fiscal performance between 1998 to 2003 and 2004 to 2009

                                                                  Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Karnataka,
             Improved fiscal performance                          Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Punjab and Uttar
                                                                                  Pradesh

                                                                     Goa, Jharkhand, Kerala, Maharashtra,
            Continued fiscal deterioration
                                                                        Uttarakhand and West Bengal
Source: Rangarajan and Prasad, World Bank (2012). Performance is assessed against the median performance of General
Category States on primary deficit, during the specified time periods.


    The impact from enactment of FRLs has been overall positive, as can be seen by the recent Reserve
Bank of India study on State Finances (Figure 1). The study analyzes a set of fiscal deficit indicators of
Indian states, comparing mean indicators recorded pre-FRL (1992-93) and post FRL (2012-13) period.
Selected findings from this analysis follow below.


                                                           31
        Revenue Deficit: Before FRL, revenue accounts of all 17 non-special category (NSC) states were in
         deficit; special category states had marginal surpluses in the revenue account. After FRLs, 12 of
         the NSC states recorded revenue surpluses, including all low-income states. SC states recorded
         larger surpluses post-FRBM due to large central transfers.

        Gross Fiscal Deficit (GFD): Before FRL, 15 out of 17 NSC states GFD was above 3% of their gross
         state domestic product (GSDP) on average. After FRL, all group A states and 6 out of 7 group C
         states lowered their GFD/GSDP to below 3%.

        Primary Deficit: Group C states recorded highest primary deficit pre-FRL. After FRL, primary
         deficits of all states came down; Group C states recorded primary surpluses.

                        Figure 1. Deficit indicators of states: Mean of pre- and post-FRLs

                                                                             Only for non-special category states:
                                                                             Group ‘A’ constitutes the top five states in
                                                                             terms of their real per capita incomes as in
                                                                             2013-14. It includes Goa, Maharashtra,
                                                                             Haryana, Gujarat and Tamil Nadu.
                                                                             Group ‘B’ constitutes the middle income
                                                                             states viz., Kerala, Punjab, Karnataka, Andhra
                                                                             Pradesh and West Bengal
                                                                             Group ‘C’ includes remaining Rajasthan,
                                                                             Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh,
                                                                             Odisha, Uttar Pradesh and Bihar.
                                                                             ------------------------------------------------------
                                                                             SC = Special Category states: Arunachal
                                                                             Pradesh; Assam; Himachal Pradesh; Jammu
                                                                             and Kashmir; Manipur; Meghalaya; Mizoram;
                                                                             Nagaland; Sikkim; Tripura; Uttarakhand
                                                                             --------------------------------------------------------
Source: Reserve Bank of India, 2015, State Finances: A Study of Budgets of   Pre-FRL period: 1992-93
2014-2015.                                                                   Post FRL period: 2012-13



     One of the outcomes of fiscal responsibility measures adopted in India in early 2000s was the change
in financing patterns with a move towards transparent market-based borrowings compared with the
earlier dependence on loans from the Centre (Figure 2). In 1990-95, the share of subnationals’ market
borrowings in total comprised 15%, while loans from the Centre comprised 47% of total. By 2013-14,
market borrowings comprised 71% of total, while loans from the Centre comprised under 3% of total.




                                                              32
                                       Figure 2. Financing of gross fiscal deficit




Source: Reserve Bank of India, 2015, State Finances: A Study of Budgets of 2014-2015.

     On the Constitutional side, the 13th FC carried forward the momentum to support states toward fiscal
correction and recommended return to the path of fiscal consolidation, following the global financial
crisis. The recent 14th FC continued enforcing fiscal discipline: it recommended states’ ceiling on gross
fiscal (overall) deficit of 3% of GSDP. Following the carrot and stick approach, additional borrowing limit
of 0.25% is given if (i) debt/GSDP ratio is < 25% and/or (ii) interest payments/revenue receipts < 10%. And
this additional borrowing is conditional on the state having ‘zero’ revenue deficit in the year in which
borrowing is fixed and in the preceding year. Further, states were allowed to reset outstanding loans from
the National Small Savings Funds, to a lower interest rate of 9 percent.

Conclusion

   In summary the debt restructuring process in India adopted a two-pronged approach with incentives
and regulation. Debt relief and debt restructuring efforts were given to states as incentives if the state
governments enacted fiscal rules or set in place a credible path towards fiscal consolidation.

     On the debt restructuring side, it was recognized that States’ debt burden could not be alleviated
unless reforms targeted both the: (i) overhang of high cost outstanding debt and (ii) flow of new borrowing
at lower rates. These efforts at debt relief and consolidation were superimposed with the move towards
market-based borrowings at lower interest rates. This had the effect of allowing States to reduce their
dependence on loans from the Centre while moving to meet their financing requirements directly from
market sources at market rates (Figure 2). This brought in the importance of market ‘watch’ and discipline
in the system. It is also important to realize that the states moved gradually to access the market
completely to meet their funding needs; a process almost across 10 years.

     In addition, to ensure sustainability of the process and avoid moral hazard of continued debt relief,
states enacted fiscal responsibility legislations (FRLs) and put in place strong governance arrangements.
Most states passed rules that targeted bringing the revenue or current deficit to zero and ensuring that
all borrowings were taken only to meet capital expenditures. In addition debt was kept within bounds and
caps instituted on issuance of guarantees, along with setting in place guarantee redemption funds.
Evidence is clear that post-FRLs states lowered debts, interest payments and improved repayment


                                                              33
capacity (assessed as interest payments ratio of revenue receipts, Figure 3). This was partly as greater
credibility was built and partly lower global interest rates that enabled states to borrow at cheaper rates.

                        Figure 3. Debt, deficit and interest payments/revenue receipts




Source: Reserve Bank of India, 2015, State Finances: A Study of Budgets of 2014-2015.

    In hindsight, a key lesson for other countries is the importance of incentivizing debt relief with prudent
regulation or conditions that ensure the sustainability of reforms. Debt relief in isolation, without fiscal
consolidation and legislative measures may not result in medium term debt sustainability. Finally, access
to resources through market based mechanisms enables better outcomes than depending on central
loans, on-lending or transfers.




                                        India: Restructuring Subnational Debt


                                                                     Abha Prasad
                                                                     Lead Debt Specialist
                                                                     Macroeconomics and Fiscal Management Global Practice,
                                                                     World Bank Group

        Presentation at the Ministry of Finance, P.R.China-World Bank Summit on Subnational Debt Management and Restructuring,
        Nanning, Guangxi Province, P.R. China, October 22, 2015.




                                                                34
             Fiscal Rules and Debt Restructuring: The EU Experience
                               Country Cases for Ireland and Greece
                                     Christoph T.F. Ungerer and Lili Liu



    This case study outlines a high-level overview of the original European Union (EU) fiscal framework in
the 2000s. It proposes reasons why this framework did not contain the accumulation of fiscal,
macroeconomic and financial imbalances in the European periphery during this period. Using the country
cases of Ireland and Greece, this brief then discusses the economic adjustment programs that were
implemented during the subsequent Eurozone sovereign debt crisis to help affected countries unwind
these imbalances. It discusses possible reasons for why Ireland was able to exit its program after three
years, while the Greek adjustment remains ongoing and is now in its sixth year. The brief concludes with
a short overview of the EU fiscal framework reform since the crisis.

    Based on the EU experience, this brief draws lessons for the effective implementation of a fiscal
framework in a federation of States as well as for the implementation of adjustment programs if members
of the federation find themselves in fiscal difficulties.

Country Context & Initial Regulatory Framework (Slide 2)

    In analogy to a subnational fiscal framework, the EU can be considered as a federation of 28 Member
States (MS). This comparison is particularly applicable to the 19 MS of the Eurozone, which share a
common currency. Nonetheless, relative to typical subnational entities, EU MS retain substantial
sovereignty. For instance, the EU budget is only 1% of EU GDP.

    The EU fiscal framework is rules-based, in that the Maastricht Treaty and subsequent Stability &
Growth Pact (SGP) put in place a system that obliges MS to enter Excessive Deficit Procedures (EDP) and
take corrective actions if their fiscal stance breaches certain target values. Key metrics in this system are
that MS should limit fiscal deficits to less than 3% of GDP and public debt to less than 60% of GDP. MS
budgets are under surveillance by the European Commission (EC). Non-compliance with EDP procedures
can lead to fines. In addition, to limit the liability of individual MS (and aiming to preserve market discipline
on MS borrowing), the EU treaties contain a “no-bail-out” clause.9

Borrowing Discipline and the EU Fiscal Framework in the 2000s (Slide 3)

    During the 2000s, market discipline on MS borrowing was largely absent. Irrespective of fiscal stance
and strength of the economy, countries such as Greece, Ireland and Germany faced largely similar long-
term borrowing rates. This brief highlights three drivers of this breakdown in market discipline. First, the
no-bail-out commitment of EU MS, particularly for Eurozone MS, was perceived as not credible. Second,


9
 “The Union shall not be liable for or assume the commitments of central governments, regional, local or other
public authorities, other bodies governed by public law, or public undertakings of any Member State” (TFEU. Art
125).


                                                       35
loose monetary policy conditions in the 2000s, coupled with a long period of relatively low volatility (the
“Great Moderation”), led investors to insufficiently discriminate between investment opportunities.
Third, EU banks faced undifferentiated risk-weights across MS sovereign bonds – they were not required
to put up significantly more capital against sovereign bond issues of MS with stronger or weaker finances.
In turn, this reduced incentives for banks to differentiate between MS bonds.

     In addition, the SGP rules suffered from implementation issues. First, there were issues in the
reporting of fiscal statistics. This meant that budgetary weaknesses could build up, without resulting in
full corrective action under the SGP. For instance, a new Greek government was forced to revise up the
expected 2009 fiscal deficit from 4% to 12.5% of GDP in October 2009. Second, macroeconomic and
financial imbalances hid underlying fiscal weakness. For example, the Irish banking system built significant
exposure to a local property bubble in the 2000s. As this bubble burst in 2008, the Irish government was
forced to inject capital in domestic banks, driving up public debt. A fiscal framework that focused on
headline fiscal statistics did not adequately capture these spillover risks. Third, breaches of the SGP rules
were insufficiently penalized. For many MS, being under EDP became the norm. A recent IMF study
concludes that “about half of the countries have missed the 60 percent debt ceiling more than half of the
time” between 1999 and 2013.10 The SGP came under particular strain, when its biggest members and
supporters, Germany and France, came under EDP during the mid-2000s. Corrective actions under EDP
were delayed, as MS referred to “exceptional circumstances” clauses in the SGP rules framework and MS
failed to vote on stepping-up EDP actions against non-compliant MS.

The Eurozone Economic Adjustment Programs (Slides 4-9)

     The combination of (i) largely absent market discipline and (ii) weaknesses in the implementation of
EU-wide fiscal rules led to a build-up of substantial macroeconomic, fiscal and financial imbalances in EU
MS over the 2000s. The financial crisis of 2008-2009 then provided a trigger for the unwinding of these
imbalances, as markets re-evaluated the sustainability of MS budgets and economies were shook by the
Great Recession in the US. In the process, several EU MS, including Ireland and Greece, lost market access
to finance their budgets. In response, the IMF, the EC and the ECB stepped in and provided crisis countries
with financial support through economic adjustment programs.

    In absence of an economic adjustment program, countries that lost access to private debt markets in
2009 would have had to resort to drastic and immediate consolidation of their finances and/or default on
existing loan commitments. The Economic Adjustment Programs therefore provided program countries
with temporary financing, allowing for a more gradual and orderly fiscal consolidation process.

    In return for regular disbursement tranches, program countries agreed on a set of policy reforms with
the EC/ECB/IMF, covering fiscal, structural and financial issues. Public debt sustainability and the need for
an outright restructuring of the public debt stock were also considered. These comprehensive economic
reforms aimed at ensuring that program countries would re-emerge from crisis. To negotiate policy



10
  Please see also “Playing by the Rules: Reforming Fiscal Governance in Europe”; Eyraud & Wu (2015); IMF Working
Paper 15/67.

                                                      36
conditionality and monitor program implementation, program countries agreed to regular intensive
“review” missions in their capitals by technical teams of the EC/ECB/IMF.

     Ireland is often seen as a successful example of such an adjustment program, exiting the program
after 3 years. A property and banking crisis in the late 2000s led to government capital injections worth
close to 30% of GDP by mid-2010. Both the direct fiscal impact of banking support as well as the ensuing
macroeconomic recession sharply deteriorated public finances, leading the Irish government to lose
market access. Its international partners responded by putting together a financial assistance program
worth 85bn EUR by end-2010, conditional on a comprehensive banking stress test and financial reform as
well as fiscal consolidation to ensure debt sustainability. Decisive implementation of the program allowed
Ireland to re-access debt markets in 2012 and close the adjustment program after three years.

    In contrast, the Greek adjustment program is currently in its sixth year, with a further extension
agreed in summer 2015. The source of the Greek crisis was an underlying deterioration of Greece’s fiscal
position during the 2000s, partly hidden by insufficient fiscal reporting as well as a macroeconomic boom.
As the full extent of these imbalances came to light in 2009/2010 and Greece lost its ability to place bonds
on the market, the EC/ECB/IMF put together a first financial assistance program in mid-2010 worth 60%
of GDP. In contrast to Ireland however, in the face of a sharp macroeconomic downturn and sluggish
program implementation, the program had to be extended twice in 2012 and in 2015. Furthermore, a
public debt restructuring was deemed necessary in 2012, which included a haircut on private creditors of
53.5%, a debt buy-back and significant rescheduling of interest and amortization payments.11 12

     Despite differences in the speed of progress in Ireland and Greece, overall the programs have borne
fruit. Both countries have executed a sharp improvement in their fiscal stance, there has been some
progress on structural reforms and both countries have exhibited signs of a macroeconomic recovery.
Nonetheless, unemployment remains stubbornly high. Public debt levels remain distressingly large,
notably given spillovers from banking support operations. Following the election of the new Tsipras
government in early-2015 and the negotiations for a 3rd Greek adjustment program, the ensuing
uncertainty and temporary capital controls imposed in Greece are likely to undo some of the recent
macroeconomic gains achieved in that country.

Why has Ireland been able to execute its adjustment program so smoothly, while Greece is now entering
its 3rd economic adjustment program?

    Beyond the fact that Ireland started with a banking crisis and Greece started with an underlying fiscal
imbalance, the nature of the required fiscal effort has been significantly larger in Greece. Ireland was able
to return to the market having (to date) improved its structural balance by 10pp (as % of potential GDP),


11
   For further evaluation of the Irish and Greek programs, please see also “Ireland: Ex Post Evaluation of Exceptional
Access under the 2010 Extended Arrangement”; IMF (2015); Country Report 15/20 as well as “Greece: Ex Post
Evaluation of Exceptional Access under the 2010 Stand-By Arrangement”; IMF (2013); Country Report 13/156.
12
   For further description of the Greek debt restructuring measures in February and December 2012, please see the
relevant passages in “The Second Economic Adjustment Programme for Greece – March 2012”; European
Commission (2012); pp. 47-48 as well as “The Second Economic Adjustment Programme for Greece – First Review
December 2012”; European Commission (2012); pp. 52-55.

                                                         37
while Greece has improved its structural balance by 20pp and yet its finances remain in doubt. Equally,
the nature of the Greek economy implies that a given budgetary consolidation effort is likely to have a
larger impact on the economy – the so-called fiscal multiplier is estimated to be larger. The Greek
economy is one of the most closed in Europe, while Ireland exports more than 100% of GDP. Because the
Irish economy is therefore much less dependent on domestic demand, fiscal consolidation is likely to come
at a proportionally smaller cost to economic activity. Equally, the Irish economy is characterized by a
relatively high degree of flexibility- as suggested for example by its 13th place ranking in the World Bank
Doing 2015 Business Report. As such, labor and capital dislocated through fiscal policy changes can re-
allocate faster to new business areas.13

    At the same time, Ireland has benefited from decisive implementation of the program, significantly
lower policy uncertainty and a high degree of ownership over the reform program. While the financing
envelope for Greece and policy conditionality were so far twice substantially renegotiated (in a 2nd
program in 2012 and a 3rd program in 2015), Ireland executed its original economic adjustment program
and then exited the program within the agreed timeframe. This relative stability of the macroeconomic
and policy framework, in turn, allowed Ireland to run banking stress tests and recapitalize the banks
upfront when its program started, while changing circumstances delayed the Greek banking sector
recapitalization to two years after the start of the Greek program - dragging on uncertainty about the
health of the domestic financial sector. The greater stability of Irish governments in this period also
promoted determined program implementation. Overall, the smoother implementation of the Irish
program may explain in part why the Irish documentation on policy conditionality agreed with the IMF
has been substantially more concise than its Greek counterpart.

Since the Crisis: Reform of the EU Fiscal Framework (Slide 10)

   As the EU is still resolving the current sovereign debt crisis, an effort is under way to strengthen the
medium-term EU fiscal framework and to prevent a repetition of the current crisis.

    First, a range of measures strengthen ex-ante fiscal rules. These include a more explicit system of fines
if MS remain under EDP. Recognizing the fact that macroeconomic booms and financial bubbles can hide
underlying fiscal weaknesses, greater emphasis is put on achieving a sustainable structural balance as
medium-term objective (MTO). An explicit Macroeconomic Imbalances Procedure (MIP) is added beside
the existing EDP framework and fiscal monitoring is performed in the context of a more general review of
national MS policies (the “European Semester”). Budgetary medium-term frameworks and projections
need to be reviewed by an independent domestic watchdog agency (a fiscal council).14




13
   For further discussion on the size of fiscal multipliers and how they depend on circumstances, see for example “A
Simple Method to Compute Fiscal Multipliers”; Batini, Eyraud, and Weber (2014), IMF Working Paper WP 14/93 .
14
   For further information, please see also “The EU’s economic governance explained”; European Commission
(2014); Fact Sheet MEMO/14/2180 and “Economic Governance Review”; European Commission (2014); COM (2014)
905.


                                                        38
    Second, the reform introduces a formal mechanism to deal with fiscal crisis in an MS. The European
Stability Mechanism (ESM) is permanently established to provide financial support if MS lose market
access.

    Third, recognizing the international nature of especially Eurozone banking, the new framework
introduces a banking union reform. All Eurozone banks will follow regulation under the “single rule book”.
The largest Eurozone banks will be regulated by a Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM). In case bank
resolution is needed, a Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM) will come into operation.15

Final Thoughts (Slide 11)

   To summarize, the recent experience in the EU suggests several lessons for the application of a rules-
based fiscal framework in a federation of states:

     1. Think beyond fiscal headlines: macroeconomic and financial imbalances can quickly spill over and
        drag down public finances. Risks to the budget need to be assessed taking a holistic perspective.
        Tackling macroeconomic and financial imbalances early on, before they build up, can help solidify
        public finances in the long-run.

     2. Fiscal rules are only as good as the underlying statistics: investing in monitoring standards
        upfront helps ensure that fiscal rules can effectively enforce budget constraints.

     3. Fiscal rules must “bite”: fiscal rules must be enforced. If violation becomes the norm, rules lose
        their social stigma and the fiscal rules lose meaning. A clear and credible menu of penalties must
        be in place to deal with deviations.

     Further lessons stem from the EU experience with economic adjustment programs:

     1. Develop a credible upfront adjustment plan: the federation needs to jointly agree on a credible
        resolution plan once one of its members is in crisis (involving potentially short-term financial
        support, comprehensive measures to close budget holes and debt restructuring).16 This ensures
        that the economy does not “freeze up”, as businesses and consumers await the resolution of
        policy uncertainty.

     2. Ensure that the government has ownership and take into account implementation capacity:
        swift and effective implementation of the adjustment program depends on ownership and
        capacity of the government in crisis. Without these two ingredients, programs are likely to get
        bogged down and extended – increasing the overall cost of the necessary adjustment.

     3. Build a firewall to protect other members of the federation: crisis and adjustment programs will
        stoke fears about the budgetary situation of other members of the federation, potentially


15
  Please see also: “Banking Union”; European Commission (2014); MEMO/14/294.
16
  For consistency, this adjustment plan needs to properly account for the fiscal multiplier, the macroeconomic
impact of fiscal consolidation. The IMF argues that these were systematically underestimated in the initial design of
the Eurozone economic adjustment programs. Please see “Growth Forecast Errors and Fiscal Multipliers”; Blanchard
& Leigh (2013); IMF Working Paper.

                                                         39
       affecting their credit market access. Measures to contain the crisis, for example a federation-level
       financing agency that pledges to intervene if needed, can help stabilize the situation.

References

Batini, Eyraud, and Weber (2014); “A Simple Method to Compute Fiscal Multipliers”; IMF Working Paper
    WP 14/93.
Blanchard & Leigh (2013); “Growth Forecast Errors and Fiscal Multipliers”; IMF Working Paper.
Eyraud & Wu (2015); “Playing by the Rules: Reforming Fiscal Governance in Europe”; IMF Working Paper
    15/67.
European Commission (2012); “The Second Economic Adjustment Programme for Greece – March 2012”;
    pp. 47-48.
European Commission (2012); “The Second Economic Adjustment Programme for Greece – First Review
    December 2012”; pp. 52-55.
European Commission (2014); “The EU’s economic governance explained”; Fact Sheet MEMO/14/2180
European Commission (2014); “Economic Governance Review”; COM (2014) 905.
European Commission (2014); “Banking Union”; MEMO/14/294.
IMF (2013); “Greece: Ex Post Evaluation of Exceptional Access under the 2010 Stand-By Arrangement”;
   Country Report 13/156.
IMF (2015); “Ireland: Ex Post Evaluation of Exceptional Access under the 2010 Extended Arrangement”;
   Country Report 15/20.
World Bank (2014); “Doing Business: Going Beyond Efficiency”; World Bank Report.




                                                   40
      Fiscal Rules and Debt Restructuring
        The European Union Experience
                     Country Cases for Ireland and Greece

Dr Christoph Ungerer & Dr Lili Liu
Macroeconomics & Fiscal Management (MFM) Global Practice,
Governance Global Practice,
Equitable Growth, Finance and Institutions (EFI) Vice-Presidency




                                              41
SECTION III - Addressing Subnational Indebtedness Problems – Distilling
                   Lessons from Country Experiences


 “Priorities in the Short and Medium-term for China’s Subnational Government Debt: Good Practices
  and Options”. Prof. Roy Bahl, Regents Professor of Economics and Dean, Emeritus, Andrew Young
                          School of Policy Studies, Georgia State University, USA

 “Debt Restructuring, Institutions, and Markets”. Dr. Lili Liu, World Bank, Governance Global Practice,
                                         EFI Vice-Presidency

  “Lessons for Borrowing Policy and Subnational Risks Management”. Dr. Sudarshan Gooptu and Dr.
     Karlis Smits, World Bank, Macroeconomics and Fiscal Management Global Practice, EFI Vice-
                                            Presidency

 “Fiscal Adjustment and Subnational Borrowing Regulations”. Prof. Jorge Martinez-Vazquez, Andrew
                    Young School of Policy Studies, Georgia State University, USA




                                                42
      Priorities in the Short and Medium-term for China’s Subnational
               Government Debt: Good Practices and Options
                                                 Roy Bahl17

INTRODUCTION

     Subnational government debt policy in China has been ad hoc and reactive to infrastructure needs
and economic development incentives. Until 2014, provincial and local governments had little or no
formal borrowing powers, but used a variety of “backdoor” approaches to finance infrastructure.
However with the issuance of the new budget law in 2014, the government has taken the first steps
toward rationalizing the use of debt finance by subnational governments. So far, however, the effort has
been more focused on making provision for addressing the management of obligations incurred in the
last decade than on putting in place the right set of institutions, incentives and controls for a sustainable
framework.

    In this paper, I address the issue of how China gets from where it is now to a sustainable framework
for subnational government borrowing. The next subjects to take up, I think, are the reasons why the
present efforts should be focused on a transition program. A debt framework that can be sustainable in
the long run will need to wait on structural and management reforms in four areas: (a) developing a
strategy for controlling provincial and local government borrowing, (b) modernizing the approach to local
government finance and to defining and enforcing hard budget constraints at the subnational government
level, (c) establishing a more balanced approach to central and subnational government finances, and (d)
identifying repayment options for subnational government debt.

WHY A TRANSITION PROGRAM IS NEEDED

     The program of debt financing that China builds now will be a transition to a more permanent
framework, and it will likely be in place for a number of years while important structural and management
reforms are put in place to support effective subnational government borrowing. But infrastructure
financing will not wait, hence the need for an interim regime. The transition program, which necessarily
will emphasize direct controls, may be very different from the eventual permanent framework, which
might rely more heavily on a combination of local discretion, market signals, incentives, and fiscal rules.
Several factors make the transition approach necessary and advisable.

Changing Economic Conditions

    The growth rate in the Chinese economy is projected to decline to about 6 percent by 2020 (World
Bank and Development Research Center, 2014, pp81-126). Even though this is a healthy economic growth
by world standards, it will not generate the fiscal surpluses that were seen in the past two decades.

    Expenditure management in this setting will present challenges. One particularly important issue is
that an aging population will put pressure on pension and health outlays. The share of population aged


17
  Regents Professor of Economics and Dean, Emeritus, Andrew Young School of Policy Studies, Georgia State
University. This was a background paper prepared for the Summit.

                                                     43
60 years and over will rise quickly in coming decades, from around 12 percent in 2010 to almost 25 percent
by 2030 and to more than 33 percent by 2050. This will not only place greater strain on family support
networks but also will challenge social programs, pensions, and, in particular, health care (World Bank
and Development Research Center, 2014, pp263-358).

    Expenditure claims such as this together with the expected lower level of revenues means that the
nominal growth in some expenditure programs of central and subnational governments will need to be
slowed, or new discretionary increases in revenues will need to be implemented. The implications are that
increased pressure will be placed on local government revenues, and the residual available to finance new
borrowing will be limited.

     Governments tend to be especially wary of economic policies that might discourage new investments
and reduce economic growth in times when there are concerns about the performance of the economy
and about job growth. If a new initiative is proposed, such as further separation of the roles of
government and the private sector or reductions in tax incentives, there may be significant pushback or
postponement of the new initiatives. This has already happened in the case of the State Council
recommendations for halting local tax and subsidy programs for private enterprises. Improvements in
the transparency of the budget, and measures to tighten the hard budget constraint, will be much more
difficult in a time of concern about slow economic and job growth.

Infrastructure Demands

    Slow economic growth or not, the demand for new infrastructure and for the renewal of existing
infrastructure will be significant. Infrastructure demand will come from a number of fronts. Continued
in-migration from rural areas will bring some pressure on capital finances. If the growth rate in real wages
increases and the hoped-for growth in middle class consumption comes to pass, the composition of public
services demanded could be pushed in the direction of better social services, a better natural
environment, and better amenities. Changes in expenditure demand also could come from the business
sector because of a shift away from manufacturing and toward a growth in the service sector. Pressures
on the government expenditure budgets also will come from a need to address backlogs of unmet
expenditure needs, debt and pension fund payments, and congestion and pollution problems. Other costs
to be addressed include the maintenance costs of the increased public capital stock that has been built
over the past decade and the higher cost associated with the urban sprawl that has come to characterize
many Chinese metropolitan areas (World Bank and Development Research Center, 2014, pp 127-186).

    Some infrastructure investment might be delayed, but it will not be halted. A framework for
borrowing by subnational governments will be required during the transition period.

Cleaning up the Debt Backlog

      The estimated debt of subnational governments at the end of 2014 was about RMB 24 trillion (US$3.7
trillion), equivalent to about 38 percent of GDP. Presently, the government is focused on refinancing
maturing debt to relieve the burden on current expenditure budgets. The program allows provincial and
local governments to swap RMB 1 trillion in high interest and short maturity debt for lower interest and



                                                    44
longer maturity bonds. This could free up resources to support additional government borrowing or to
address current expenditure needs.

Oversight

    The transition plan will almost certainly emphasize direct controls on borrowing by subnational
governments, as the State Council laid down in 2014. One should expect the central government to play
a more direct role in determining which subnational governments can borrow, how much they can
borrow, and for what purposes they can borrow.

     Until the role of the financing platforms is fully spelled out this will likely be regulated by the central
government. The new budget law and the State Council Regulations of 2014 would seem to have called
for the elimination of some elements of this practice, but the phase-out will take some time.

    The implementation of the full transition version of a debt framework will come well before the
decisions about any new intergovernmental financing reforms, because the latter will involve major
changes that will require time for design and implementation. Therefore, the transition framework will
need to stay within the constraints of the present system and the new regulations given by the State
Council. The central government will decide who can borrow and who cannot, and repayment of the debt
will be from a “surplus” of unconditional grants and shared taxes over current expenditures and
repayment of existing debt and pension/health fund obligations.

Building a Debt Management Capability

    There is much to be done in putting together an administrative architecture that will manage the debt
framework. The administration of a permanent framework that monitors the performance of subnational
governments and the adherence to fiscal rules will be more complicated than a model that depends on
direct controls. Development of the management capability to support a permanent framework is not
presently in place and will take time to develop.

    At the subnational government level, debt management will also require a management
infrastructure. The new budget reform will help because it mandates more transparency in all four local
budgets. But matters will be complicated by the absence of a capital budget and less than complete
transparency in the government fund budget. Efficient fiscal planning will be enhanced by the use of
medium term fiscal planning networks.

    At the central (and/or provincial) level, a capability will need to be established to measure and
compare the creditworthiness of subnational governments. Usually, “creditworthiness” has to do with
assessing the ability of the local government to repay its debts fully and in a timely fashion. Governments
are then ranked according to the ease with which they can meet this test, and are rated. The central
government, or an independent rating agency, will need to do this assessment. If it is the central
government, it will be necessary for it to set standards for creditworthiness, and to develop and update a
data base for all subnational governments.




                                                      45
MARKETS, FISCAL RULES AND DIRECT CONTROLS

     Ultimately, China will need to decide on a balance between direct control of debt issuance (approvals
on a case by case basis), fiscal rules that govern access to debt markets, and market discipline. However,
even before it gets to the point of making that decision, the government must address several issues
concerning the intergovernmental fiscal structure: (a) how to deal with the incompatibility of the present
vertical imbalance in the system with the evaluation of debt repayment potential, (b) how to establish
fiscal rules under the present intergovernmental fiscal system, (c) how to design and enforce incentives
for fiscal discipline, and (d) how to reconcile the inherent conflict between eligibility to borrow and
equalization.

    Most of these issues are not yet addressed, and likely will not be in the very near future. The
enactment of a new borrowing regime will likely go forward under the present intergovernmental public
financing system.

Vertical Fiscal Balance

    The Chinese intergovernmental fiscal system is unbalanced. Most of the spending responsibility lies
with the subnational governments, and therefore much of the demand for capital financing will lie with
subnational governments. But almost all power to raise revenues lies with the central government. The
exception is land lease revenues. In effect, the subnational governments have no capacity to repay debt
other than that capacity given to them by the central government in the form or grants and shared taxes.

Administrative Controls, Fiscal Rules and Incentives

     Any debt framework established for the transition period will almost certainly be characterized by
direct administrative controls, and some fiscal rules, but how will these controls and rules be established?
A first question to be raised is how debt will be rationed across and within provinces. If the criteria is
revenue strength and the probability of meeting all debt service payments, then some lower income
provincial and local governments will likely be excluded. But even this will be a difficult assessment to
make because the only recurrent revenue source for subnational governments is intergovernmental
transfers. At least for the interim period, the recourse will be to measure a fiscal surplus between “non -
controllable” expenditure requirements and entitlement revenues from shared taxes. This will not be an
easy calculation to make or to monitor.

    Fiscal rules could be used and fiscal indicators could be compared to assess ability to repay debt. For
example, a “green light” community for new borrowing would be one whose debt burden is not high, who
has fiscal resources that are high relative to expenditure needs, and whose economy is not vulnerable to
cyclical swings and is not experiencing slow growth. Some measures of the quality of management of the
local government might be added, based on their present practices.

    There are many questions to be answered about how to make the fiscal rules. For example, which
sources of subnational government revenue should be used to make such a calculation? At present, the
revenues available to subnational governments are shared tax entitlements and unconditional grants,
earmarked grants, dedicated national taxes, and land leases. Of these, land leases are questionable as
collateral for lending, and dedicated national taxes (e.g., the business tax) are vulnerable to central

                                                    46
government policy decisions. Earmarked grants are not available for repayment of general debt. This
leaves only shared taxes and unconditional grants available as sources to cover debt repayment. A fiscal
rule for the transition program might define a threshold for borrowing as the controllable portion of these
resources as a percent of GDP.

Rewards, Incentives and Penalties

    Debt policy could also include rewards, incentives and disincentives to induce more responsible fiscal
behavior by subnational governments. The following might be considered, some for the transition period
but others for the permanent program.

       The fiscal rules could provide for increased borrowing in the event of increased revenue
        mobilization. If viewed in the traditional way, this would involve local governments increasing
        their tax rates or broadening their tax base to increase revenue mobilization. Subnational
        governments in China have no power to set the tax rates. However, Chinese local governments
        can expand the tax base, in two ways. First, they can use discretionary powers such as giving fiscal
        incentives to attract industry and thereby expand the tax base. Second, the tax bureaus in the
        provinces can follow the 2014 mandate of the State Council and collect full rather than partial
        liabilities and thereby increase total revenues.

       Beyond the transition period, subnational governments could be given rate setting powers and
        could increase tax revenues as a local option. This would become part of the debt framework for
        the long run, and revenue effort relative to expenditure needs could become the basis of an
        important fiscal rule.

    There also could be disincentives built into the debt framework.

       Borrowing by subnational governments could be restricted to government services, and could
        exclude any private sector activities. This might limit the demand for new borrowing.

       Punitive measures could be put in place for subnational governments that defaulted on debt
        repayments. These might include an intercept of intergovernmental transfers, or replacement of
        lead provincial and local government officials. Fiscal discipline could be built into the regular
        evaluation of local government lenders.

       Borrowing windows would be closed to subnational governments that did not meet the tests laid
        down in the fiscal rules.

       Governments that did not meet certain tests of good fiscal management – timely approval of the
        budget, transparency of good budget reporting, separation of government from private sector
        activities – would not be given access to credit markets.

Creditworthiness and Equalization

   Both the transition and the permanent framework will need to make provision for the problem of
subnational governments with limited fiscal capacity. The creditworthiness approach will give borrowing
power to subnational governments that can show stronger repayment potential and less risk of default.

                                                    47
But this approach often will rule out places with a weaker needs-resources balance, and will be
inconsistent with equalization policy.

    How might this problem be addressed under the longer run framework? There are several ways.

       Substitution of grant for loan financing,

       Subsidize part of the repayment burden of the loan,

       Build more equalization into the intergovernmental transfer system,

       Reassign the responsibilities for some pro-poor expenditure programs to higher levels of
        government.

HARD BUDGET CONSTRAINTS AND FISCAL MODERNIZATION

     China has recognized that its intergovernmental fiscal system has important weaknesses and that
some reforms in the structure are necessary (Lou, 2013; Bahl, Goh and Qiao, 2014; Bahl, Goh and Qiao,
forthcoming). Many of these needed reforms have to do with cleaning up the concept of a hard budget
constraint, as applied in China. Three issues of particular importance are: (a) the right place for land leases
in the financing structure, (b) the limited revenue discretion of local governments, and (c) the need for
modernization of the subnational government fiscal structure and management.

Land Leasing as a Revenue Source

     In theory, the sale of locally owned assets can be a source of financing for capital projects. Turning
an asset that generates little current return into a part of the public infrastructure that generates a long
term flow of benefits for the population can be good policy. China managed to use land leases to finance
a significant amount of public infrastructure to accommodate a huge in migration of rural population.

     The problem with the sale of land leases to finance new infrastructure was not with the selling of a
government-owned asset, but with the regime that went with this. It included (a) confiscation of land
from farmers, (b) investment in some infrastructure that benefitted private sector enterprises, (c) the lack
of transparency and uncertain liabilities, (d) ignoring the risk of sustainability if land values fell, (e) poor
project selection, and (f) the accumulation of unnecessary amounts of land reserves.

    What to do in a new borrowing framework, either during a transition or in a sustainable borrowing
framework? Land leases could be collateral for revenue bonds in financing a public project, or they could
be part of the repayment guarantee for a general obligation bond (i.e., they could be part of the dedicated
revenue stream). But, as has been learned in the past two years, the demand for land leases can be
volatile and revenues can fluctuate widely.

Local Government Revenue Discretion

    In a sustainable borrowing framework, as might be found in some industrial countries, subnational
governments have the discretion to raise taxes. If expenditure needs rose to a level to challenge the
possibility to repay loans, the tax rate could be increased. In this way the subnational government would
be able to balance the budget and cover the fixed obligations. But under the present regime in China, local

                                                      48
governments do not have a formal discretion to increase taxes. They may, and have, used backdoor
approaches to generate a flow of revenues to finance capital projects, e.g., extra budgetary revenues,
UDIC financing platforms, tax collections that do not match tax liabilities, are examples. But all of these
have proved to be non-sustainable.

    Even the intergovernmental transfers that support subnational government budgets have not proven
to be sustainable. The income tax revenue shares have been reduced, and more recently the business tax
and the agricultural tax have been abolished.

Liberalizing the Intergovernmental Fiscal System

    In the fall of 2014, China’s top leaders presented a program for fiscal reform of the nation’s tax system,
budgeting practices and center-local fiscal relations. The broad proposals are impressive, and a timetable
has been set to modernize the fiscal system. The Minister of Finance has said that the major reform tasks
concerning the fiscal and tax system will be completed by 2016, and a modern system will be fully
developed by 2020.

     On August 31th of 2014, China's legislature adopted a revision to the Budget Law. This is the first
time the Budget Law has been revised since it took effect in 1995. The old Budget Law was adopted when
China was more strongly influenced by planned economy concepts, leaving a great deal of room for
interpretation by governments. The amendments to the Budget Law are closely interrelated with China's
fiscal reform. It took an unusually long time to revise it—seven years to draft a bill for the first reading in
2011 and four readings to get it passed. Subsequently in September of 2014, the State Council followed
suit with directives on deepening the reform of budget and debt management.

    Among the key areas for reform are to improve legislation, clarify powers and responsibilities,
restructure the tax system, stabilize tax burdens, produce transparent budgets, increase efficiency, and
establish a modern fiscal system for both the central and local governments. In order to achieve these
goals, the CCCPC proposes three major fiscal reform measures: improvement of the budget management
system, improvement of the tax system, and establishment of a system of matching between
administrative authority and expenditure responsibility. All are important to developing a sustainable
framework for subnational government borrowing.

     Improve the budget management system. A completely standardized, open and transparent budget
system will be adopted. The focus of budget review will be extended from fiscal balance and deficit size
to expenditure budget analysis and fiscal policies. Most major expenditures that are presently indexed to
increases in financial revenues or GDP will be delinked. This will allow a significant increase in budget
flexibility. China also will establish a multi-year budget balance mechanism, a comprehensive government
financial reporting system on an accrual basis, and a standardized and reasonable debt management and
early warning risk mechanism for both central and local governments. The plan also includes integrating
and regulating special transfer payments, and gradually cancelling funds that flow from local governments
to the competitive sector.

    Improve the taxation system. Reforms in the tax structure will be implemented, and there will be a
gradual increase in the proportion of direct taxes. The ongoing reform of the VAT will continue with the

                                                      49
folding-in of the business tax, and the tax rate structure will be simplified. The structure of consumption
taxes will be upgraded and will be imposed on products that consume too much energy and cause serious
pollution as well as some high-end consumer goods. Other elements of the tax reform plan include
establishing an individual income tax system in which taxable income is defined in both comprehensive
and categorized ways, passing new real estate tax legislation and implementing this in a timely manner,
accelerating the resource tax reform, and changing the current environmental protection fee into an
environmental tax.

     In line with the principles of unifying the tax system, promoting equality in tax burdens and fair
competition in the private market sector, the management of preferential tax policies, especially regional
preferential tax policies, will be rationalized. Legislation regarding the use of preferential tax treatments
will be made clear and regulations will be issued. This will enable determination of which preferential
policies can be continued and which cannot. In addition, the collection and management system for
provincial and local government taxes will be upgraded.

    Comments on CCCPC decision by Minister Lou. 18 Finance Minister Lou Jiwei commented on these
CCCPC decisions by pointing out that the budget management system reform, is the foundation and should
be the first step taken in the reform. The reform of revenue distribution should be implemented after the
substantial completion of tax system reform. Meanwhile, building a better system of matching between
administrative authority and expenditure responsibility may require more time to form a consensus plan.
While reform of the budget management system may make decisive progress in the short run, and reform
of the taxation system may make significant progress in legislation and promotion in the short run, the
reform of assignments of administrative authorities and expenditure responsibilities may only get as far
as reaching a basic consensus. The major works and tasks of fiscal and taxation reforms will be basically
achieved by 2016 and various reforms will be put in place, but a modern fiscal system may not be
established before 2020.

A NEW VERTICAL BALANCE?

    A transition framework for subnational government borrowing will be formed under the present
financing arrangements, i.e., heavily decentralized expenditure assignments and heavily centralized
revenue assignments. At present, most spending (over 80 percent) is made directly by subnational
governments, but all revenue raising power (except land leasing) is at the central level.

    A sustainable debt framework for the longer run might benefit if China moved to a more balanced
vertical fiscal structure, i.e., if there was a better match between the expenditure responsibilities for each
level and their revenue raising powers. This discussion about revenue and expenditure assignments has
begun, but the conclusions remain in the offing. Three components of a rebalancing might be considered:
(a) assignment of more expenditure responsibility to the central government, (b) restructuring the
revenue sharing system, and (c) giving more fiscal autonomy to subnational governments. Any of these
three changes would have a significant effect on the borrowing framework.



18
     As reported in Bahl, Goh and Qiao (2015), forthcoming.

                                                         50
Expenditure Assignment

    Expenditure assignments in China have not been changed since before the TSS reform in 1994. The
present day Chinese economy is quite different from the one for which the present division of government
expenditure responsibilities was cast. A thorough review of the division of expenditure responsibilities is
long overdue. The end result of such a review could be a new budget law that will lay out the
responsibilities for each sub function of government.

     Reform of expenditure assignments in China could usefully center on three areas. First, a more clear
division between the role of government and the role of the private sector is needed. Second, the
question of which level of government is best suited to finance and manage social insurance programs
should be revisited. Third, there is need to review all of the functions of government in order to formalize
and clarify the division of responsibility. On the first area, a reform direction that called for less direct
involvement of government in the competitive sector would seem the right path. On the second area,
both income distribution and labor mobility goals would seem to argue for more fiscal centralization. On
the third, the maturing of the Chinese economy and the presence of spatial externalities suggests that
there is need for more involvement of higher level governments in direct service delivery and/or
coordination.

    Changes in expenditure assignments would change the borrowing needs of subnational governments,
and could lead to changes in the fiscal rules or direct controls of debt issuance. And if finance did follow
function, it also will require changes in the ability to repay debt.

Revenue Sharing

    Changes in revenue assignment will be driven by the increased expenditure needs related to
urbanization and by reassignments of expenditure responsibility. China faces the need to rebalance its
system by shifting some functions to the central government level, and to provide for some sources of
subnational government revenues to address the needs of provincial, city and county governments. The
central government financing gap will be best handled by an increased retention rate of shared taxes. The
subnational government revenue needs could be addressed by new local taxes. Both of these fiscal
reforms would bring the Chinese intergovernmental fiscal system into better vertical balance.

      The case for subnational government taxation in China is a strong one. This initiative has always been
off limits for Chinese intergovernmental fiscal reform, but perhaps the time has come. There are a number
of benefits. Revenue mobilization would be enhanced because local governments have information
advantages that give them a comparative advantage in the collection of certain types of taxes. Property
and land taxes are a good example of this advantage. There also is a regional efficiency argument to be
made. Substituting local taxes for some intergovernmental transfers would lead to a higher tax price in
some local areas and force labor and capital owners to take this into account in making location decisions.
China is struggling with urban sprawl. A system of property and land taxes could help rationalize land use
patterns and provide incentives for more compact investments. Finally, there is an equalization argument,
i.e., as local governments in higher income regions substitute own taxes for intergovernmental transfers,
central funds will be freed up for distribution to lower income regions.


                                                     51
    Empowering urban local governments to levy higher or lower tax rates would allow the fiscal system
to preserve some of the innovation and the competitive strategy of local governments that has served
China so well. The use of land lease sales in recent years and the use of extra budgetary charges in the
1990s and 2000s are examples of this resourcefulness. With taxing powers, local governments would
have the wherewithal to expand the delivery of services that are in high demand or that would allow them
to better capture their comparative advantage. It would also improve the creditworthiness for local
governments by showing a stronger ability to service debt or to maintain public facilities. In general, local
taxing powers would give local governments an instrument to use in shifting their competitive strategies
from the back door to the front.

Is Local Autonomy Necessary?

    If provincial and local governments issue debt under the current intergovernmental fiscal structure,
repayment will be from central transfers to local governments. Nearly all sources of revenue are
determined in amount by central government sharing rates and centrally-determined distribution
schemes. Moreover, lenders should see some risk in this because central policies on intergovernmental
transfers can change. See, for example, the recent decision to eliminate the major local government tax
source by folding it into the value added tax.

     A major question in developing a debt framework for subnational government finance is whether
ability to repay debt can be fully guaranteed by intergovernmental transfers, or requires some local
discretion.

SUBNATIONAL GOVERNMENT TAXING OPTIONS

    China has been slow to move away from its centralized system of public financing. But the problems
with the centralized approach have become increasingly apparent. Subnational governments have sought
(and found) backdoor approaches to do what they want, and sometimes this has led to undesirable
outcomes, e.g., extrabudgetary funds and land lease collateral for unsustainable debt. When these
backdoor approaches are withdrawn, subnational governments do not have autonomous local revenues
to pledge to the servicing of debt. The question we raise here is whether there are feasible options for
local government tax revenues. Our answer is that there are potentially revenue productive options that
pass the tests of good international practice. Whether they pass the test for good governance in China is
another issue.

Property Taxation

    For three decades, property taxation has been discussed as a possibility for a major local government
tax in China, but to date a broad-based annual property tax has not been introduced on a nationwide
basis. This is not to say that real property is not taxed in China, but most of the existing taxes on real
estate take place at the time of transfer and are better described as an ad hoc group of levies rather than
a property tax system with clearly defined objectives. Together, these taxes on real property account for
about 8 percent of national tax revenues, and 1.6 percent of GDP.

     The property tax has great potential as a revenue source in China. It is an opportune time to realize
this potential. Most important, it could fill a revenue gap at the subnational government level, and could

                                                     52
be especially productive in larger urban areas. To get some idea of the revenue potential, note that
industrial countries raise an average of more than 2 percent of GDP in property tax while low income
countries raise about 0.6 percent of GDP on average.

    Advantages and Disadvantages. Because the ownership of real property wealth is usually
concentrated in the highest income classes, the tax burden tends not to fall heavily on low income
households. To the extent that higher taxes are paid on properties that tend to have better public
services, the property tax might be seen as a benefit levy. Finally, since residential property taxes are
capitalized into reduced property values, market decisions will be more rational because owners will pay
a charge for the benefits of local services delivered, and speculators will face a real cost of holding their
land off the market.

     The major problems with the property tax have to do with its difficult administration and its
unpopularity with property owners. With respect to the former, good administration requires
identification of all parcels and their ownership, valuation and revaluation, collection from individual
owners, and it requires extensive recordkeeping and updating. All facets of the administration must be
done well to realize the full revenue benefits from the tax. The political unpopularity, which seems
disproportionate to the tax burden, has to do with the judgmental nature of the assessment, and the high
visibility of the tax burden.

    Potential in China. China is one of the few countries in the world that does not levy an annual tax on
residential property. In theory, China could generate considerable revenues with such an urban tax. An
annual property tax that would yield the equivalent of one percent of GDP may be a feasible reform target
in China.

    Revenue mobilization is of course an important objective, but the property tax also can be structured
to encourage land use patterns that might lead to reductions in external costs. If the base of the tax is the
assessed market value of the user right, for example, it could approximate an annual charge on location
rents. The tax could be structured to provide an incentive for all users to develop and use land more
intensively and could be made more consistent with an infill strategy for urban development. So would a
tax on vacant property in the built up area that is imposed at a differentially higher rate. Again, this would
not be a tax directly on the land, but on the market value of the user right. If the market value increased,
so too would the tax. Liability would rest with the holder of the user right. With respect to property
taxation, unused properties would be taxed at the same as occupied properties, at their value in highest
use.

    Other property-related financing instruments might be useful in achieving the objectives of
recapturing some of the value created by public investment, and increasing the density of cities. These
might include CEPACs as used in Brazil, special assessments, betterment levies, valorization, and tax
increment financing.

Motor Vehicle Taxation

    Local government taxes on the ownership and use of motor vehicles could fit a Chinese strategy for
coping with urbanization. The number of motor vehicles is growing faster than the population in urban

                                                     53
areas, their use imposes infrastructure costs on urban local governments, and they generate external
costs that are for the most part uncompensated. Nearly 80 percent of the vehicle fleet is privately owned.

    The rapid growth in motor vehicles compared to that of the road network has been instrumental to
the growing congestion levels and longer commutes. The result is a heavy external cost in terms of
congestion and pollution. One study of Beijing has put the level of external costs at between 7.5 percent
and 15 percent for all types of externalities (reported in World Bank and Development Research Center,
2014, pp187-262).

     Given this situation, it is understandable that Chinese policy has focused on controlling automobile
use in large urban areas, and a good start has been made in this direction in a few cities. However, there
is arguably even more to be gained by giving subnational governments additional control over motor
vehicle taxation. The result could be to discourage the use of private cars, at the margin, while generating
new revenues to defray some of the costs involved.

    Chinese cities could continue to use tax and charge policies either to increase the price of owning and
using a motor vehicle, relative to using a public transport system, or to make a different housing location
choice. This could be done by charging drivers for the full cost of using private vehicles, including
environmental and social costs, through mechanisms such as higher registration fees, higher gasoline
taxes, higher tolls and parking fees or various forms of congestion pricing. Depending on the price
elasticity of demand, local governments could generate significant revenues from these charges and taxes.

    At present, Chinese subnational governments are not funded to any significant extent by taxes on
motor vehicles. The registration tax on motor vehicles produces only a small revenue flow, and the tax
on motor fuels is a central government levy. The experience with parking fees, toll and congestion charges
as resource allocation measures is growing but has not yet become a major subnational government
revenue source.

    The annual tax on motor vehicle registrations is based on engine capacity, as it is in most countries.
At present, revenues from this tax are equivalent to only about 6 percent of that the present level of
revenue received in VAT revenue sharing. The taxation of motor fuels is a more lucrative tax base, and it
would more directly tax the use of motor vehicles. The question is whether such a tax could be locally
administered in China’s larger cities. Ideally, the tax would be collected at the pump. Alternatively, it
could be assessed at the factory gate as it is now, but the destination of shipments could be tracked. This
would put in place a system whereby the rate of motor fuel tax could vary from one local government to
another. Even at the current central government excise tax rates, a motor fuels levy would enable local
governments to collect an amount about equivalent to one-third of VAT revenue sharing.

    Would it be fair to levy a higher tax on motor fuels in large cities? China’s gasoline prices are already
above those in most developing countries, and above those in the US, but below the average in the
European countries (World Bank and Development Research Center, 2014, pp439-535). On the other
hand, Chinese gas prices are not high enough to cover the external costs of congestion and pollution.

   Would it be efficient to levy a higher rate of gasoline tax in China’s large metropolitan areas? At the
margin, this would lead to a higher cost of living and would be a factor affecting migration decisions.

                                                     54
Higher gasoline prices would be consistent with other urban planning goals, such as reducing the
congestion and pollution that come with automobile use, and raising the price of urban sprawl. In all of
this, however, it is not so clear that the elasticities of substitution are high enough to make much of a
difference unless there were very large rate increases.

Local Retail Sales Taxes

     Local government sales taxes can be efficient instruments of urban government finance if collections
can be shifted from an origin basis (place of manufacture or distribution) to a destination basis (place of
consumption). In the United States, for example, a local government retail sales tax is collected at the
point of consumption. Under an origin-based arrangement, such as China’s VAT, by contrast, collection is
at the point of production and some of the tax burden may be borne by consumers who live in another
jurisdiction.

    If administration on a destination basis could be made feasible, sales taxes on selected items of
consumption could be revenue productive and would pass some of the tests of a good local tax. This might
be done adequately for some items of consumption, for example, high end jewelry, durables and imported
luxury goods. But for most consumer goods, a retail sales tax would encourage tax avoidance by providing
an incentive to shift the point of consumption to informal traders that are not easily policed by the tax
authorities.

     The problems with collection from informal sector retailers is also the reason why the revenue
productive excises cannot be converted to retail sales taxes with higher rates imposed on consumption in
cities. Otherwise, particularly beer, liquor and cigarettes would be attractive revenue bases. There is
another option. All of the excise revenue could continue to be collected as at present, but the revenues
could be assigned to cities on some formula basis. This would be a transfer of revenue, but would not
give the local governments any power to increase or reduce rates, or to differentiate their rate from that
in other urban areas. In effect, it would be another tax sharing transfer.

Piggyback Taxes

    Some of the administrative problems with local taxation can be avoided by adopting a “piggybacking”
approach, i.e., to allow the local government to select a tax rate to be imposed on a central government
tax base. Piggybacking is already done in China with the urban construction and maintenance tax and the
education surtax. In these two cases, the base is the aggregate tax collections from VAT, excise taxes and
the business tax, and the revenues from this surtax are allocated fully to the local government. The sur-
rate, however is set by the central government.

    The piggyback tax proposed here might be viewed as a benefit charge, i.e., a payment for using city
services. Under such a reform, the existing UMCT and education surcharge would be replaced with an
“urban service tax”. The local government then could be given the option of increasing the piggyback tax
rate above its present level.

    To demonstrate, let us suppose that the tax rate on UMCT was increased from 9 percent to 12 percent.
The additional revenue generation would be large enough to recoup an amount equivalent to about 44
percent of the shared VAT revenues. Similarly, a piggyback personal income tax could generate enough

                                                    55
new revenue to recover an amount equivalent to 9 percent of VAT revenue sharing. There are good
arguments to use individual income tax revenue sharing, including the lower likelihood that the burden
will be exported. But the already high tax rate on labor is a major drawback. Unless the social security
contribution rate can be lowered, this is probably not a viable option.

CONCLUDING THOUGHTS

    China could benefit significantly from an overhaul of its intergovernmental financing system. One
benefit is that such a reform could help rationalize a sustainable framework for subnational government
debt. The deliberations behind changes in provincial and local government expenditure and financing
structure will take time. But the development of the national infrastructure will not wait until all of the
needed structural changes to the intergovernmental fiscal system are put in place. For this reason, China
needs (Beijing: China Financial and Economic Publishing House) a transition plan for capital financing. The
transition framework for borrowing needs to be recognized as just that – a bridge from the present system
to a sustainable long term framework. Even though the transition debt policies could be in place for a
number of years, the Chinese Government would benefit if it had its long term objectives for subnational
government borrowing in place when it develops the transition plan.

References

Asian Development Bank (2014) Money Matters: Local Government Finance in the People’s Republic of
    China (Manila: ADB).
Bahl, Roy, Chor-Ching Goh and Baoyun Qiao (2014). Reforming the Public Finance Sysem to Fit a More
   Urbanized China (Beijing: China Financial and Economic Publishing House).
Bahl, Roy, Chor-Ching Goh and Baoyun Qiao (forthcoming) ”Options for Reforming Shandong’s Fiscal
   System” (Beijing: China Financial and Economic Publishing House).
Bird, Richard. (2013). “The VAT as a Local Business Tax” Tax Notes International, September 16, page 1-7.
Liu, Lili and Baoyun Qiao (2013). “Restructuring of Legacy Debt for Financing Rural Schools in China” in
     Until Debt Do Us Part: Subnational Debt, Insolvency, and Markets edited by Octaviano Canuto and Lili
     Liu (Washington DC: The World Bank), pp. 81-108.
Lou, Jiwei. (2013). Rethinking of intergovernmental fiscal relations in China. (Beijing: China Finance and
    Economics Press).
Man, Joyce (2013). “Evaluation of Property Tax Reform and Experiments in China” Unpublished paper
   prepared for the Lincoln Institute of Land Policy (Cambridge, Mass), August 23, 2013.
Smolka, Martim (2013). “Implementing Value Capture in Latin America: Policies and To ols for Urban
   Development (Cambridge, Mass: Lincoln Institute of Land Policy).
World Bank and Development Research Center (2014). Urban China: Toward Efficient, Inclusive and
   Sustainable Urbanization (Washington DC: The World Bank).




                                                    56
   Debt Restructuring, Institutions and Markets
                          Lili Liu




Debt Restructuring, Institutions, and Markets

                          Dr. Lili Liu
 Global Lead, Decentralization and Intergovernmental Finance
                Governance Global Practice
  Equitable Growth, Finance and Institutions Vice-Presidency
                       The World Bank




                      October 22, 2015




                            57
      Lessons for Borrowing Policy and Subnational Risks Management
                                     Sudarshan Gooptu and Karlis Smits19

     China is not alone in its build-up of subnational liabilities to meet its development needs. What is more
noteworthy has been the recent high rate of increase in this indebtedness of Chinese Provinces. Cross-
country lessons suggest that a Subnational Debt Workout with the Center is just a start of a debt resolution
process. The policy and institutional reform measures that accompany it, which restructures the
subnational entity itself, is what will bring debt and fiscal sustainability, equitable growth, and economic
strength to the region, and the country, over the medium term. Fiscal Rules have played in important role
to try to maintain fiscal discipline and avoiding debt problems in future. Linkages between Medium-term
budgets (MTFF), Debt and Fiscal Sustainability (DSA/FSA), and Medium-term Debt or Borrowing Strategy
(MTDS) are important as well. Subnational Debt is only one form of Contingent Liability that can pose fiscal
risks for the Government. There are others as well – Implicit and Explicit, Direct and Indirect. Thus, a
consolidated view of these fiscal risks will provide a way for the government to minimize fiscal surprises in
future.

Subnational Debt is inevitable

     While urbanization and decentralization typically increases spending responsibilities of subnational
governments (e.g. in provinces, and municipalities), the opportunities and constraints facing subnational
governments when making their fiscal and debt decisions differ somewhat from those facing the Central
government. Specific institutions and legislation shape policies at subnational level, most notably the
revenue-sharing system, the intergovernmental transfers, and the implicit national guarantees that are
accorded on local government debts. For instance, subnational governments typically give up tax bases
as part of federal arrangements (e.g., they cannot impose interstate import/export duties). They often
rely on transfers from the national government that are earmarked, must be allocated to specific spending
programs, and cannot be used arbitrarily for budgetary consolidation and adjustment. Or, on the contrary,
there may not be well-institutionalized transfers that depend on relative bargaining power between
national and subnational entities. As a result, local governments typically face borrowing costs that
underestimate the true credit risk associated with economic and fiscal fundamentals because investors
price-in implicit guarantees provided by the national government.

    The 2008 global crisis brought with it an increase in subnational deficits and debt build ups in OECD
countries. This was a result of the combined impact of decreased subnational tax revenues and increased
demand for social services (which are typically provided in most OECD countries by subnational
governments). Subnational Government debt in OECD countries grew from an average of 8% of GDP in
2007 to 10% of GDP in 2010. There is a lot of diversity across countries with subnational debt accounting
for 1% of total public debt in Greece to 53% of the total in Canada. From 2010 onwards, when OECD
national governments started implementing fiscal consolidation measures and withdrawals of the special


19
   The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those of the author(s) and
should not be attributed in any manner to the World Bank, to its affiliated organizations or to members of its Board
of Executive Directors or the countries they represent.


                                                        58
fiscal stimulus measures that were taken by Central Governments in the aftermath of the 2008 crisis, this
tended to reinforce this trend in their subnational levels (Vammalle, 2013).

    Aside from its own source revenues (e.g. from subnational taxes and fees), typically a local
government has several sources of financing it spending needs (and associated budget deficits) in any
given year (Figure 1). It includes transfers from the Central Government (often guided by
intergovernmental fiscal legislations, or on-lending of foreign loans taken on by the Central Government),
special development funds (for nationally important and strategic priority public investment projects),
loans from state-banks or private banks, and from issuance of debt securities in domestic or external
markets.

            Figure 1. There can be many sources of direct financing for local governments




     In China, local government expenditure growth has tapered sharply in the first two quarters of 2015.
Expenditure growth is decelerating because local government fiscal space is constrained, as revenues
from land-lease transactions slow and reforms in the budget management system reduce quasi-fiscal
activities. Issuance of new debt to finance new projects is moderating somewhat as the authorities
introduce guidelines on strengthening management of local government debt. Corporate bonds issued by
local government financing vehicles (LGFVs) to fund municipal investments slowed sharply in the first
quarter of 2015. LGFVs issued only 194 billion RMB, a 45 percent year on year decline (figure 2). However,
in recent months activity has accelerated as some of constraints to issue corporate bonds by LGFVs were
relaxed—in May 2015 alone 121 billion RMB worth of such bonds were issued. At the same time, the
authorities continue to make progress in decoupling the use of local government debt and provision of
public infrastructure, such that growth of fixed asset investment in infrastructure is no longer strongly
correlated with an increase in the net debt position of LGFVs.

                                                   59
  Figure 2 Local government capital expenditures decline sharply in Q1 and Q2 as fiscal revenues from
        land-lease transactions slow sharply and quasi-fiscal activities are brought under control

     Growth of land-lease revenues and Local                             Growth of net position of LGFV corporate bonds,
  Government Fund Budget expenditures, percent                                           billions of RMB
                  (year on year)

   80%

   60%

   40%

   20%

    0%
         Q1   Q2    Q3    Q4   Q1   Q2    Q3     Q4    Q1      Q2
  -20%
                2013                  2014               2015
  -40%

  -60%



         Land lease revenues   Local level Fund expenditures




      On 29 August, China’s National People’s Congress released the State Council’s update of debt statistics
for sub-national governments. The update shows that sub-national debt at the end of 2014 rose by more
than one third to RMB24 trillion ($3.7 trillion), the equivalent of 38% of China’s 2014 GDP, from RMB17.9
trillion as of June 2013. Higher levels of both direct and indirect debt suggest that RLG indebtedness has
increased on account of new borrowing since June 2013. Direct RLG debt obligations rose 41%, while
indirect and contingent liabilities rose 23%. At the same time, the National People’s Congress capped the
total amount of RLG direct debt at RMB16 trillion, which equals total direct debt of RMB15.4 trillion at
the end of 2014 and RMB0.6 trillion of new bond issues in 2015.




                                                                    60
  Figure 3 Total outstanding sub-national debt remains high but efforts to refinance maturing debt
                                  at lower maturities is underway

 Total amount of outstanding sub-national level debt                               Total amount on debt swap ceiling and
              and contingent liabilities                                           cumulative amount of debt-swap bonds
                                                                                                  issued

                    30000

                    25000

                    20000
      Billion RMB




                    15000

                    10000
                                                  15400             16000
                     5000      10886


                        0
                            End June 2013       End 2014           Est 2015

                            Guarantees and other contingent liabilities

                            With direct payment responsibility



Source: World Bank Staff estimates from MoF data.

China’s Subnational Debt Resolution Process is just getting underway

    These recent revisions to the Budget Law are a big step in advancing China’s fiscal reform efforts
toward a modern fiscal system. They lay the foundations for the overhaul of the fiscal system and should
improve the quality of budget management and local governments’ debt sustainability over the medium
term. The measures also facilitate efforts by the central government to align local governments' objectives
more directly with the aim of public service delivery. Ultimately, these reforms are expected to channel
Local Government Financing Vehicle (LGFV) debt to a more transparent bond market and encourage the
use by SN governments of market-based instruments to meet their future financing needs.

    The recent change in the Budget Law is also an important first step towards resolution of China’s
subnational indebtedness situation. On August 31 2014, the National People’s Congress adopted revisions
to the budget law to enhance transparency of the budget, improve the budget control mechanisms,
strengthen accountability for local government debt management, and improve the intergovernmental
transfer system. This is the first time the budget law has been revised since it took effect in 1995.

    The old budget law was adopted when the country was still strongly influenced by planned economy
concepts and at an early stage of applying budget management practices. It had only a very general
definition of what the government budget covers, leaving ample room for interpretation by local
governments. China's government budgets only included the general budget, largely made up of tax
revenue and spending on public services and government operations. The revenue gained through
transactions in use rights of state land, which account for a large part of local government revenues, and
finances of state-owned enterprises were not budgeted or supervised by provincial people's congresses.


                                                                              61
The revised law, however, defines the government budget in four parts: the general budget, the budget
for government-managed funds, the budget for state-owned assets, and the budget for social insurance
funds. All four are now under formal control of legislatures.

     With a view towards achieving greater budget transparency, the revised law introduces detailed
provisions to ensure the public's access to government budget information. The old law did not have any
provisions about public supervision. The revised law requires government financial departments to
publish their budgets and final account reports within 20 days after they are adopted by the legislature.
It also gives the public access to information about local government debts, purchases, budgets and
audits. The new law also clearly regulates how the legislature to examine the government budget report
and what to examine. It specifically asks the legislature to examine major expense items and big
investments as well as to inspect the development and efficiency of such projects.

     Previously, the Budget Law severely restricted local governments from issuing bonds on their own
credit profile; hence, many local governments relied on off-balance sheet entities to raise funds, mostly
to fund infrastructure. This practice severely undermined prudent debt management. The revision allows
for bond sales by provincial-level governments but places them under strict conditions. It not only restricts
the amount of bonds but also regulates how they can be issued and how the proceeds can be used by
subnational governments.

    Under the new version, provincial governments are now allowed to issue bonds within a quota set by
the State Council, China's cabinet, and approved by the National People’s Congress or its standing
committee. Money raised by the bonds can only be used for public services, and not for government
operations. The debts must be reflected in the provincial budget and supervised by provincial people's
congresses. The central government will assess risks inherent in this local debt. As a result, the revised
law has helped clarify several important principles on how to manage local debts, setting rules and
dividing liabilities.

     In addition, policy measures have been introduced to address the most immediate funding pressures
of China’s subnational governments. The authorities have indicated that a reasonable grace period will be
set for current projects to prevent the fiscal and financial risks that could be associated with a sudden cut
in financing for the highly indebted subnational governments. The MOF’s October 2015 report to the
National People’s Congress (NPC) (Ministry of Finance, China, 2015) indicates that the Central
Government will allow the ongoing SN projects that are already under construction to be refinanced
through commercial bank loans (most of which would be expected to from state-owned banks).20

    Efforts to refinance existing debt at lower maturities is underway. The original plan announced in early
March 2015 stipulated that provinces and municipalities would be primarily responsible for issuing and
repaying the new debt using market mechanisms, such as bond auctions. In May authorities clarified
details of the swap indicating that local governments can instead also negotiate directly with creditors of
those swappable debts. Interest rates for these new bonds will also negotiated by debtors and creditors,


20
  This measure supersedes the earlier P.R. China’s State Council issued Debt Management G uidelines (of October
2014) which made such bank refinancing in doubt.

                                                      62
but should not be lower than the prevailing treasury yields of the same tenor or exceed 30 percent of the
treasury yields of the same tenor. Local governments have refinanced debt in amount exceeding
RMB 1800 billion in a short period between mid-May and August 30, 2015. Most of these bonds were
issued using bond auctions with average coupon rates ranging from 2.89 percent for a three-year bond to
3.56 percent for a seven year bond. It is planned that these new bonds will be allowed to be used as
collateral with the central bank for repo and other liquidity operations.

                               Box 1. Local government debt swap in China, 2015.
 On March 14, the NPC approved the 2015 budget, which covers important measures for local government debt.
 First, the budget set a RMB 600 billion bond issuance limit for 2015, an increase of 50 percent from 2014. This
 limit is split between RMB 500 billion for general obligation bonds and RMB 100 billion for special-purpose bonds
 tied to specific projects. Second, the MOF will permit regional and local governments to swap RMB 1 trillion of
 high-interest and short-maturity debt raised through third parties into low-interest and longer-dated bonds.
 According to the MOF, the debt swap represents “a change of form” and “not a rise of outstanding debt”.

 The initial RMB 1 trillion debt-for-bond swap program is designed from a 2013 local government debt audit by
 the National Audit Office. The program does not take into account debt accumulated after June 30, 2013. All 31
 provinces and five centrally planned cities will be allowed to issue new bonds worth up to 53.8 percent of their
 debt falling due in 2015 as of June 30, 2013. Use of this latter date implies that the MOF has not finalized
 reclassifying local debt with the latest information that local governments submitted by January 5, 2015, possibly
 on concerns that these January figures overstate the true outstanding debt. The initial debt-for-bonds swap
 covers just a portion of all outstanding debt and contingent liabilities of local governments estimated to be around
 18 trillion RMB at the end of 2013. It also covers a small share of potential payment responsibilities in 2015 if
 some of guarantees or contingent liabilities are called upon.

 To address these concerns, in early June authorities announced the launch of another RMB 1 trillion debt-for-
 bond swap for local governments in May, and expanded the program by an additional RMB 1.2 trillion in August,
 2015. This will provide an additional buffer to local governments in executing an orderly rollover of maturing debt.

 Source (Ministry of Finance, China, 2015)



    The RMB 3.2 trillion debt-for-bond swap program (See box 1) addresses one of the key short-term
vulnerabilities—namely, that without an orderly rollover of its outstanding debt, local governments’ own
resources are insufficient to fully service maturing debt liabilities. The debt-for-bonds swap covers just a
portion of all outstanding debt and contingent liabilities of local governments, which were estimated at
around RMB 18 trillion at end-2013. However, the program addresses the most immediate concerns with
respect to maturing debt in 2015 and clarifies recent regulations. The program could also cut local
governments’ annual interest expenditures by about RMB 100 billion, implying a de-facto reduction in the
average interest rate on outstanding LGFV bonds of about 500 basis points. Similarly, using local
government bonds instead of corporate bonds to fund new spending would result in lower interest
expenditures. For example, the average interest rate spread between seven-year bonds issued by LGFVs
(AA-) and local governments averaged about 320 basis points in the first five months of 2015.




                                                         63
Fiscal Rules and SN Debt Control Mechanisms

     Subnational governments are often subjected to formal arrangements enticing them to pursue fiscal
discipline and budget transparency. In OECD countries, SNGs are subject to strict fiscal rules and so their
increase in indebtedness has not been as high as compared to their Central Government’s deficits and
debt during the aftermath of the crisis. In many countries SNGs can only borrow to finance public
investment and/or face tight ceilings on their debt and debt service (e.g. Maximum level of annuities as a
share of operating revenues.). Since the institutional specificities of subnational governments create fiscal
risks for them as well as for the Central government, there is a wide spectrum of subnational fiscal rules
and ceilings on spending, deficit, borrowing and debt stock. Box 2 presents some international evidence
concerning subnational debt limits, which have played a key role in achieving subnational debt
sustainability.

                          Box 2. International experience on subnational debt limits.
Brazil. The Fiscal Responsibility Law sets a limit of 200 percent on the debt-to-net current revenue ratio (current
revenue net of certain national government transfers), so there is a legal limitation on the amount (not the use) of
new debt flows. It also imposes a limit of 11.5 percent on the debt service-to-net current revenue. Debt restructuring
agreements between federal and state governments established a comprehensive list of fiscal targets.

Colombia has extensive legislation on government debt which established a traffic-light system to regulate
subnational borrowing. States in the red-light zone, with the debt-to-current revenue ratio above 80 percent and
the interests-to-operational savings ratio exceeding 40 percent, are prohibited to borrow.

India imposes a ceiling on budget deficit-to-GSDP ratio of 3 percent for all states and requests them to gradually
close the current deficit. In addition, those whose debt service exceeds 20 percent of revenue are deemed to be at
‘debt stress’ and the national government closely monitors a ll new borrowings.

Poland sets a limit of 60 percent on the debt-to-revenue ratio, restricting the amount of indebtedness, and a limit
of 15 percent in the debt service-to-revenue ratio. As soon as the local government debt exceeds 55 percent of
revenue, however, the debt service must be reduced below 12 percent of revenue.

United Kingdom. After the September 2014 referendum in Scotland where its citizens chose to remain part of the
United Kingdom, thereby, continuing to be part of the UK single currency (Pound Sterling) and single market, have a
unified pensions system, and collective security and being part of the sixth largest economy in the world. The UK
Government has subsequently just revised its Scotland Act 2012 on the intergovernmental fiscal devolution
arrangements and outlines the executive borrowing and income tax powers already devolved to UK’s “family of
nations”. This new Scotland Bill, which will come into force in 2015 and 2016 respectively, will ensure that, for the
first time, over 50 per cent of the money spent by the Scottish Parliament will be funded by revenues raised in
Scotland. This aims to deliver greater accountability, allowing more decisions affecting Scotland to be made in
Scotland. As a result, the Scottish Parliament will have one of the most extensive arrays of tax and spending powers
of any devolved parliament in the developed world.

United States. The US states mainly follow golden rules constraining the operating balance to be zero, thus debt
must be used to finance capital expenditures. Rules governing subnational borrowing vary across states and depend
on the type of debt issued, the revenues used as collateral, and the type of government entity issuing debt. Markets
play a key role in fiscal surveillance.

Source: Juan Pradelli (2014), “Subnational Fiscal Sustainability and Debt ceilings” DMF Knowledge Note, World Bank.


                                                             64
    When deciding on choice of fiscal rule to encourage prudent subnational government borrowing to
finance its public investment needs, there is no one right answer. It all depends on the risk tolerance levels
of the policy makers and the sources of revenues for the subnational government (tax and non-tax). Most
countries have fiscal balance rules and debt rules but implementing expenditure and revenue rules is
challenging for all, more so for emerging economies and low income countries. Expenditure rules are more
prevalent in advanced and emerging resource-rich countries (Figure 4).

               Figure 4. Most countries have either debt rules or balanced budget rules.




                    Source: Schaechter, Andrea, Tidiane Kinda, Nina Budina and Anke Weber (2012).




   The following is an example of four alternative fiscal expenditure paths that a resource-rich
subnational government examined to meet a policy determined fixed composition of public investments
over the medium term. Similar approaches that have been adopted by other countries are:

        Spend-as-you-go (SAYG): This approach presents the least strategic policy stance. In this case, the
        entire flow of resource revenues are spent on additional public investment projects as they
        become available.

        Permanent Income Hypothesis (PIH): This approach denotes a sustainable spending path that
        allocates the spending evenly over the time. Public investments are scaled up by an amount equal
        to the permanent income annuity implied by the present value of resource wealth.

        Bird-in-Hand (BIH): This approach represents the most stringent spending stream. All revenues
        from the oil sector are accumulated in a sovereign wealth fund that invests abroad. Only the
        interest earnings from this fund are used to scale up public investments.

        Moderate Frontloading (MF): This approach presents a case where public investments are scaled
        up rapidly in the early phase of the simulation period. In principle, neither the flow nor the stock

                                                         65
        of additional spending stream is linked to the resource wealth under this approach. However, in
        the long-term, the amount that is used for additional public investments converges to the
        Permanent Income annuity to ensure fiscal sustainability.

The spend-as-you-go (SAYG) approach does not lead to any savings. So, transfers to the budget due to
revenue surpluses diminish over time, e.g. following a resource revenue depletion.

Under the PIH, the government transfers a fixed amount of funds to the fiscal budget annually (black line
in panel a). In the short term, this may indicate subnational borrowing (the first red shaded area) as
resource revenues are considered relatively low at this stage. In the medium term, the resource revenues
picks up and reaches a peak (blue curve). The difference between revenues and transfers in this
hypothetical situation are saved in a contingency/stabilization fund (green shaded area). Finally, as the
revenues gradually die out, interest earnings on the contingency/stabilization fund assets are used to
supplement the transfers to the budget (second red shaded area).

Under the BIH, transfers to the fiscal budget are scaled up over time as resource revenues are saved in
the sovereign wealth fund and interest earnings on wealth fund assets increase (black curve line in panel
b). As long as resource revenues exceed the transfers for the earmarked public projects, therefore,
reserves continue to build up. Later in the projection horizon, accumulation comes to a halt and BIH
annuity reaches to a plateau.

Finally, the “big push” under the moderate frontloading approach leads to investments that are financed
by borrowings in the short-term (first red-shaded area). In the medium term resource revenues exceed
the spending, however the difference is smaller than under the PIH and BIH. Moreover, the spending
converges to the PIH annuity in the long-term; however, they are always above the PIH. Therefore,
contingency/stabilization fund savings would be a lot smaller than the PIH and BIH levels21.

    Whether there are fiscal rules on subnational governments or not, cross country evidence suggest
that having a Medium-term Fiscal framework (MTFF) and regularly undertaking Debt Sustainability
Analysis (DSA) at the subnational level, even before sovereign guarantees are issued and funds borrowed
from any source, demonstrates fiscal prudence and sound debt management practices. These are useful
analytical frameworks and tools for assessing the envelope of revenues and borrowings that subnational
governments need to undertake urban infrastructure investment and provide decentralized social
services such as education and health. It also allows the Government to assess how much fiscal
adjustment will be needs in order to return a subnational government’s debt situation into a sustainable
path in case of debt servicing difficulties. It also enables the setting up of an institutional structure in
government where the different relevant government departments (at Central and subnational levels)
formally collaborate and exchange information regularly to undertake these DSAs and better track
emerging subnational debt-related vulnerabilities on a continuous basis.



21
  See Scheachter, Andrea, Tidiane Kinda, Nina Budina and Anke Weber (2012) for a more detailed description of
and country examples of various fiscal rules.



                                                     66
     The impact of fiscal rules has been mixed as well, depending on the dimensions the government wants
to focus on. The OECD has recently designed a Subnational Fiscal Rules indicator that examines the
effectiveness of a country’s subnational fiscal rules on the basis of success in meeting four preferred
attributes, namely, (i) restraining the size of the public sector, (ii) supporting allocative efficiency, (iii)
ensuring debt sustainability, and (iv) coping with shocks. OECD Decentralization data for 2011 for selected
countries shows that fiscal rules have been more effective in supporting allocative efficiency of public
spending by subnational governments. It has been less so in restraining the size of the public sector and
excludes operations (and growth) of quasi-fiscal activities at local levels that resulted instead. (OECD,
2015)

Ensuring budgetary transparency and discipline

    Cross-country experiences suggest that any sovereign guarantees (whether issued at central or
subnational levels) should be identified, registered and disclosed in financial statements. They should be
quantified and included in the state budget as an expense item. The Central Govt. may charge the
beneficiary a fee for the guarantee. In some cases (e.g. Sweden), a notional Contingency Fund is created
to provide transparency of expected pay outs when contingent liabilities are triggered. General
Contingent Liability Policy can be incorporated in the legislation. Such a law (e.g. A Public Debt Law or a
Fiscal Responsibility Act) should at least impose an annual limit on guarantees that can be issued, and
specific limits on overall indebtedness levels of the subnational entity.

     Main building blocks of a Fiscal Risks Management Framework include creating general policy for
government exposure to Sovereign Guarantees and other Contingent Liabilities (CLs), ensuring budgetary
transparency and discipline continuously applying financial risk management principles and examining
cost-risk tradeoffs of different financing alternatives. To this end, how one measures debt and deficits for
policy decision-making purposes matters. This is intrinsically linked to the definition of “government” that
is used to report liability positions in the budget. For example, the U.S. federal government’s deficit in
fiscal year 2010/11 was either 8% of GDP or 14% of GDP depending in whether it was estimated on a cash
or accrual basis – the latter accounting for the impact of explicit contingent liabilities of the federal
government while some researchers, namely Kotlikoff and Burns say that the “true” US budget deficit for
that year was 39% of GDP. (Irwin, 2015)

     If the definition of subnational government in deficit and debt targets is too narrow, it may encourage
shifting of spending through entities outside the defined perimeter of Government (and result in
operations involving off-budget assets and liabilities). Wider definitions in turn may lead to errors in
measurement of on-balance assets and liabilities. As a result, these will influence any assessments of a
government’s spending and tax policies and resulting fiscal sustainability over time (Irwin, 2015). It is
therefore prudent to be cognizant of the fact that estimates of subnational indebtedness are often
underestimates which do not account for debts that emerge as contingent liabilities that result from the
build-up of “hidden deficits” over time though the use of off-budget financing vehicles and/or
inadequately accounting for the “true” government obligations under private public partnership
arrangements in public investment projects, especially in infrastructure. Mispricing of collateral assets in
subnational bond issuances (e.g. land) and implicit liabilities that emerge from perceptions of future
expected government bailouts due to systemic considerations (e.g. “too-big-to fail” financial institutions

                                                      67
that may be owned by the subnational government themselves). The recent post-2008 global crisis
experience of the European Union and continued discussions within it on the need for a fiscal and banking
union to complement its monetary union in the EU area vividly highlights how debt resolution and
financial sector health are intricately linked as well.

            Figure 5. Europe: NPLs after the global financial crisis (Percent of sample assets)




     In designing a framework for contingent liabilities management, any overall policy (for issuance of
sovereign guarantees, for instance) should clearly establish conditions for risk-sharing and overall policy
of risk allocation between the central, subnational and private sector entities involved in the transaction.
What are the government’s reasons and priorities for providing such guarantees/contingent support?
Why it sees the need to issue such contingent liabilities rather than providing direct loans or subsidies to
these public sector/subnational entities? What types of risks willing will it cover and what can be shifted
to the private sector?

     Best practices in monitoring subnational fiscal risks from contingent liabilities suggest that in
publications of budget documents, explicit contingent liabilities of the government are identified,
registered, disclosed; also quantified (as expected cost/ maximum probable loss). Depending on
institutional realities and risk tolerance of the government, the fiscal costs could be directly budgeted and
reserve funds created on the basis of established financial risk management principles. Ideally,
quantification of cost and risk of subnational loans and other contingent liabilities of the government
through different techniques can be undertaken subject to availability of reliable and consistent data so
as to estimate how contingent payouts will affect country’s fiscal situation.

Subnational Debt is only one source of fiscal risks to Government

    While the focus of this paper has so far been on Subnational Debt, it is important to note that a
comprehensive picture of the true fiscal risks that the Government is exposed will need to look at its
contingent liabilities beyond direct borrowing by subnational entities. This includes an assessment of the
sources of fiscal risks emanating from the government’s direct and contingent liabilities, and whether they
are explicit or implicit liabilities. The “Fiscal Risk Matrix” is one such analytical tool developed at the World

                                                       68
Bank that allows for such an assessment (Polackova-Brixi, 2002). A consolidated view of these fiscal risks
will provide a way for the government to minimize fiscal surprises in future.

     Table 3. The “Fiscal Risk Matrix” – A way to catalogue the sources of fiscal risks to Government




Source: Contingent Liabilities – a threat to fiscal stability, PREM Notes, n.9, November 1998.
Note: These liabilities refer to fiscal authorities in central government, not the central bank.

     On the asset side, risks erode the value of accumulated assets and reduce the inflows. This also needs
to be considered when managing fiscal risks in a Government. This calls for regular monitoring of
contingent liabilities and conducting scenario analyses and stress tests on the government’s debt and
fiscal sustainability situation over time.

   One approach to monitoring CLs is using an asset-liability management (ALM) approach but this is
more related to financial management of contingent liabilities. One must continuously keep an eye on
debt and fiscal sustainability continuously. Good experiences in LAC: Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, and
Peru. Monitoring of CLs is done here in the context of the Fiscal Responsibility Laws, highlighting fiscal
impact of CLs and not just financial impacts.

     •         Colombia – Transparency in Budget Law allows for CLs for budgetary transfers to a State
               Agency Contingency Fund.

     •         Chile – Methodology for estimating CLs in Government is published. The Government has
               established an Economic and Social Stabilization Fund and a Pension Reserve Fund (linked to
               copper prices and fiscal revenues/GDP ratio).

    Since it is difficult to measure contingent liabilities (CLs), a practical approach to monitoring them is
to start with estimating the maximum liability (if this is an explicit contingent liability like a subnational
loan that is guaranteed by the Central Government) and then decide how much of this fiscal risk to cover.
(The examples of practices in Chile and Colombia are good in this regard.) In the case of explicit contingent


                                                                  69
liabilities in Chile, such as student Loans, minimum guaranteed income in PPPs for Airports, roads and
energy projects, bring contingent liabilities to “adjusted CLs” on the basis of Net present values (NPVs).

    When it comes to implicit contingent liabilities, the practice in some best practice countries has been
to focus on doing fiscal sustainability scenario analyses, stress tests, and contingency planning for the
potential fiscal costs of natural disasters and financial sector implicit liabilities only as a way to set up their
framework for contingent liability management in the Government. They are not incorporated in the
annual budgets of Government. Some countries do disclose in practice, but only aggregate information is
published. For instance, Chile, Pakistan and the U.S.A. disclose the fiscal cost of past banking crises, and
past costs of stabilizing fuel prices. However, even where govt. would not disclose implicit fiscal risks, it
would be prudent to analyze exposure to implicit fiscal risks (as sometimes amounts can be very large).22

Conclusion

    Addressing a country’s high stock of “legacy” debt at the subnational level and making associated
future subnational debt-service obligations more manageable in terms of prudent levels of cash flows is
only one aspect of subnational debt restructuring. Underlying these efforts is the aim of achieving
medium-term fiscal sustainability while, at the same time, better monitoring and minimizing fiscal risks to
the government. Such fiscal surprises could emerge from the different financing vehicles that are often
used by subnational governments (including municipalities) to finance their future investment and
spending needs to achieve their equitable growth and development objectives. This paper draws from a
rich history of cross-country experiences, and discusses how various countries emerged from their
subnational indebtedness pressures. All these measures were undertaken as an integrated package that
restructures the debt and implemented subnational fiscal adjustments over a medium-term period of
implementation. These experiences from selected countries offer important lessons for China going
forward.

    In the end, the design of subnational debt restructuring approaches, insolvency regimes, fiscal
adjustment policies in subnational governments will have to be informed by a country’ s own history,
circumstances, economic, legal and institutional structure and the external environment it faces when
embarking on such a process of subnational restructuring.

References

Brixi, Hana Polackova and Mody, Ashoka (2002). “Dealing with Fiscal Risk”. In Government at Risk by Hana
    Polackova-Brixi and Allen Schick (eds.), World Bank, Washington D.C. 2002.
Farvacque-Vitkovic, Catherine and Mihaly Kopanyi eds. (2014) “Municipal Finance: A Handbook for Local
    Governments” Washington D.C.: World Bank.
Irwin, Timothy C. (2015). “Defining the Government’s Debt and Deficit”. Journal of Economic Surveys, Vol
    29, No.4 pp. 711-732.
Ministry of Finance, China (2015). Budget Report to the National People’s Congress, Beijing.



22
     See R. Velloso, IMF, Fiscal Affairs Dept. “Good Practice in Fiscal Risks Disclosure: International Experience”.

                                                             70
OECD (2015), OECD. Fiscal Decentralization Database. 2015.
Schaechter, Andrea, Tidiane Kinda, Nina Budina and Anke Weber (2012). Fiscal Rules in response to the
   Crisis – toward the “Next Generation”rules, A New Dataset. International Monetary Fund Staff
   Working Paper No. WP/12/187. July 2012.
Vammalle, C and C. Hulbert (2013), “Subnational Finances and Fiscal Consolidation: Walking on Thin Ice”,
   OECD Regional Development Working Papers, 2013/02. OECD Publishing.




                                                  71
  Lessons for Borrowing Policy and Subnational Risks
                    Management
                                     Lessons from Country Experiences

Sudarshan Gooptu
Global Lead, Fiscal Policy,
Macroeconomics & Fiscal Management (MFM) Global Practice,
Equitable Growth, Finance and Institutions (EFI) Vice-Presidency


 Presentation at Ministry of Finance, P.R.China-World Bank Summit on Subnational Debt Management and Restructuring ,
 Nanning, Guangxi Province, P.R. China. October 22, 2015.




                                                         72
            Fiscal Adjustment and Subnational Borrowing Regulations
                              Jorge Martinez-Vazquez and Violeta Vulovic23



I. Why are borrowing regulations of significance?

    The development literature widely acknowledges the importance of infrastructure for economic
growth, quality of life and poverty reduction. 24 And with deep decentralization trends throughout all
regions of the world, and with subnational governments on average being in charge of approximately two-
thirds of total public infrastructure spending, there has been a natural increase in importance of
subnational borrowing for financing this infrastructure.25

     Even though there are some countries around the world that prohibit outright any borrowing by
subnational governments,26 most other countries allow subnational borrowing because in their view the
efficiency and equity benefits of borrowing outweigh the associated macroeconomic risks.27 But on the
whole, factors such as the lack of institutional capacity and the history of sub-national government
defaults in other decentralized systems give central governments substantial arguments to regulate sub-
national government autonomy by introducing effective borrowing controls. The challenge is to
simultaneously achieve the goals of providing borrowing autonomy and at the same time to preserve
fiscal discipline by preventing the insolvency of sub-national governments and assuring national fiscal
sustainability.28

    One key aspect of the process is the presence of “moral hazard.” Subnational governments have less
incentive than central governments to be concerned with the macroeconomic impact of their policies
because they do not bear –or at least they perceive so-- the full cost of their actions. In short, subnational
governments are not concerned—or as concerned-- with national fiscal sustainability as central
governments are. 29 While well designed fiscal decentralization systems, especially on the side of


23
   International Center for Public Policy, Georgia State University. October 2015. We are grateful to Yasin Civelek for
excellent research assistance. The views expressed here are those of the authors alone.
24
   See, for example, OECD (2006) and World Bank (1994).
25
   See Martinez-Vazquez and Timofeev (2015).
26
   That is the case in a good list of developing countries. Among developed countries, Denmark is among the few
that have an outright prohibition.
27
   The advocates of sub-national borrowing typically emphasize four potential benefits: (i) expansion of the sub-
national fiscal space for the infrastructure financing; (ii) efficient and inter-generationally equitable outcomes from
infrastructure financing through borrowing; (iii) increased fiscal transparency of the sub-national governments; and
(iv) a deepening of national financial markets. Empirically, a positive effect of the availability of subnational
borrowing on the provision of infrastructure service has been found (Freire and Petersen, 2004; Leigland, 1997;
Peterson and Hammam, 1998).
28
   Fiscal discipline requires imposing constraints on all three fiscal aggregates: total revenues, fiscal balance, and
public debt (Fölscher, 2007).
29
   Past macroeconomic crises involving public debt such as those in Russia, Argentina, Brazil, and East Asia, have
brought up the importance of fiscal sustainability as an important component of macroeconomic stability. The more
recent experience of peripheral European countries during the great recession that started in 2008 has made the
link between fiscal sustainability and macroeconomic stability much more salient.

                                                          73
subnational revenue autonomy, can enhance or at least not harm fiscal sustainability (Fukasaku and De
Mello, 1998), there is also consensus that decentralization can pose significant risks to fiscal sustainability
and that a disciplined subnational borrowing process is much needed (Ter-Minassian, 1997b).30

     Due to the potential long-term consequences of sub-national borrowing on fiscal sustainability and
macroeconomic stability, most countries manage and supervise sub-national borrowing and debt by
implementing ex-ante and/or ex-post borrowing regulations. The ex-ante regulations can consist of more
or less direct control by the central government, of fiscal rules predetermined in the constitution or
organic laws, or of a reliance on the financial markets and its mechanism to control borrowing. On the
other hand, ex-post regulations consist of sanctions for non-compliance to the rules and for imprudent
behavior. There is also consensus that both ex-ante and ex-post regulations should be used
simultaneously, and should consider both the borrowers and the lenders (Webb 2004). One view in the
literatures is that in regulating subnational borrowing it should be enough to rely on financial markets and
the rules it imposes on debtors and creditors. Other legal rules are seen as unnecessary because market
conditions already impose effective sanctions through higher interest rates and denying any lending.
However, the history of sub-national borrowing in some decentralizing countries suggests that exclusive
reliance on the financial markets in maintaining sub-national fiscal discipline may not be enough (Ter-
Minassian and Craig, 1997). The necessary conditions of developed financial markets, availability of
financial information, and no expectation of bailouts by the central government are generally not met,
and defaults can have very long term negative consequences.31

    A commonly accepted definition of fiscal sustainability states that the fiscal balance and the
underlying trends are such that in a steady state the ratio of outstanding debt and debt servicing to GDP
is not increasing over time (World Bank, 2010b). In a similar way, the IMF (2001) defines a set of fiscal
policies as sustainable if a borrower is able to continue servicing its debt without an unrealistically large
future correction to its income and expenditure. For the purpose of this paper we will define fiscal policy
to be sustainable if the present value of future primary surpluses equals the current level of debt.

     More in particular, in this note we examine the international practices with subnational borrowing
regulations and we advance the results form a more detailed statistical analysis examining whether any
particular borrowing regulatory framework perform in a superior manner in maintaining fiscal
sustainability, as well as what factors are important in choosing particular types of subnational borrowing
regulations.

     Despite the importance of these issues, little systematic empirical work has been done so far on the
effect of sub-national borrowing on fiscal sustainability. The existing literature does not offer a definitive
answer on whether borrowing at the sub-national level should be allowed, and if so, how it should be
regulated. The few cross-country empirical studies that evaluate these effects use either only some
aggregate measure of borrowing autonomy that does not take into account different types of regulations,


30
   The empirical literature on this issue is inconclusive (Martinez-Vazquez et al. 2015), but this is not surprising given
that the outcomes are very much dependent on the decentralization system design and actual operation.
31
   As an example, in the 1840s eight American states defaulted on their debts and these same states still continued
paying a premium on their debt in the 1990s (English, 1996).

                                                           74
monitoring and enforcement, or focus only on the effect of the fiscal rules. Moreover, most of these past
studies suffer from important econometric issues, including not addressing the potential reverse causality
between fiscal sustainability and chosen types of borrowing regulations, not modeling a dynamic process
in fiscal sustainability, or just focusing on the subnational rather than the general government fiscal
performance.

II. International experience with borrowing regulations

     As those who disagree with fiscal decentralization emphasize, giving more responsibilities to sub-
national governments may endanger their fiscal sustainability and macroeconomic stability, suggesting
that to maintain sustainability borrowing controls at the sub-national level are required. The literature on
sub-national borrowing emphasizes higher government levels’ provision of an implicit guarantee to sub-
national government debt as one of the main problems with borrowing at the sub-national level, causing
a classical moral hazard situation. There are different ways in which a national government can contribute
to prudent borrowing and these alternatives have been much debated.

                    Figure 1. Broad types of ex-ante sub-national borrowing regulations
                                     (relative frequency in the sample*)


        40%

        35%

        30%

        25%

        20%

        15%

        10%

          5%

          0%
                    Prohibited     Administrative Centrally-Imposed   Self-Imposed     Cooperative    Market Discipline
                                                        Rules             Rules
                                     1990                        2000                        2008


        Source: Author's calculations; *Sample consist of 60 industrialized, developed and countries in transition.


    As Figure 1 presents, most of the countries that introduced borrowing at the sub-national level after
1990, preferred centrally-imposed rules or direct control by the central government as the dominant type
of regulation. Furthermore, there has been a relative decrease in sole reliance on financial markets in
regulating sub-national borrowing, which may be explained by experience gained from recent crises in
which sub-national borrowing played major role. Moreover, in the last two decades, there has been an
increased trend of imposing legal sanctions for non-compliance, mostly in case when sub-national

                                                              75
borrowing is dominantly regulated by centrally imposed rules (Figure 2). This trend of imposing legal
sanctions for non-compliance is mostly due to those countries that have introduced borrowing at the sub-
national level during this period, rather than to the changes in those that have already been present in
the sub-national capital market (Figure 3).

     Most countries manage and supervise sub-national borrowing and debt by implementing ex-ante
and/or ex-post borrowing regulations. Ex-ante regulations can consist of more or less direct control by
the central government, of fiscal rules determined in the constitution or organic laws, or of reliance on
the financial markets and their mechanisms. On the other hand, ex-post regulations consist of sanctions
for non-compliance to the rules or for imprudent behavior. Webb (2004) contends that both ex-ante and
ex-post regulations should be practiced simultaneously, and should consider both the borrowers and the
lenders. Reliance on only ex-ante controls gives both the borrowers and the lenders incentive for
irresponsible behavior since it bears no consequences. On the other hand, reliance on only ex-post
regulations may give space to large sub-national governments to over-borrow and build up debts so large
that the central government cannot enforce them to bear the consequences, given their importance in
the national economy.

    Figure 2. Sanctions for non-compliance by type of ex-post sub-national borrowing regulations
                                (relative frequency in the sub-sample*)

              35%
              30%
              25%
              20%
              15%
              10%
               5%
               0%




                                   1990                     2000                    2008


           Source: Author's calculations; *Sub-sample consists of 39 countries in 1990, 47 in 2000 and 51 in 2008 that allow
           sub-national borrowing.
     This chapter reviews the four main institutional settings that have been used to regulate the
operations of sub-national credit markets. They represent the ex-ante regulations and sanctions for non-
compliance, as an ex-post regulation of sub-national borrowing. The ex-ante regulations reviewed in this
chapter include four broad types defined by Ter-Minassian and Craig (1997), namely, market discipline,
fiscal rules, administrative and cooperative regulation.



                                                           76
THE EX-ANTE REGULATIONS

     Ex-ante regulations consist of ex-ante control and monitoring of sub-national borrowing and fiscal
performance. These regulations specify the purpose, types, and procedures of sub-national borrowing.
Liu and Waibel (2006) summarize the key elements of ex-ante regulations commonly used in practice. The
first is allowing borrowing only for financing long-term capital investments, which is also known as the
“golden rule”. The second type of the ex-ante regulations set limits on key fiscal variables, such as the
primary and/or fiscal deficit, debt service ratio, etc. Finally, some frameworks include requirements for
the sub-national governments to establish a medium-term fiscal framework and a transparent budgetary
process. To improve fiscal transparency, more and more countries have introduced credit rating systems
for sub-national governments, as an element of the regulatory framework for sub-national borrowing.

     Figure 3. Allowing borrowing at the sub-national level and imposing legal sanctions for son-
                            compliance (relative frequency in the sample*)




       90%
       80%
       70%
       60%
       50%
       40%
       30%
       20%
       10%
        0%


                                               Sanctions     Allowed borrowing


      Source: Author's calculations; *Sample consist of 60 industrialized, developed and countries in transition.


MARKET DISCIPLINE

     In some countries, the government relies solely on the capital markets to regulate sub-national
borrowing. Market discipline means that the financial markets are capable of sending appropriate signals
to prevent a borrower from entering the “unsustainable area”, and borrowing is limited by lenders’
willingness to invest. Credit agencies, such as Standard and Poor’s, Moody’s, and Fitch, provide both the
lenders and the borrowers in the market with information about the risk of default. There are, however,
certain conditions that need to be satisfied for the private financial markets to be an effective control


                                                              77
instrument for sub-national borrowing. These include: (i) capital markets must be free and open; (ii)
potential lenders must have available information about the borrower’s outstanding debt and repayment
capacity; (iii) there should be no chance or possibility of a bailout of lenders by the central government;
and (iv) borrowers must have the ability to respond with adequate policies to the signals sent by the
market (Lane, 1993).

    In this sort of setting, sub-national governments generally have direct access to the financial markets
to meet their borrowing requirements. Also, they independently decide how much and from whom to
borrow, and on what to spend the borrowed money. For example, provinces in Canada may borrow for
any purpose, whenever, wherever, and however they wish. There are neither internal nor external federal
controls over provincial borrowing, and they do not even need to provide any information on their
borrowing to the federal government (Bird and Tassonyi, 2001). Unlike provinces, municipalities face a
very explicit hard budget constraint. Local borrowing requires prior provincial approval and is severely
limited. Similarly to Canadian Provinces, Finish and Swedish municipalities do not need authorization from
higher authorities to raise loans and can borrow from both domestic and foreign sources without any
special conditions (Council of Europe, 1996b, 2009).

     Market discipline is only effective if the capital market is free and open. Restricted access to foreign
capital markets limits the available options and creates a suboptimal financial sector portfolio (Giugale et
al., 2000). There has been an increasing trend of allowing sub-national borrowing in foreign capital
markets over the last two decades, but mostly only with an approval by the central government authority
(Figure 4). Furthermore, availability of information and full transparency on outstanding debt and capacity
to pay are essential to market discipline. However, obtaining reliable financial information, especially from
the sub-national governments, often requires significant effort. Moreover, not all the sub-national
governments follow a standardized accounting plan, hold uniform registers of their assets and liabilities,
or publish information on debt and capacity to pay. In addition, hidden extra-budgetary funds weaken
transparency. Additionally, moral hazard undermines the effectiveness of market discipline in checking
sub-national governments’ excessive indebtedness. Bailouts encourage the expectation of future rescues
and moral hazard type behavior of both the borrowers and the lenders. Finally, market signals, such as
interest rates, can affect borrowers’ financial behavior in choosing more solvent fiscal policies. However,
the borrowers must be sensitive to the market signals for market discipline to be effective, that is, the
decisions about borrowing should change depending on the interest rate.

    However, in many parts of the world, capital markets at the local level are inadequately developed to
be able to provide efficient discipline to sub-national governments. In such circumstances, credit rating
agencies at the sub-national level are becoming increasingly important to evaluate the performance of
intergovernmental systems. In this same context, some sub-national governments have adopted fiscal
responsibility rules (that are self-imposed) trying to improve their credit ratings in the market. Examples
of these trends are seen in Canada, Switzerland, and the United States. Some countries in Latin America,
such as Argentina, Brazil, Colombia and Peru, recently have sought to follow this approach, at least
partially, with the introduction of Fiscal Responsibility Laws (Webb, 2004).

    As mentioned above, the Canadian government relies solely on market discipline in controlling sub-
national indebtedness. Credit rating companies evaluate sub-national creditworthiness. However, even

                                                     78
Canada’s fully-developed financial markets have not been fully able to control excessive indebtedness of
the sub-national governments. In fact, in the mid-1990s, sub-national debt reached 23 percent of GDP
(Bird and Tassonyi, 2001), (prompting) the provinces to adopt fiscal adjustments programs. Brazil and
Argentina, without meeting all necessary market conditions, did in fact rely on some sort of market
discipline approach in the 1980s, which had very unfortunate consequences. In Brazil, sub-national debt
jumped from 1 percent of GDP in the early 1970s, to 20 percent in the mid-1990s, with five large federal
bailout interventions (three for states and two for municipalities) (Bevilaqua, 2002).

    Market based sub-national borrowing regulations can take different forms. Dillinger (2003) compares
the United States’ and the European model for market based mechanism and concludes that while the
United States’ model relies primarily on municipal bonds, the European model relies dominantly on
specialized banks to finance sub-national borrowing. However, municipal bonds are becoming more and
more popular in Europe recently. The largest owners of municipal bonds in the United States are individual
investors, mutual and money market funds, and the commercial banks. After being issued, municipal
bonds can be sold in the secondary market, and are considered relatively safe from default, despite some
opposite examples in the recent period. Some of the specialized banks in Europe are owned by the
municipalities (e.g. Finland and Sweden), while others are founded by the national governments and have
later been privatized (e.g. Dexia in France).

RULE-BASED APPROACH

    Rule-based regulations consist of fiscal rules imposed by the central government and specified in the
constitution or in the organic laws. Such rules introduce a constraint on fiscal choices by sub-national
governments in order to guarantee that fiscal outcomes will remain predictable and robust regardless of
the government in charge. Rules may take different forms: ceilings on debt or total borrowing, deficit
targets, maximum expenditure rules, the “golden rule” (proceeds from borrowing must be spent
exclusively on capital projects), or rules related to debt repayment capacity.

   Borrowing and debt ceilings represent the borrower’s upper legal limits of total indebtedness and are
generally simple and easy to monitor. A deficit target has the advantage of simplicity and of being easily
understood by the wider public, but it may be unsuccessful in preventing excessive debt accumulation
because of the off-budget items. The most frequent deficit target rules are those targeting the overall
budget deficit (e.g. Austria, Belgium, Spain, and most U.S. states) or the operating deficit (e.g., Norway).
However, deficit target rules can also be met at higher levels of revenues and expenditures, which may
have macroeconomic implications.

    Expenditure rules set the limits on the expenditure level, and are conceptually simple, easy to
monitor, and can be most directly controlled. However, an expenditure limit can be more difficult to
implement at the sub-national level than a deficit target and may not necessarily be able to prevent debt
accumulation, since spending could be pushed below the line. Furthermore, the “golden rule”, limiting
the sub-national governments’ borrowing to finance capital investment only, mostly satisfies the
intergenerational equity justification for borrowing. However, borrowing for infrastructure does not
guarantee by itself the macroeconomic and debt stability. Typically, infrastructure investments are
required to provide “adequate” economic and social rates of return to be desirable or be approved. Many

                                                    79
countries currently implement some form of the “golden rule” (e.g. the United Kingdom, Germany, Spain,
and most states in the U.S.). Finally, rules related to the capacity to repay debt attempt to stimulate the
workings of the market discipline approach by relating the limits on indebtedness to expected debt service
on the debt (e.g. Colombia and Hungary in the 1990s). These rules, however, might not be as effective in
controlling debt accumulation if financial conditions are manipulated.


                   Figure 4. Allowing sub-national borrowing in foreign capital markets
                                  (relative frequency in the sub-sample*)



         90%
         80%
         70%
         60%
         50%
         40%
         30%
         20%
         10%
          0%
                            1990                            2000                               2008
                    Prohibited foreign           Allowed foreign w/ approval              Allowed foreign


        Source: Author's calculations; *Sub-sample consists of 39 countries in 1990, 47 in 2000 and 51 in 2008 that allow sub-
        national borrowing.



      Fiscal rules have the advantage of being generally transparent, more effective in addressing long-term
sustainability and intergenerational equity, and relatively easy to monitor. They can, however, be
counterproductive if poorly designed, or not adequately enforced. Most countries using the rule-based
approach use a variety of rules, some of which are redundant. Main disadvantage of the rule-based
approach is the trade-off between ensuring compliance and preserving flexibility. Strict fiscal rules leave
little room for adjustments in case of unexpected economic downturns, while more flexible fiscal rules
lack credibility and may fail to impose sufficient discipline. In practice, the efficacy of fiscal rules for sub-
national governments primarily depends on the ability to monitor the debt. There has been particularly
increased trend to impose limits on sub-national debt and borrowing during the last two decades (Figure
5). The use of the “golden rule” has also increased, but not by as much.

    All but one state in the United States (Vermont) has a balanced budget requirement. Budget rules
vary significantly across the U.S. states, mostly applying only to the operating budget (general fund). In
addition, as of 2008, 30 states also operate under tax or expenditure limitations (Waisanen, 2008). Several
studies investigate the effectiveness of sub-national government rules in the context of the U.S. states.


                                                            80
Most authors conclude that rules do enforce some budget discipline on the U.S. states, in terms of lower
deficits and quicker reaction to negative fiscal shocks (Poterba, 1994; Alesina and Bayoumi, 1996; Poterba
and Von Hagen, 1999; Poterba and Rueben, 1999).

     In the European Union, within the Stabilization and Growth Pact, limiting the overall level of public
debt as well as annual total budget deficits, raises the question about whether the debt limit should be
shared among the levels of government. In most countries it is assumed that the central government
should be responsible for the overall limit of public debt. Public debt is much lower at the sub-national
compared to the central government level, being just above 8 percent of total debt in Germany to around
19 percent in Switzerland (Swianiewicz, 2004). In most European Union countries the ratio of the sub-
national debt to GDP is pretty low, on average around 5 percent. The only “outliers” are the Netherlands
and Spain with over 8 percent of the sub-national debt to GDP. In Belgium, only the central government
is responsible for complying with the European Union fiscal rules, but with the agreements set between
the central and the sub-central levels of government, the commitments for complying with these
constraints is shared among all levels of government.

                     Figure 5. Imposing limits on borrowing and debt and the “Golden Rule”
                                      (relative frequency in the sub-sample*)



          80%
          70%
          60%
          50%
          40%
          30%
          20%
          10%
           0%
                              1990                       2000                               2008
                            Limits on Debt and Borrowing                      The "Golden Rule"


        Source: Author's calculations; *Sub-sample consists of 39 countries in 1990, 47 in 2000 and 51 in 2008 that allow sub-
        national borrowing.


    Switzerland’s approach to the sub-national borrowing regulation is an example of self-imposed fiscal
rules. 26 Swiss cantons apply different regulations which are set in each Canton’s law. In many cantons,
borrowing is allowed only for financing capital expenditures, and if the local and/or cantonal government
has the financial capacity to pay the interest on debt as well as the amortization out of the current budget.
Dafflon (2002a) discusses the sub-national borrowing regulation practice in the Fribourg canton where for
each project that cannot be financed from the current revenues, then the borrowing for its financing
requires the cantonal approval.

                                                            81
ADMINISTRATIVE APPROACH

    The administrative approach is completely the opposite from the market discipline approach, giving
the central government direct control over sub-national borrowing. It may take different forms, such as
setting an annual or even more frequent limits on the overall sub-national government debt; prohibiting
external (foreign) borrowing; reviewing and approving individual borrowing operations (including
approval of the terms and conditions); or centralizing all government borrowing with on-lending to the
sub-national governments. The approval of each borrowing issuance requires an evaluation of the
financial terms and conditions under which each operation is contracted. The administrative approach is
more frequently used by unitary countries and less by (federal type countries.)

     Direct involvement of the federal government in micromanaging each credit operation at the sub-
national government level represents one of the disadvantages of this approach, since it is the opposite
of the fiscal decentralization idea. Moreover, this approach may unnecessarily increase federal
bureaucracy and cause undesirable inefficiencies in the financial system, and may even be incompatible
with a country’s Constitution if it allows the sub-national government free access to the capital market.
However, a major disadvantage of this approach is the moral hazard resulting from the fact that the
central government may find it difficult to refuse to financially support the lower levels of the government
in the case of impending defaults. On the other hand, the administrative approach has several advantages.
First, the central government can control both the macroeconomic and the external debt policy. Second,
the central government’s control may increase the sub-national borrower’s credibility, given that the
foreign lenders often require a central government guarantee, and it may result in better terms and
conditions received in the foreign financial markets.

    Countries like Denmark, Greece, Ireland, Mexico, and the United Kingdom practice the administrative
control approach in regulating sub-national borrowing. In Mexico, the states and municipalities, including
their decentralized agencies and public enterprises, can only borrow domestically to finance investment
outlays up to the ceilings set by their respective legislatures. Unlike several other countries in Latin
America, Mexico does not have a Fiscal Responsibility Law even under consideration. It uses financial
sector regulations instead to motivate state-level prudence. In the United Kingdom, a local authority may
not, without the consent of the Treasury, borrow from a lender from abroad or in a currency other than
sterling. In Spain, for example, foreign debt and bond issuances by the sub-national governments are
subject to the approval of the Ministry of Finance. During the 1980s, Australia centralized regulation of
sub-national borrowing through the Loan Council, but this direct control system did not turn out to be
effective, and now the sub-national governments are free to access the capital markets directly. The
functions of the Loan Council were restructured in the mid 1990s, and excessive indebtedness is now
cooperatively controlled (Craig, 1997; Dillinger, 2003; Koutsogeorgopoulou, 2007).

    Denmark provides an interesting example of the administrative approach to sub-national borrowing
regulation. In general, sub-national borrowing in Denmark is prohibited, but in some cases this rule is
waived. Permission for borrowing issuance, for which the municipalities apply individually, is granted if
the overall borrowing ceiling has not been exceeded and if the municipality’s debt does not exceed 30%
of total municipality’s expenditures. The borrowing and debt ceilings are negotiated annually with local

                                                    82
government associations. Furthermore, the general rule is that, if borrowing is permitted, both current
and capital budgets need to be balanced. Nevertheless, during the 1990s between 40% and 80% of Danish
municipalities’ deficits) were financed through borrowing, resulting in local debt of 4.5% of GDP in 1998
(Jorgen and Pedersen, 2002). Similarly, the United Kingdom applies an administrative approach to sub-
national borrowing regulations, but in the British case the borrowing limits differ among sub-national
governments (Watts, 2002). Limits are allocated to the local governments depending on their specific
needs for housing, education, etc. Allocations are increased or decreased based on the efficiency and
effectiveness of the local governments and can be adjusted for special needs (Dafflon, 2002b).

COOPERATIVE APPROACH

     Under this approach, the sub-national borrowing controls are designed through a negotiation process
between the federal/central and the lower levels of government. The sub-national governments are
actively involved in reaching an agreement on overall general government deficit targets, on the main
revenue and expenditure items, as well as on the limits on financing of the individual sub-national
jurisdictions. This approach is in practice in some European countries and in Australia.

    In Austria, for example, the “Consultation mechanism” between different levels of government and
the Stability and Growth Pact were implemented in 1999 (Thöni, Garbislander, and Haas, 2002) to ensure
lowering and maintaining the overall deficit below 3 percent of GDP. Similar arrangements exist in Spain
(Laborda et al., 2006). In Belgium, sub-national borrowing is supervised by a High Finance Council (HFC),
which is comprised of members nominated by the federal, regional, and community levels, and the
Belgian National Bank. In Australia, a fiscal institution called the Loan Council coordinates the fiscal policies
and borrowing decisions of the Australian states.

    The cooperative approach combines many individual advantages of the other three approaches,
which is both its main strength and its main weakness. A clear advantage lies in promoting dialogue and
the exchange of information across various government levels, as well as in raising awareness of the
macroeconomic implications of their budgetary choices. However, in order to be effective, this approach
requires the central government to be strong and able to effectively guide the intergovernmental
negotiations, which in many emerging markets may not be the case (Joumard and Kongsrud, 2003). The
main weakness of this approach is that, because it combines components of other three approaches,
when it is poorly implemented it reproduces the flaws of other approaches, instead of their advantages
(Ahmad, et al., 2005).

     As already mentioned above, since the Loan Council’s functions were restructured in the mid-1990s,
sub-national borrowing in Australia has been cooperatively controlled. Jurisdictions are required to
submit their total financial requirements for the upcoming year to the Loan Council with no requirement
for submitting specific project details. Then the Loan Council evaluates these nominations with regard to
the jurisdictions’ fiscal position, the infrastructure needs and the macroeconomic implications of
borrowing. In the event when the Loan Council has concerns about certain nominations, it has the right
to request the jurisdiction to justify the nomination, and if needed, it can amend its fiscal strategy. So far,
the restructured Loan Council, complemented by the financial markets and rating agencies, has been



                                                       83
successful in controlling sub-national fiscal behavior (Craig, 1997; Koutsogeorgopoulou, 2007; Webb,
2002).

     A key role in managing sub-national borrowing in Belgium is played by the “Public Sector Borrowing
requirements” in the High Finance Council (HFC). The HFC is composed of academics, members of the
National Bank of Belgium and the representatives of all levels of governments. The committee monitors
and analyzes the borrowing requirements of all levels of government at regular intervals and, based on a
concept of sustainability, formulates recommendations about the medium and long-term budgetary
targets for the different government levels. Based on the HFC’s recommendations, the agreements
between the central government and the regions and the communities are formulated, covering a period
of five to six years and committing the sub-national governments to meeting specific annual budgetary
targets in terms of their borrowing requirements. In order to ensure that public finances are consistent
with the budgetary targets, municipalities are subject to the “golden rule” under which deficits are only
allowed for investment. On the recommendation of the HFC, the central government can limit the
borrowing capacity of a non-compliant region or community to prevent endangering economic stability
or the external balance. So far, however, the HFC has not considered it necessary to use this sanction on
any of the regions or communities (OECD, 2007).

     According to Liebig, et al. (2008), the sub-national borrowing regulation in South Africa is a
combination of the cooperative and the marked based approach. The cooperative component originates
in the South African Constitution where Article 3 requires a “co-operative government”. Furthermore,
different spheres of the government control each other in terms of who borrows how much. On the other
hand, the South African legal setting for sub-national borrowing is also partly market-based, since the sub-
national entities can generally borrow as much as they want. The municipal councils authorize borrowing
issuances and there are no country-wide debt limits.

EX-POST REGULATION

    As already pointed out, the effectiveness of ex-ante regulations is limited without an ex-post
mechanism for dealing with sub-national insolvency. Even though ex-ante regulations are very important
for minimizing the risk of defaults, they cannot prevent them in all cases. Sub-national insolvency may
occur because of sub-national fiscal and debt mismanagement but also because of external shocks.

    Ex-post control mechanisms consist of a set of predetermined rules for allocating the default risk.
They provide a basis for both borrowers’ and lenders’ expectation that in case of insolvency, they both
would share the burden. Properly designed ex-post regulations enforce the hard budget constraint on
sub-national governments.

    Countries generally apply two main approaches in ex-post regulation of the sub-national borrowing,
namely the judicial and the administrative approach. The judicial approach involves the courts which make
key decisions and give guidance on the restructuring process. The advantage of the judicial approach is
that it neutralizes political pressure. However, the ability of courts to impose fiscal adjustments on sub-
national governments is very limited. The administrative approach, however, often allows political
intervention of the higher levels of government in resolving the sub-national insolvency.


                                                    84
    Depending on the factors, such as history, political and economic structure, etc. countries apply
various approaches for ex-post regulation of the sub-national borrowing. For example, Hungary and Brazil
apply the administrative approach, while South Africa and the United States prefer a combination of the
judicial and the administrative approaches. Moreover, there is a uniform approach across states in the
United States for dealing with municipal distress.

    Any ex-post control mechanism consists of three central elements. The first is the definition of
insolvency that acts as a procedural trigger. Different countries define insolvency. While Hungary and the
United States define insolvency as inability to pay debt, South Africa uses one definition for serious
financial problems and another for persistent violation of financial commitments. The second element is
the debtor’s fiscal adjustment to bring in line spending with revenues as well as borrowing with capacity
to service debt. Even when the sub-national governments have significant autonomy in controlling
expenditures and raising revenues, fiscal adjustment often requires difficult political choices of reducing
spending and raising revenues. Finally, the third one includes negotiations between the debtor and
creditor to restructure debt obligations. In case of the administrative approach, the higher government
level tends to restructure sub-national debt into longer-term debt instruments, which was the case in
Brazil in 1997. However, the debt discharge is typically limited to the judicial approach (Liu, 2008).

    In summary, there is a wide variety of both ex-ante and ex-post sub-national borrowing regulations
that countries implement. The regulations reflect the level of development of the financial markets, the
political power of different levels of government, and macroeconomic and fiscal conditions. Each type of
sub-national borrowing regulation has both advantages and disadvantages, which determine how suitable
each is for a particular country’s circumstances. Reliance on only ex-ante controls gives both borrowers
and lenders the incentive for irresponsible behavior since they bear none of the consequences. On the
other hand, reliance on only ex-post regulation may give space to large sub-national governments to over-
borrow and build up such large debts that the central government cannot enforce them to bear the
consequences given their importance in the national economy. Finally, as a county’s circumstances change
over time, the country may change its preferred mechanism to control sub-national behavior in financial
markets.

III. Advancing the main results on the selection of borrowing rules and on the impact of rules on fiscal
sustainability

    For the empirical analysis we use unbalanced panel data for 57 industrialized, developing, and
transition countries between 1990 and 2008. Two alternative dependent variables are used; namely, the
primary balance32 at the general government33 level and at the sub-national level.34 The main variables of
interest are four broad types of sub-national borrowing regulations, first categorized by Ter-Minassian
and Craig (1997); namely, market-based, rule-based35, cooperative, and administrative regulation. The


32
   That is, Revenues minus (Expenditures net of Interest Payments).
33
   The general government sector consists of entities that fulfill the functions of government as their primary activity
and can be divided into central, state, and local government subsectors, depending on a country (IMF, 2001: p.33).
34
   The sub-national government represents all levels of government below the central government level.
35
   With a distinction made between centrally-imposed and self-imposed rules.

                                                          85
results obtained from using these types of sub-national borrowing regulations are compared with those
obtained from prohibiting borrowing at the sub-national level altogether.

    To evaluate the relationship between sub-national borrowing regulations and fiscal performance at
the general and the sub-national government levels, two methodologies are applied. First, we use the
“system” GMM estimator to evaluate how the primary balance changes as a result of changes in the level
of sub-national outstanding debt, sub-national borrowing regulations, revenue and expenditure
autonomy, and in control variables. Second, we apply duration analysis to investigate the effect of the
main and control variables on fiscal sustainability, when alternative levels of the primary balance are
defined as fiscally sustainable. Finally, we address the potential reverse causality problem between the
primary balance and the types of sub-national borrowing regulations by applying the multinomial logit
approach in the first state to estimate the predicted probabilities of choosing each type of regulations.
This methodology allows the investigation of potential determinants of choosing each of the sub-national
regulation types at the same time.

    Advancing our main results, first, concerning the selection of rules, we find that the depth of the
financial market is particularly important when choosing cooperative regulations and regulations based
on centrally and self-imposed rules. Also, countries with higher primary balances (both at the general and
subnational levels of government) are more likely to choose self-imposed rules and market-based
regulations over the other types. On the other hand, countries with higher sub-national outstanding debt
seem to be more likely to regulate the sub-national borrowing.

    The institutional design and history of the fiscal decentralization system has some effects on fiscal
sustainability. The presence of subnational tax autonomy contributes to an increase in the general
government primary balance but at the subnational level tax autonomy is on the margin not significantly
high. In those countries with a history of subnational government bailouts primary balances on average
are lower at both the sub-national and the general government levels than in other countries.

    On the effectiveness of borrowing regulations, we find that the “golden rule” (borrowing is only for
capital investment purposes) and limits on debt and borrowing positively affect the primary balance at all
levels of government. However, on the question of which regulations are most effective, we find that
none of the broad types of sub-national borrowing regulations seem to have a significant direct effect on
the narrow definition of fiscal sustainability at the subnational level.

     This is somewhat of a surprising result, given the amount of discussion and effort that has gone on in
shaping up the different regulations. This negative result shifts the focus to what the impact may be of
the different regulations on the overall fiscal balance of the country through the impact of the different
fiscal behavior of subnational governments. And here there are some salient results.

    First, we find that cooperative type of sub-national borrowing regulations seems to have a positive
effect on improving general government fiscal performance even in the case of high levels of sub-national
debt and high dependence on subnational governments on intergovernmental transfers. In addition, the
threshold level for fiscally sustainable primary balance appears to be quite determinant on how effective
the different rules are: (i) When a particular level of the primary balance is predetermined as sustainable,


                                                    86
then self-imposed rules seem to be the only effective method in maintaining the primary balance above
that threshold, for all government levels; (ii) more centralized types of regulations (administrative and
cooperative) seem to be more effective with a higher threshold for fiscally sustainable primary balance,
while more decentralized regulations (self-imposed rules) seem to show better performance with lower
thresholds.

References

Ahmad, E., Albino-War, M., and Singh, R. (2005). Sub-national Public Financial Management: Institutions
   and Macroeconomic Considerations. IMF Working Paper Series 05/108.
Alesina, A. F., and Bayoumi, T. (1996). The costs and benefits of fiscal rules: evidence from U.S. states.
    NBER Working Paper No. 5614.
Bevilaqua, A. S. (2002). State government bailouts in Brazil. Inter-American Development Bank, Research
    Network Working Paper #R-441.
Bird, R. M., and Tassonyi, A. T. (2001). Constraints on provincial and municipal borrowing in Canada:
    markets, rules, and norms. Canadian Public Administration, 44(1), 84-109.
Council of Europe. (1996b). Structure and Operation of Local and Regional Democracy: Sweden.
Council of Europe. (2009). Structure and Operation of Local and Regional Democracy: Finland.
Craig, J. (1997). Australia. In T. Ter-Minassian (Ed.), Fiscal Federalism in Theory and Practice. Washington,
    D.C.: International Monetary Fund.
Dafflon, B. (2002a). Capital Expenditure and Financing in the Communes in Switzerland. In B. Dafflon (Ed.),
    Local public finance in Europe: Balancing the budget and controlling debt. Cheltenham-Northampton:
    Edward Elgar Publishing.
Dafflon, B. (2002b). The Theory of Sub-national Balanced Budget and Debt Control. In B. Dafflon (Ed.),
    Local public finance in Europe: Balancing the budget and controlling debt. Cheltenham-Northampton:
    Edward Elgar Publishing.
Dillinger, W. (2003). Regulations and Markets: Brazil's Efforts to Control Subnational Borrowing. USAID.
English, W. B. (1996). Understanding the costs of sovereign default: American state debts in the 1840's.
    American Economic Review, 86(1), 259-275.
Fölscher, A. (2007). Local Fiscal Discipline: Fiscal Prudence, Transparency, and Accountability. In A. Shah
    (Ed.), Local Budgeting. Washington D.C.: The World Bank.
Freire, M., and Petersen, J. E. (2004). Subnational capital markets in developing countries: from theory to
    practice. Washington D.C. / New York: The World Bank and Oxford University Press.
Fukasaku, K., and De Mello, L. R. (1998). Fiscal Decentralization and Macroeconomic Stability: The
   Experience of Large Developing and Transition Economies. In K. Fukasaku and R. Hausmann (Eds.),
   Democracy, Decentralization and Deficits in Latin America. Paris: OECD.
Giugale, M., Trillo, F. H., and Oliveira, J. C. (2000). Sub-national borrowing and debt management. In M.
    Giugale and S. B. Webb (Eds.), Achievements and Challenges of Fiscal Decentralization: Lessons from
    Mexico. Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.

                                                     87
IMF. (2001). Manual on Fiscal Transparency. Washington D.C.: International Monetary Fund.
Jorgen, N., and Pedersen, M. (2002). Local Government and Debt Financing in Denmark. In B. Dafflon (Ed.),
    Local public finance in Europe: Balancing the budget and controlling debt. Cheltenham-Northampton:
    Edward Elgar Publishing.
Joumard, I., and Kongsrud, P. M. (2003). Fiscal relations across government levels. OECD Economic Studies,
   1(36).
Koutsogeorgopoulou, V. (2007). Fiscal relations across levels of government in Australia. OECD Economics
   Department Working Papers No. 541.
Laborda, J. L., Martinez-Vazquez, J., and Escudero, C. M. (2006). The Practice of Fiscal Federalism in Spain.
   International Studies Program Working Paper 06-23.
Leigland, J. (1997). Accelerating municipal bond market development in emerging economies: an
    assessment of strategies and progress. Public Budgeting and Finance, 17(2), 57-79.
Liebig, K., Bahrinipour, M., Fuesers, L., Knödler, B., Schönhofen, C., and Stein, M. (2008). Municipal
    Borrowing for Infrastructure Service Delivery in South Africa: A Critical Review: Deutsches Institut für
    Entwicklungspolitik.
Liu, L. (2008). Creating a Regulatory Framework for Managing Subnational Borrowing. In J. Lou and S.
     Wang (Eds.), Public finance in China: reform and growth for a harmonious society (pp. 171–190).
     Washinton D.C.: The World Bank.
Liu, L., and Waibel, M. (2006). Subnational Borrowing Notes for Middle-Income Countries. The World
     Bank.
Martinez-Vazquez, J and A. Timofeev (2015) “Capital infrastructures and equity objectives in decentralized
   systems” in J. Frank and J Martinez-Vazquez (eds.) Decentralization and Infrastructure in the Global
   Economy: From Gaps to Solutions, Routledge, London and New York.
OECD. (2006). Promoting pro-poor growth: infrastructure. DAC Guidelines and Reference Series.
OECD. (2007). OECD Economic Surveys: Belgium.
Peterson, G., and Hammam, S. (1998). Building local credit systems. Washington D.C.: The World Bank.
Poterba, J. M. (1994). State responses to fiscal crises: The effects of budgetary institutions and politics.
    Journal of Political Economy, 102(4), 799-821.
Poterba, J. M. (1995). Balanced budget rules and fiscal policy: Evidence from the states. National Tax
    Journal, 48, 329-329.
Poterba, J. M., and Rueben, K. (1999). State Fiscal Institutions and the US Municipal Bond Market. In J. M.
    Poterba and J. v. Hagen (Eds.), Fiscal institutions and fiscal performance. Chicago: The University of
    Chicago Press.
Poterba, J. M., and Von Hagen, J. (Eds.). (1999). Fiscal institutions and fiscal performance: University of
    Chicago Press and National Bureau of Economic Research.




                                                     88
Swianiewicz, P. (2004). The Theory of Local Borrowing and the West-European Experience. In P.
   Swianiewicz (Ed.), Local government borrowing: risks and rewards: a report on Central and Eastern
   Europe. Budapest, Hungary: DFID and Open Society Institute.
Ter-Minassian, T. (1997a). Decentralization and Macroeconomic Management. IMF Working Paper
    WP/97/155.
Ter-Minassian, T., and Craig, J. (1997). Control of subnational government borrowing. In T. Ter-Minassian
    (Ed.), Fiscal Federalism in Theory and Practice (pp. 156-172). Washington D.C.: International Monetary
    Fund.
Thöni, E., Garbislander, S., and Haas, D.-J. (2002). Local Budgeting and Local Borrowing in Austria. In B.
   Dafflon (Ed.), Local public finance in Europe: Balancing the budget and controlling debt. Cheltenham-
   Northampton: Edward Elgar Publishing.
Waisanen, B. (2008). State Tax and Expenditure Limits. The National Conference of State Legislatures.
Watts, P. A. (2002). Local Government Capital Expenditure in England. In B. Dafflon (Ed.), Local public
   finance in Europe: Balancing the budget and controlling debt. Cheltenham-Northampton: Edward
   Elgar Publishing.
Webb, S. B. (2004). Fiscal responsibility laws for subnational discipline: the Latin American experience.
  The World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 3309.
World Bank. (1994). World Development Report 1994, Infrastructure for Development. Washington D.C.:
   World Bank.
World Bank. (2010b). Public Expenditure Trends and Fiscal Sustainability. Afghanistan Public Expenditure
   Review 2010.




                                                   89
P.R. China Ministry of Finance-World Bank High-level Summit on
SUBNATIONAL DEBT MANAGEMENT and RESTRUCTURING.
October 22, 2015. Nanning, Guangxi Province, P.R. CHINA




Fiscal Adjustment and Subnational
Borrowing Regulations
               JORGE MARTINEZ-VAZQUEZ
                               AND

                      VIOLETA VULOVIC




                                  90
SECTION IV - Roundtable Discussion on Options and Subnational Reform
      Priorities for China - Learning from Cross Country Lessons


 The participants in the roundtable discussion were Dr. Satu Kahkonen (Senior Director, World Bank),
Professor Jorge Martinez-Vazquez (Professor, Georgia State University), Professor Roy Bahl (Professor,
 Georgia State University) and Professor Qiao Baoyun (Dean of China Academy of Public Finance and
Public Policy, Central University of Finance and Economics). The roundtable was moderated by Dr. Bert
                   Hofman (Country Director for China-Korea-Mongolia, World Bank).




                                                 91
 Round-table Discussion: “Options and Subnational Reform Priorities for
             China - Learning from Cross Country Lessons”

    This section summarizes the discussion and key messages that emerged among panelists on their
views about the main priorities for subnational debt-related reforms in China going forward. There was
broad consensus among the panelists that:

      The recent reform of the Chinese budget law in late-2014 was an important step towards
       putting in place a modern subnational debt management framework in China. For years, without
       formal on-budget debt-raising authority, Chinese local authorities have resorted to financing local
       public investment by borrowing through off-budget vehicles, such as Urban Development
       Investment Corporations (UDICs). The new budget reform measures require local governments to
       bring these off-budget liabilities explicitly on to the budget when making any fiscal policy
       decisions, including any maturing local government debt that is swapped with Central
       Government bonds. Provinces will now have an explicit quota for new on-budget borrowing. Since
       interest rates for government bonds are generally lower, this reform will reduce the debt servicing
       costs of local governments. Subnational government budgets will become more transparent.

      During a transition phase, quotas on new provincial borrowing and close supervision of local
       government investment plans by the central government are probably appropriate. Chinese
       financial markets, and especially local banks which are often connected to local governments, are
       not yet sophisticated enough to effectively constrain local government borrowing and impose
       market discipline. Further devolution of borrowing and investment decisions, subject to fiscal
       rules, requires a clearer separation of responsibilities and budgets at the various levels of
       government. It will also require to build further on recent improvements in the fiscal planning
       capacity of subnational government entities. In the short-run, the central government will
       therefore need to retain substantial administrative control over local government budgets, debt
       management and investment plans.

      Ensuring sound underlying local public finances is a prerequisite for further institutional reform.
       In the short run, the priority must be to ensure the sustainability of local government budgets.
       Sharp growth in local government liabilities following the fiscal stimulus program enacted by the
       Chinese government during the Global Financial Crisis (2007-2009), coupled with a recent
       slowdown of the Chinese economy, have raised doubts about the health of local government
       finances. A comprehensive debt sustainability analysis is therefore needed at all subnational
       entities. This analysis should take into account some of the key long-term challenges facing
       Chinese budgets, which are too often ignored, including unfunded pension obligations and the
       rapidly increasing costs of maintaining public infrastructure. Where required, fiscal consolidation
       and debt restructuring actions should be taken as soon as possible to bring local government
       budgets back onto a sustainable path. Given potentially limited scope for recurrent expenditure
       consolidation, this may require exploring further sources of local revenues, a cost-benefits
       analysis of public investment projects and assistance from higher levels of government.

                                                   92
        In the medium-run, further evolution towards a rules-based fiscal framework could be
         considered. As local government budget planning becomes more sophisticated and local financial
         markets gain in depth, further decentralization of control over local budgets may become
         efficient. Local governments may be best placed to determine local expenditure needs and
         appropriate local financing means. Subnational ownership, accountability and funding may
         increase local pressure for efficient public investment projects. Relaxing central control can also
         reduce local incentives to circumvent formal regulation through opaque “back door” transactions
         and thereby increase budget transparency. Overall, future reform steps may consider further
         increasing the autonomy of subnational entities over their budget and debt management
         decisions, subject to broad fiscal rules to ensure sustainability of local borrowing.

        A clear delineation of budget responsibilities across layers of government will be required.
         Expenditure responsibilities across different levels of government are still not clearly defined. Tax
         revenues are shared between central and subnational government, but local authorities have
         limited scope for setting their own tax rates and tax revenue sources. In practice, subnational
         entities conduct around 2/3 of expenditure, but receive about 1/2 of revenues. The gap is closed
         by transfers from the central government and subnational borrowing. For subnational entities to
         gain greater responsibility over their fiscal decisions, their budgets need to first be more clearly
         delineated. This implies that some expenditure responsibilities need to be reassigned. One
         panelist recommended, for example, a reassignment of expenditure responsibilities for most of
         social security and income maintenance programs away from the county governments and moved
         up to the Central and Provincial governments.

        Need to introduce more sustainable sources of subnational revenues. A clear delineation of
         budgets will need to match expenditure responsibilities with revenue raising authorities at the
         local level. This will also improve the ability of subnational entities to manage their debt. In any
         such rebalancing effort, land-lease revenues will likely continue to be an important source of
         revenues for local budgets. In addition, several other taxes are currently under discussion as
         candidate sources of local revenue. A recurrent tax on the value of property is already being
         piloted in some regions of China. However, the implementation of such a tax is technically
         demanding, including the valuation of properties. Panelists noted that other taxes could include
         a vehicles tax, a vehicles fuel tax or a local piggy-back tax on an existing income tax base.36

        The budget planning capabilities of subnational entities need to be enhanced. Multi-year budget
         planning will need to be fully implemented at the subnational level. Budget planning should also
         become more comprehensive, with full coordination of the recurrent and investment budgets.
         Economic growth targets and fiscal targets need to be set jointly and need to be mutually
         consistent, requiring coordination among government departments. The data quality,




36
  A potential cost of moving tax-raising authority to the local level may be that the central government will find it
harder to quickly mobilize funds, such as for support after regional natural disasters or for fiscal stimulus to stabilize
the economy.

                                                           93
       transparency and comprehensiveness of subnational budget data should be enhanced further,
       including the full recognition of off-budget state-owned enterprises and contingent liabilities.

     Overall, it was noted that these medium-term reforms would need to be introduced gradually over a
period of at least five years. International experiences presented at this workshop suggest that reforms
of the formal fiscal framework can only be successful if there is accompanying “cultural change” among
all stakeholders towards more prudent public finance, debt and fiscal risks management. In addition,
implementation capacity and human capital constraints need to be quickly identified and efforts to
improve them in local budget authorities should be supported in earnest. To this end, the Central
Government can assist subnational authorities, including by incentivizing subnational reforms through
conditional financial assistance or conditional further debt swaps. Panelists highlighted that the World
Bank Group—through the materials presented here, its convening power to bring the state-of the art
thinkers and experienced practitioners from around the world, and its in-house expertise—has a wealth
of international experience in the design and implementation support of appropriate reforms of
subnational debt management frameworks in its client countries. The ongoing cooperation between the
Chinese Government and the World Bank in two pilot subnational debt-related reform projects in
Chongqing and Hunan are significant partnerships in this direction.




                                                  94
                      SECTION V - Concluding Remarks




   Mr. Chen Xinhua, Deputy Director-General, Budget Department, Ministry of Finance, China

Dr. Satu Kahkonen, Director for Asia and Europe, Macroeconomics and Fiscal Management Global
                            Practice, EFI Vice-Presidency, World Bank

  Mr. Xu Xiang, Deputy Director-General of Human Resources Development Center, Ministry of
                                        Finance, China




                                           95
                                             Chen Xinhua
        Deputy Director-General, Budget Department, Ministry of Finance, Government of China

    Respected Ms. Satu Kahkonen, honored specialists, ladies and gentlemen, time always passes so
quickly when we enjoy sharing knowledge. After a full day of lively discussion, the international workshop
on local government debt management is about to end, I, hereby, on behalf of the Budget Department
of Ministry of Finance express the appreciation and thanks to the excellent speeches of specialists from
home and abroad, the active participation of local government debt managers, and the warm hospitality
of Department of Finance of Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region.

     Raising loans are a necessity for the local governments to carry out the process of industrialization
and urbanization. Rational and moderate borrowing is helpful in improving the economic development.
However, raising excessive loans and monitoring gaps could lead to debt crisis, which will affect the
sustainable achievement of our economic development. This goal has been an important subject for many
countries to study how to use the double-edged sword to effectively make full use of the borrowing
through standardizing the activities of local governments, and successfully managing their debt size and
risks.

     Specialists here have conducted full discussions based on their own research and practices, and the
excellent speeches of many honored guests have left a deep impression on us. For example, Director Mr.
Liu analyzed the paths and future of improving debt management in China from the perspectives of
connection between debt management and budget management, as well as the national and local
governance. Professor Qiao gave an in-depth analysis with focus on the taxation responsibilities,
assignment of expenditure responsibilities, and development of the bond market in China, which
summarizes the current characteristics of local debt system and reform logic in China. Ms. Lili Liu
introduced the classic cases in New York and Detroit combined with the U.S. Chapter 9 Bankruptcy Code,
pointing out that the size of the debt is not the only indicator of risk evaluation and it is necessary to also
establish the connection between the ex-post and ex-ante management. Mr. Fernando Blanco compared
the characteristics between Brazil and Mexico. Professor Jorge Martinez-Vazquez introduced the
development of the local finance and debt in Russia, pointing out that it is necessary to maintain the
balance between income and expenditure to prevent the increase of local debts. Ms. Abha Prasad pointed
out that different strategies are adopted for the governance system with diverse political effects in
different development stages, which makes the comparison more informative. Mr. Sudarshan Gooptu
pointed out that the sustainability of fiscal rules played an important role in avoiding fiscal issues.
Professor Jorge Martinez-Vazquez carried out an experimental analysis on the monitoring of subnational
market rules, cooperation and administration. An open discussion was conducted by specialists from
home and abroad and interaction is done with the audience, so as to share the latest theoretical results,
provide valuable management experience, and put forward rewarding suggestions on the policies of
subnational debt management in China.

    In light of this information, I think that there are common principles and universal practices for
strengthening subnational debt management. The intervention and management of the central
government, open and transparent borrowing mechanism, effective control of the size of debts,

                                                      96
standardized legal restraints and budget management were seen to be indispensable for U.S.A., European
Union countries and developing countries such as India and Brazil. Furthermore, the stages of
development of the management systems differ in various countries and regions. The objectives for the
management of the creditor rights set by local governments are different as well. The evaluation of the
outcomes and results of their responsibilities is different too. For example, the concept of emergency aid
is different in Mexico. Ireland and Greece have different capacities in executing financial supervision.
Obviously, the debt management of a country shall be based on its actual conditions. It should draw on
the world-best practice management experience, but country-specific aspects should be taken into
account.

     According to the Chinese practices, the debts of local governments accumulated over the years played
a positive role in fighting international financial crisis and natural disasters, improving the people’s
livelihood, protecting ecological environment and promoting economic and social development. Of
course, there exist some problems such as nonstandard management, high financing cost and
unreasonable structure. In recently years, the Chinese government has taken effective measures to
strengthen subnational debt management with a strong sense of responsibility. In August 2014, the
budget law was adopted by the National People's Congress Standing Committee. In September 2014, the
State Council printed and distributed the opinions on strengthening subnational debt management which
specified relevant requirements such as local governments’ debt size control body and method. Relevant
departments of the Ministry of Finance have done a lot of work in these areas of budget management,
bond issuing and risk control. We are soberly aware that improving subnational debt management is a
long-term task. New circumstances, new problems and new challenges will be encountered. We will
actively absorb the workshop results and constantly improve the subnational debt management. We also
hope to deepen the cooperation with the World Bank in many aspects, so as to jointly advance subnational
debt management theory and practice of our local governments.

    Finally, wish you all a happy journey home. Thanks!




                                                   97
                                           Satu Kahkonen
         Director for Asia and Europe, Macroeconomics and Fiscal Management Global Practice
              Equitable Growth, Finance and Institutions (EFI) Vice Presidency, World Bank

     I would like to thank the Ministry of Finance (in particular the International Cooptation Department,
International Economic and Financial Cooperation Department, Budget Department, Human Resources
Development Center and the Finance Department of Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region for their
initiative to co-host the international workshop on Subnational Debt Management and Restructuring with
the World Bank. The topic of the workshop is highly relevant for China today.

The proceedings of the workshop highlighted five messages:

     There is a need for a transition strategy for subnational financing;
     Use debt sustainability as a guide for transition;
     There is no free lunch;
     Strengthening subnational budget and debt management cannot wait; and
     It is all about incentives.
IV. There is a need for a transition strategy for subnational financing

    China has made remarkable economic progress in the past couple of decades: over 700 million people
have been lifted out of poverty, the urban infrastructure has been developed quickly and social services
have improved significantly. Investments by subnational governments have helped achieve this and
sustain growth in China.

    However, the magnitude and the way these investments have been financed have led to a large and
growing stock of subnational debt, and, if unchecked, becoming a problem of debt sustainability in a
number of subnational entities. In response and to avoid a hard landing of the economy, the Government
has decided to transition to a more sustainable framework for subnational financing. The 2014 Budget
Law reform is a significant step in this direction.

    But establishing that new financing framework will not happen overnight. It will take some time to
establish well-functioning institutions, policies and the legal framework that will allow subnational
governments to borrow more responsibly. At the same time, spending needs are pressing and large.
Among other things, the Chinese population is aging and the social sector spending pressures—in
particular on health and pensions—are rising. Also, infrastructure still needs some attention.

    Therefore, the first message that came out clearly in the workshop is that a transition strategy from
the current to a new financing framework is needed. The other messages from the workshop proceedings
focused on that transition strategy.

V. Use debt sustainability as a guide for transition

The introduction of provincial and local government bonds—or swap of RMB3.2 trillion of existing debt
to bonds--was a welcome measure. In addition to reducing debt servicing costs, it enhanced the
transparency of subnational financing arrangements.



                                                   98
    While that was an important step, the workshop presentations highlighted that debt sustainability
analysis is needed at the subnational level to determine whether the debt swap and other measures
already taken are sufficient to deal with the stock of debt. If the analysis shows the measures have not
been enough, fiscal adjustment—spending and revenue measures—will be needed over time to bring
debt levels under control and on a sustainable path. Further, if fiscal consolidation alone is inadequate to
bring debt to sustainable levels in a reasonable time, the government will need to consider debt re-
profiling or debt restructuring in highly indebted provinces.

    The workshop discussions highlighted that, in parallel, it is advisable to start the review of the
intergovernmental fiscal framework to ensure that tax assignments match expenditure responsibility. In
that context it would be important to ensure that equity concerns are addressed as reliance on market
financing will tend to favor richer areas.

    Also, while the new financing framework can be expected to include fiscal rules, during the transition
period the government could use administrative controls to set debt limits that cover all sources of
financing. Further, it would be important to establish also guidelines for use of land leases to finance
infrastructure.

VI. There is no free lunch

    When preparing a transition strategy and assessing debt sustainability, international experience
stresses the importance to take a consolidated “public sector” view of finances at the subnational level:
including UDIC activities, estimates for contingent liabilities and off-budget expenditures. As in other
countries, financing public expenditure outside the budget or through the “backdoor”, such as through
extra-budgetary funds, special purpose vehicles, bank loans or PPP projects only postpones when the
government has to pay. The bill always comes. There is no free lunch.

VII. Strengthening subnational budget and debt management cannot wait

   The fourth message from the workshop was that strengthening subnational budget and debt
management cannot wait. Four ways to improve subnational budget management was highlighted:

    (i)         Integrate budgeting for capital and current expenditure and take a multi-year view;
    (ii)        Improve public investment management to ensure that high quality projects are financed
                since resources are scarce;
    (iii)       Strengthen public debt management to ensure sound borrowing decisions;
    (iv)    Increase the use of capital market financing and PPPs.
    The results of these measures will take some time to show. Thus, it is important to start early.

VIII.       It is all about incentives

    None of this works without appropriate incentives to subnational governments. Peter Drucker once
said that “culture eats strategy for breakfast”. To avoid that happening in China, the culture of subnational
financing would benefit from some rebalancing. Specifically, at the subnational and national levels the
focus should emphasize not just aiming for growth and investment, but also debt and fiscal sustainability
and productive projects. The task ahead is complex, but rewarding. I look forward to further exchanges
on this important agenda.


                                                     99
                                             Xu Xiang
     Deputy Director-General of Human Resources Development Center, Ministry of Finance, China

     Thank you very much, Ms. Satu Kahkonen for your concluding remarks. I’d like to thank the technical
team from the World Bank led by Ms. Satu Kahkonen for their dedication and devotion, without which
this workshop could never be that high-level and professional. We also believe that this Summit, although
concluded now, symbolizes starting point of further cooperation between the Ministry of Finance and the
World Bank. I expect that such sound cooperation between the two parties will bear more abundant fruits
in the future. Ladies and gentlemen, dear friends, China like the rest of the world has experienced the
transformation from a simple government debt management practice to a more complicated one, from
the theoretical study to the integration of theory and practice. I believe, through the experience,
communication, and collision of ideas among Chinese and overseas experts, we now view government
debt management from a wider angle and have gained deeper understanding. It will have a positive effect
on the subnational debt management reform in our country. Now let us again give a warm applause to all
the experts present here. Thank you for sharing with us your great knowledge.

   I announce that the international workshop on subnational debt management today is concluded
now. Thank you.




                                                  100
                                      Authors’ Biographies

                      Roy Bahl is Regents Professor of Economics and Founding Dean, emeritus, Andrew
                      Young School of Policy Studies, Georgia State University. Bahl is an expert in public
                      finance with extensive experience consulting on state and local government issues
                      with public and private agencies, including Standard & Poor’s Corp., several city
                      and state governments, and federal agencies. Bahl headed the staffs of the Ohio
                      and Georgia Tax Commissions. He has served on the editorial boards of the
                      National Tax Journal, The Journal of Public Budgeting and Finance, and Growth and
                      Change. He is the author of the book Fiscal Policy in China, and with Johannes Linn,
                      of Urban Public Finance in Developing Countries. He served as principal economic
advisor to IBM’s Worldwide Tax Practice.

Bahl has consulted on fiscal matters with governments in developing and transition economies all over
the world, as well as with the International Monetary Fund, the Asian Development Bank, the U.S. Agency
for International Development, the United Nations and the World Bank. Bahl is the author of numerous
books, monographs and scholarly papers in the area of urban/regional economics, public finance and
economic development. He came to Georgia State from Syracuse University, where he was the director
of the Metropolitan Studies Program and Maxwell Professor of Political Economy.

                         Qiao Baoyun, Professor of Economics and Dean, China Academy of Public
                         Finance and Policy, Central University of Finance and Economics, He published
                         numerous books and scholarly papers. He has advised many countries on public
                         finance, local governance, and economic development. Baoyun graduated from
                         Georgia State University, U.S., where he earned his Ph.D. in economics.




                       Fernando Blanco, a Bolivian national, is Lead Economist in the Macroeconomic and
                       Fiscal Management Global Practice of the World Bank in the Latin America and
                       Caribbean Region. He joined the World Bank in 2002 as country Economist for
                       Brazil and became Senior Economist in 2008. Mr. Blanco worked actively in
                       analytical and advisory projects on fiscal federalism and in the World Bank lending
                       program in fiscal decentralization and with sub-national governments in Brazil and
                       West Africa where he led a number of innovative projects. Mr. Blanco has worked
                       in analytical pieces on public spending and fiscal decentralization in Brazil, Mexico,
                       Pakistan, Kenya and Nepal. Prior to the World Bank, Mr. Blanco worked at the

                                                    101
Institute of Applied Economics Research (IPEA), a think-tank of the Brazilian government, and was
professor of Public Economics and International Economics at the Brazilian Institute of Capital Markets
(IBMEC) and the Pontifical Catholic University of Rio de Janeiro. Fernando holds a PhD in Economics from
the Pontifical Catholic University of Rio de Janeiro with specialization in public economics and fiscal
federalism theory and practice. His work on fiscal federalism issues in Brazil was awarded in 1996 with the
XXI National Prize of Master Dissertations in Economics, National Bank of Economic and Social
Development (BNDES) in 1996. Since 1995 is member of the Brazilian Econometric Society.

                      Sudarshan (Shan) Gooptu, Global Lead, Fiscal Policy in the World Bank Group's
                      Global Practice for Macroeconomics and Fiscal Management. In this role, Dr.
                      Gooptu is the technical lead of the cross-section of staff in the Practice that have
                      professional interests and abilities in this business line (Global Solutions Group) of
                      the World Bank Group to help deliver strategic, global or country outcomes. He has
                      a Ph.D. in Economics from the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, U.S.A. and
                      over 25 years’ experience in the World Bank where he has undertaken a full range
of activities and operational products in both low and middle-income countries--from budget support
lending operations to core economic reports, policy and technical papers, and technical assistance
services.

His assignments have included work on debt and fiscal risk management; public expenditure reviews,
emerging markets' sovereign debt buyback and restructuring operations; policy-oriented
macroeconomics research. He was the World Bank’s Lead Economist for China and Mongolia between
2001-2008, after which he served as the Sector Manager for the World Bank’s, Economic Policy and Debt
Department and, until recently, a Practice Manager in the Macroeconomics & Fiscal Management Global
Practice (2008 and mid-2015).

                      Bert Hofman is Country Director, China, Mongolia and Korea. Mr. Hofman, a Dutch
                      National, is the World Bank's Country Director for China, Mongolia and Korea in the
                      East Asia and Pacific Region, based in Beijing.

                     Prior to his present assignment, Mr. Hofman was the World Bank's Chief Economist
                     for the East Asia and Pacific Region and Director, Singapore Office. As regional chief
                     economist he led a team to analyze key trends and policy issues across East Asia and
                     the Pacific and as Director Singapore he helped build a partnership that focuses on
expanding investment in infrastructure in emerging economies. Before moving to Singapore in 2011, Mr.
Hofman was the Country Director for the Philippines, responsible for a growing portfolio of projects and
advisory services to the Philippines government. Hofman has accumulated more than 22 years of
experience in the World Bank, 16 of which in the East Asia region. Among others, Mr. Hofman was Lead
Economist for China and for Indonesia and country economist for Mongolia and Namibia. He had also
worked on Brazil, South Africa, Mongolia, Zambia, and Namibia in his earlier years with the Bank.




                                                    102
Prior to joining the World Bank, Mr. Hofman worked at the Kiel Institute of World Economics in Germany,
the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) in Paris, and NMB Bank in the
Netherlands (now ING).

Mr. Hofman holds a degree in economics of Erasmus University Rotterdam and studied at the Christian
Albrechts University, Kiel.

                         Satu Kahkonen is Director of the Macroeconomics and Fiscal Management
                         Global Practice at the World Bank Group, which comprises over 350 staff with
                         expertise in macroeconomics, fiscal policy, growth and statistics. Here, she
                         oversees the work of the Pract... ice in Europe and Central Asia, East Asia and
                         Pacific,             as          well          as          South            Asia.
                         Prior to this, Ms. Kahkonen was a Sector Manager in the Poverty Reduction and
                         Economic Management unit. The cluster focused on economic policy
                         management and covered 18 countries of the East and South East Europe—new
                         EU Member States and Western Balkans—as well as select Eurozone
countries. Preceding that, she worked as a Lead Economist in South Asia, East and South East Europe, and
Africa in the World Bank. In that role, she led a team which provided economic policy advice and technical
expertise to multiple countries including Pakistan, Bulgaria, Croatia, and Uganda.

Before joining the World Bank, Ms. Kahkonen was part of the faculty of the University of Maryland and
Associate Director of the Center for Institutional Reform and the Informal Sector (IRIS), a think tank
affiliated with the Department of Economics and headed by the late Professor Mancur Olson. Ms.
Kahkonen is the author of three books on economic development, and has published numerous economic
reports                          and                         research                          papers.

Ms. Kahkonen holds a Ph.D. in Economics from the University of Pennsylvania, where she studied as a
Fulbright Scholar, and an M.Sc. from the Helsinki School of Economics.

                           Lili Liu is the Global Leader on Decentralization and Intergovernmental
                           Relations in the Governance Global Practice Group of the World Bank. She has
                           led policy research on multilevel government finance in the context of
                           macroeconomic adjustment, infrastructure financing, and capital market
                           development. She co-chairs the Decentralization and Subnational Regional
                           Economics Thematic Group, a Bankwide network with over 300 members. She
                           has published widely including books Until Debt Do Us Part and International
                           Experience on Subnational Debt Management. Dr Liu has been invited to speak
at high-level international conferences including those organized by APEC, European Commission, the
International Monetary Fund, and the governments of China, India, Italy, Poland, Russia, and Turkey.

Dr. Liu has led advisory services to the World Bank’s operations in many developing countries on multilevel
government finance, infrastructure financing, and capital market development. She operational work has

                                                   103
included leading high-level policy dialogue and lending operations for India and other countries, covering
development strategy, macroeconomic policy, public finance, trade, and infrastructure. She has a PhD and
MA in Economics from the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.

                          John Litwack became the Lead Economist for China as of October 2015. Before
                          he was the Lead Economist for Nigeria from September 2010. Litwack joined
                          the World Bank in 2002, and has been Lead Economist for Kazakhstan and the
                          Chief Economist for Russia. Before joining the World Bank, Dr. Litwack headed
                          the Russia Desk in the Economics Department of the Organization of Economic
                          Cooperation and Development (OECD) from 1995-2002. 1995-1998 he was an
                          Assistant Professor in the Economics Department at Stanford University.

                         Dr. Litwack received his Ph.D. in economics from the University of Pennsylvania
in 1998. He has published a number of books and articles on economic theory and topics of economic
transition. He has also done work on the economies of Ukraine, Belarus, Bulgaria, Serbia and
Montenegro.

                       Jorge Martinez-Vazquez is Regents Professor of Economics at Georgia State
                       University and Director of the International Center for Public Policy. He has
                       published over 20 books and numerous articles in academic journals, such as
                       Econometrica and Journal of Political Economy. He was the director of the $20
                       million USAID Fiscal Reform Project in the Russian Federation (1997-2000) and has
                       consulted with federal agencies and state governments in the United States and
                       over 60 countries including Russia, China, South Africa, Indonesia, and Mexico. He
                       has consulted with the World Bank, the Asian Development Bank, the United
Nations, and the Inter-American Development Bank, and is a Member of the IMF Panel of Fiscal Experts.

Martinez-Vazquez has been recognized with the Russian Federation National Prize in Economics for 2007-
2009 and the 2010 Public Policy Award of the German Development Cooperation from the International
Institute of Public Finance. In 1997 he was inducted into the Russian Academy of Natural Sciences and in
2006 he was made an Honorary Professor of the Central University of Finance and Economics, Beijing. He
was awarded an honorary doctorate from the University of Vigo in 2011 for his extensive body of work in
fiscal decentralization and taxation.

                     Abha Prasad has over 25 years of experience working on debt management and
                     fiscal policy. She is the Program Manager of the Debt Management Facility (DMF)
                     and is working as a Lead Debt Specialist with the World Bank’s Macro Fiscal Global
                     Practice. Prior to this, she was the Director with the Reserve Bank of India, the
                     central bank, managing the debt of both the federal and 28 sub-nationals. She was
                     actively involved in providing policy advice for framing India’s fiscal responsibility
                     legislation. At the World Bank, as part of a core team she has been leading the work
                     on the Debt Management Performance Assessment (DeMPA) framework, and the

                                                   104
medium term debt management strategies. She has worked in several developing countries and emerging
markets on debt management issues, that include, among other, Bosnia, Brazil (Rio de Janeiro), Belarus,
China (Chongqing and Hunan), Ghana, India, Indonesia (DKI Jakarta), Peru (Lima), Moldova, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, Sri Lanka, Tanzania, and Vietnam.




                    Liu Shangxi, Professor of Economics, Director of Research Institute for fiscal Science
                    (RIFS), Ministry of Finance, People's Republic of China. Research interests are on
                    Macroeconomics, Taxation and Public Distribution, Public Finance and Public Policy,
                    Public Debt and Public Risk, Public Budgeting and Financial Management. He has
                    Ph.D. in Economics from China Ren Min University.




                   Christoph Ungerer is an Economist at the World Bank. He works in the East Asia
                   Pacific Unit of the Macroeconomics and Fiscal Management Global Practice, EFI Vice
                   Presidency. Previously, Christoph worked as Economist at the Office of Financial
                   Stability, US Federal Reserve Board, and at the Country Desk for Greece, DG
                   Economic and Financial Affairs, European Commission. Christoph holds a PhD in
                   Economics from the LSE, an MPhil in Economics from the University of Cambridge
and a BSc in Economics from the University of Nottingham. He was also a Visiting Fellow at Harvard
University.




                    Mathew Verghis is Practice Manager of Macroeconomics and Fiscal Management
                    Department for East Asia and Pacific. Prior to assuming this position, he was Lead
                    Economist and Sector Manager for 7 years at the World Bank for Cambodia, Lao PDR,
                    Malaysia, Myanmar and Thailand. He had also spent fifteen years at the World Bank
                    covering a number of countries in Europe and Africa. He has written widely on
                    growth, poverty, fiscal policy and labor markets. He has a PhD in Economics from
                    the University of Notre Dame in the United States.




                                                  105
