                        102640



IMPROVING WEATHER, CLIMATE
AND HYDROLOGICAL SERVICES
DELIVERY IN CENTRAL ASIA
(KYRGYZ REPUBLIC,
REPUBLIC OF TAJIKISTAN
AND TURKMENISTAN)
                                                                                        |   1




Preface	



I
   mproving weather, climate, and hydrological services in Central Asia is an
   important component of social and economic development in the region. This
   report is prepared as a part of a technical assistance project, An Action Plan
for Improving Weather and Climate Service Delivery in High-Risk, Low-
Income Countries in Central Asia, funded by the Global Facility for Disaster
Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR) and implemented by the World Bank. This
summary report is based on the findings of the three national reports developed
jointly with the National Hydrometeorological Services (NMSs) of the Kyrgyz
Republic, the Republic of Tajikistan and Turkmenistan. It summarizes economic
requirements for weather, climate, and water information, and the product and
service improvements necessary to meet those needs.

The report contributes to the development of a broader Central Asia and Caucasus
Regional Economic Cooperation Initiative on Disaster Risk Management (DRMI),
which aims to reduce disaster risk vulnerability of the countries in Central Asia and
Caucasus. Recently launched, this program is coordinated by the World Bank, the
United Nations International Strategy for Disaster Reduction (UN/ISDR) secretariat,
and for hydrometeorology, the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) under
the umbrella of the Central Asia Regional Economic Cooperation (CAREC).
Acknowledgements



A
        number of people contributed to this study, and the authors would like to thank them. First of all,
        we thank the staff of the Kyrgyz, Tajik, and Turkmen NMSs in the central offices and regional cen-
        ters, which supported the development of this study and facilitated the work of technical missions
and consultation workshops with stakeholders. Preparation of country reports, which served as a basis for
this summary report, was advanced significantly by substantive inputs and coordination efforts, especially
those made by Mr. M. Bakanov and Ms. I. Mayatskaya (Kyrgyzhydromet), Messrs. B. Makhmadaliev and
M. Safarov (Tajikhydromet), and Messrs. K. Yazyev and D. Boltaev (Turkmenhydromet).

The study benefited from valuable inputs provided by the Bank partners, such as UN/ISDR, World
Meteorological Organization, and Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation (SECO). Our special
thanks go to Ms. P. Albrito (ISDR), Ms. M. Power (WMO), and Mr. H. Maag (SECO, Swiss Confederation).

The authors gratefully acknowledge the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR) for
their collaboration and generous financial support for this study and three national reports on which
it is based. The GFDRR is a global partnership of national governments and regional and international
organizations committed to helping developing countries reduce their vulnerability to natural hazards and
adapt to climate change.

Finally, we would like to thank World Bank management for their interest to this topic. Messrs. S. Jha, J.
Kellenberg, W. Zakout, R. Robinson, C. Bosch, R. Hoffer, Ms. C. Bronchi, Ms. A. Cave, and many World
Bank colleagues based in Central Asia offered their support during implementation of this work and
provided every practical help to ensure success.

The main authors of the report are David Rogers, Marina Smetanina, and Vladimir Tsirkunov who is also
the Task Team Leader for this GFDRR project. Messrs. A. Korshunov, V. Kotov, and A. Zaitsev participated in
the country missions and developed technical background documents and studies on climate vulnerability;
capacity assessment of the hydrometeorological services of the Kyrgyz Republic, Republic of Tajikistan, and
Turkmenistan; and modernization alternatives for each. Ms. L. Hancock and Ms. S. Sharipova contributed
to the development of the study concept, provided valuable information, and participated in the report
preparation.
Table of Contents

Acronyms and Abbreviations. ....................................................................................................................5

Executive Summary
Purpose of the Report.....................................................................................................................................7
                  ............................................................................................................................................7
Principal findings.

Chapter 1 Key Weather and Climate Hazards in Central Asia
1.1	 Main Geophysical and Hydrometeorological Characteristics...................................................................11
1.2 	Weather and Climate Risks: their Social and Economic Impacts and Related Economic Losses................11

Chapter 2 Comparative Assessment of Hydrometeorological Services Capacity in Central Asia........13

Chapter 3 Assessment of user needs in hydrometeorological information
3.1 	Approaches to needs assessment...........................................................................................................18
3.2 	Comparative evaluation of sector needs and NMS capacity....................................................................20

Chapter 4 Economic benefits of improved hydrometeorological service delivery
4.1 	Objectives, scope, and approaches of economic assessment..................................................................22
4.2 	Methods of economic assessment.           .........................................................................................................22
     4.2.1 	 Benchmarking method................................................................................................................22
     4.2.2 	 Sector-specific assessment...........................................................................................................23
4.3 	Summary of the key economic findings.             .................................................................................................24
     4.3.1 	 Kyrgyz Republic. ..........................................................................................................................25
     4.3.2 	Republic of Tajikistan...................................................................................................................26
     4.3.3 Turkmenistan................................................................................................................................26

Chapter 5 How to Improve Weather, Climate, and Hydrological Service Delivery in Central Asia
5.1 	Potential directions for improvement.....................................................................................................28
5.2 	National NMS modernization programs.................................................................................................29
              ................................................................................................................................................31
5.3 	Services	.
5.4 	Regional cooperation.        ............................................................................................................................32
5.5 	Summary of next steps..........................................................................................................................32

Selected Bibliography and Supplemental Information Sources. ...........................................................34

Appendix I. Main Geophysical and Hydrometeorological Characteristics
   1. Kyrgyzstan.  ........................................................................................................................................37
                ...........................................................................................................................................38
   2. Tajikistan.
   3. Turkmenistan.....................................................................................................................................39
4 |   IMPROVING WEATHER, CLIMATE AND HYDROLOGICAL SERVICES DELIVERY IN CENTRAL ASIA




Appendix II. Key Hydrometeorological and Climate Hazards
   1. Kyrgyz Republic.................................................................................................................................41
   2. Republic of Tajikistan.........................................................................................................................42
   3. Turkmenistan.....................................................................................................................................43

Appendix III. Basic NMS Modernization Options for Kyrgyzhydromet, Tajikhydromet and
   Turkmenhydromet
   1. Kyrgyz Republic. Kyrgyzhydromet- Main Modernization Components and Activities.  ..........................46
   2. Republic of Tajikistan. Tajikhydromet -Main Modernization Components and Activities......................47
   3. Turkmenistan. Turkmenhydromet - Main Modernization Components and Activities..........................48
                                                                                         |   5




ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

CA                Central Asia
CAC DRMI          Central Asia and Caucasus Disaster Risk Management Initiative
CAREC             Central Asia Regional Economic Cooperation
CIS               Commonwealth of Independent States
CMA               China Meteorological Agency
ECA               Europe and Central Asia
EHH               Extreme (high impact) Hydrometeorological Hazards
EU                European Union
FSU               Former Soviet Union
GFDRR             Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery
HH                Hydrometeorological Hazards
HMI               Hydrometeorological Information
IBRD              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
IFI               International Financial Institution
IT                Information Technology
JICA              Japan International Cooperation Agency
Kyrgyzhydromet    State Agency for Hydrometeorology of the Ministry of Emergency Situations
                  of the Kyrgyz Republic
NMHSs             National Meteorological and Hydrological Services
NMS               National Hydrometeorological Service or National Meteorological Service
O&M               Operations and Maintenance
SDC               Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation
SECO              State Secretariat for Economic Affairs of Swiss Ministry of Economic
                  Affairs
Tajikhydromet     State Agency for Hydrometeorology of the Committee for Environmental
                  Protection under the Government of the Republic of Tajikistan
Turkmenhydromet   National Committee for Hydrometeorology under the Cabinet of Ministers
                  of Turkmenistan
UNISDR            United Nations International Strategy for Disaster Reduction
WMO               World Meteorological Organization – a United Nations agency
                                                                                                         |   7




Executive Summary

Purpose of the Report



T
      he purpose of this report is to present the results of an assessment of national weather, climate, and
      hydrological services in Central Asia and to propose a program to improve these services. The report
      is based on the findings of three country assessments—the Kyrgyz Republic, the Republic of Tajikistan
and Turkmenistan—and supporting regional documentation. These and other countries that form the
Central Asian region share common concerns, regarding economic development and the vulnerability
of their economies and people to weather, climate, and hydrological extremes. National assessments
are based on evaluations of weather, climate, and hydrological hazards; key users’ needs; National
Hydrometeorological Services’ (NMS) capacities; and potential economic benefits from improvement of
hydrometeorological service delivery. The results of this GFDRR work and summary report will contribute
directly to the development of the Regional Initiative to Improve Weather, Climate, and Hydrological
Service Delivery in the Central Asia.



Principal findings

Improving weather, climate, and water services in Central Asia region is essential for stable social and
economic development. Central Asian countries are vulnerable to a wide range of weather-related disasters,
including floods and mudflows, droughts, frosts, avalanches, hail, and strong winds. Data suggest that
on average these events constitute a major part of all economic losses attached natural hazards and vary
from 0.4 to 1.3 percent of GDP per annum for the countries studied. There is a growing need to provide
better quality weather, water, and climate information particularly for early warning and to support
disaster reduction strategies in such sectors as agriculture, transport, water resources management, and
hydropower generation.

Figure 1. Mudflow, Flood, and Avalanche Related Damage in Kyrgyz Republic




Source: Presentations at Consultation Workshop, Bishkek, December 16, 2008.
8 |   IMPROVING WEATHER, CLIMATE AND HYDROLOGICAL SERVICES DELIVERY IN CENTRAL ASIA




The decline in the capacity and capability of the National Meteorological and Hydrological Services (NMHSs)
throughout Central Asia to meet society’s growing demand for weather, climate, and water information
and services reflects the overall decline in spending on public services since early 1990. Obsolete and broken
equipment, poor telecommunications, inadequate training, and problems with retaining qualified staff all
contribute to this problem. The lack of access to timely and accurate weather, climate, and water information
substantially impedes civil society and economic performance. Economic assessments of key sectors show a
measurable improvement in economic benefit is possible even with a modest investment in improving the
capabilities of the NMSs of the Kyrgyz Republic, the Republic of Tajikistan, and Turkmenistan.

In addition, simultaneous investment in NMS modernization in these three countries, and in the whole of
Central Asia, is valuable since political boundaries do not constrain atmospheric processes. Understanding
how the atmosphere behaves over the entire region will improve forecasts and outcomes throughout
Central Asia, as well as in each of the three countries.

Proposed programs for strengthening and technical upgrading of NMSs in the Kyrgyz Republic, the
Republic of Tajikistan, and Turkmenistan consist of three components:

      1.	 Technical design of hydrometeorological monitoring and telecommunication systems;

      2.	 System improvements for hydrometeorological monitoring to provide timely warnings of extreme
          disasters and hazardous weather events, to manage water resources, and to provide support to
          other sectors;

      3.	 Institutional strengthening and capacity building.

The first component focuses on the concept of hydrometeorological development, the technical design of
the system and the development of technical specifications and tender documents based on the national
reviews and supporting documentation. The second component focuses on implementing the modernization
of the NMSs. It consists of technical upgrading of the observational networks and strengthening of the
information technology base of the NMSs. The third component focuses on enhancing service delivery,
staff training, and professional upgrading.

The renewal of the observing networks, which are the backbone of weather, climate, and water forecasts
and analyses, must go hand-in-hand with building the capacity to deliver services users want. This approach
will realize the value of technical modernization as quickly as possible and make long-term sustainability
of the NMSs more likely.

Implementation of the proposed modernization programs will lead to substantial improvement of NMS
performance and better service delivery. Preliminary performance indicators have been developed; more
specific verifiable sets of indicators and their monitoring procedures will be developed for each national
program, as an intrinsic part of the technical design component.

To develop a more effective provider and user interface for service delivery, it is essential to involve users
of NMSs products and services in the modernization programs in each country.
                                                                                         Executive Summary |   9




The proposed NMS Modernization Program is a part of a Central Asia and Caucasus Disaster Risk
Management Initiative (CAC DRMI) initiated by the World Bank and the UN/ISDR secretariat in collaboration
with international partners in September 2008. The initiative includes three main components: (i) Disaster
Mitigation, Preparedness, and Response; (ii) Disaster Financing and Risk Transfer; and (iii) Improvement of
Weather, Climate, and Hydrological Service Delivery. NMSs modernization and better service delivery will
also contribute to the Central Asia Regional Energy-Water Development Framework announced recently
by the World Bank and other development partners. NMSs’ modernization, strengthening, and capacity
building are important particularly for mitigating weather and climate risks and for providing better services
for agriculture, water resources management, transport, hydropower generation, and other sectors.
                                                                                                         |   11




Chapter 1 Key Weather and Climate
Hazards in Central Asia

1.1 	 Main Geophysical and Hydrometeorological Characteristics



C
         entral Asia is a land-locked region of the Eurasian continent with multiple climatic regimes, ranging
         from heavy precipitation in the mountains to arid deserts (Figure 1.1 – regional map). The Kyrgyz
         Republic is highly drought prone, but this is offset by heavy precipitation associated with its high
relief. More than 70 percent of the country is above 2,000 m. Most of the country is located in a moderate
climate zone while its southern areas are subtropical. The Republic of Tajikistan, which borders the Kyrgyz
Republic, is mostly subtropical and semi-arid with some desert areas. Over 50 percent of the country’s
territory lies above 3000 m. Turkmenistan is extremely arid and about 80 percent of the country is flat
desert. (See Country Reports and Annex 1).



1.2 	 Weather and Climate Risks: their Social and Economic Impacts
      and Related Economic Losses

The Kyrgyz Republic, the Republic of Tajikistan, and Turkmenistan use a similar, standard classification of
both hydrometeorological events and unfavorable weather conditions to measure intensity and impact on
the economy and population.

These criteria identify extreme (high impact) hydrometeorological hazards (EHHs), including hydrome-
teorological disasters and hydrometeorological hazards (HHs). Meteorological, agrometeorological, and
hydrological events are classed as EHHs when by intensity, territorial coverage (more than 30 percent of
the region’s territory), or duration they could cause or have caused significant damage to the economy
and population and could result or have resulted in a disaster.

Meteorological, agrometeorological, and hydrological events are classed as hydrometeorological hazards
(HHs) when, by certain criteria, they could cause damage but their intensity, duration, and territorial
coverage does not exceed the criteria of EHHs.

Similar EHHs affect all three countries in the region; the most severe are mudflows, floods, and avalanches
caused by snowmelt or heavy precipitation. Droughts are also common to all three and are becoming
more frequent. EHHs have a high impact because agriculture is important to all the economies, and food
security is an issue for regional subsistence farmers. In addition hail and strong winds affect all three
countries with the Republic of Tajikistan and Turkmenistan having a particular problem with dust storms.
A comparison of annual frequency of occurrence of major hazards, using all available data since 1985, and
the annual average economic losses for each country is shown in Table 1.1.
12 |    IMPROVING WEATHER, CLIMATE AND HYDROLOGICAL SERVICES DELIVERY IN CENTRAL ASIA




Table 1.1. Average Annual Frequency of Occurrence of Major Hydrometeorological Hazards and Associated
Annual Average Economic Losses (US Dollars in 2006 prices)
 Type of Event           Kyrgyz Republic                Republic of Tajikistan                Turkmenistan
                   Frequency of   Average annual    Frequency of    Average annual    Frequency of   Average annual
                    occurrence    economic losses    occurrence     economic losses    occurrence    economic losses
 Floods and            43.0            11.0             42.0              15.7            2.17               14.5
 Mudslides
 Drought                0.5                7.3          0.12               8.6            0.61                n/a
 Spring and             2.0                7.5           n/a               n/a             9.9                n/a
 Autumn Frosts
 Severe Frosts          n/a                n/a           1.1               0.4             4.3                n/a
 Rainstorms             5.6                0.4           3.0               1.5            8.35                n/a
 Hail                   1.6                0.5           7.7               1.6            1.13                n/a
 Snowstorms             2.6                0.2           3.0               0.6            0.91                n/a
 Avalanches            15.1                0.3          26.6               0.8               0                n/a
 Windstorms             4.5                0.1           8.1               0.8            28.4                0.2
 Duststorms               0                  -             0                 -            22.0                n/a
 Dust Cyclones            0                  -             0                 -            0.09                n/a
 Dry Hot Winds            0                  -             0                 -            31.0                n/a
 Total cost                            27.3                               29.8                                n/a



Socioeconomic impacts of meteorological risks (in the aggregate and by types of EHHs and HHs) were estimated
on the basis of the integration of losses suffered by the economy due to specific hydrometeorological events
(e.g., mudflows and floods, strong wind, frosts, drought, etc.).

Two parameters are used to estimate the meteorological risk of impact of certain events on the economy:

■■ Hazard of event impact (or its climate frequency/frequency of its occurrence);
■■ Vulnerability to event impact (an absolute value of economic losses caused by the event in case of
   both correct and incorrect forecasts/warnings).

Economic damage caused by unfavorable weather conditions and hazardous hydrometeorological events
is estimated in two stages: (i) the climate hazard of impact of different events (their climate frequency) is
estimated on the basis of climate data; and (ii) the vulnerability of the economy to impact of specific HHs
and EHHs is estimated.

In general no single source provides a complete set of information on the impact of hydrometeorological
hazards on the economy. The information sources included data supplied by the respective hydrometeo-
rological services; where available, data from the ministries responsible for coping with emergency situa-
tions; and data from various economic studies.

Floods and mudslides rank highest in their impact on the economies of all three countries and drought
ranks second (Table 1.1). During the 2007-2008 winter, for example, Central Asia experienced extremely
cold temperatures for a prolonged period, resulting in a surge in demand for power that led to large water
releases and sharp declines in reservoir water levels. This was followed by abnormally low precipitation
and hot weather in the following spring and summer, resulting in extensive drought.
                                                                                                        |   13




Chapter 2 Comparative Assessment
of Hydrometeorological Services
Capacity in Central Asia



A
        s members of the World Meteorological Organization (WMO), the Kyrgyz Republic, the Republic
        of Tajikistan, and Turkmenistan, through their National Meteorological Services (NMSs), provide the
        international meteorological community access to data from the national observational network and
receive information from the National Meteorological and Hydrological Services (NMHSs) of other countries.

National laws and resolutions regulate the activities of an NMS. Following independence each of the three
countries developed a legal framework for the provision of meteorological and hydrological services. In
each, the laws allow for the provision of public hydrometeorological observing networks, forecasting of
hazardous events, and provision of information to appropriate governmental bodies. Each country has
a different governance structure for its National Hydrometeorological Service. In the Kyrgyz Republic,
the NMS is part of the Ministry of Emergencies; in the Republic of Tajikistan, the NMS is a state agency
(enterprise) of the Committee for Environmental Protection; in Turkmenistan, a national committee under
the Turkmenistan Cabinet of Ministers governs the NMS. In practice, however, they have similar day-to-day
operating procedures. Each of the three countries is a member of the World Meteorological Organization,
and each discharges this obligation through its respective NMS.

In practice, each NMS continues to operate largely according to procedures established during the Soviet
era. Staffing levels are high overall but with insufficient skills to provide for the needs of a modern
economy. In particular, technical qualifications are inadequate, and there is limited experience in providing
an effective interface with the users or potential users of weather, climate, and water information.

Throughout the region, NMSs operate largely with obsolete equipment and lack access to modern
forecasting methods, which limits their capacity to provide the products and services needed by the public
and the economy. All of the meteorological services’ facilities assessed in this study are in a poor state
of repair; they have insufficient qualified staff to adequately maintain current observation networks and
inadequate training opportunities to retain qualified staff.
14 |   IMPROVING WEATHER, CLIMATE AND HYDROLOGICAL SERVICES DELIVERY IN CENTRAL ASIA




Figure 2.1. On-site Meteorological Equipment and Instruments (Tajikistan, 2008)



Extensive technical reviews have been conducted of observational networks and other hydrometeorological
infrastructure (telecommunications, facilities for forecasting weather conditions for each country, warning
systems) and of the region’s hydrometeorological services, including the outcomes of assistance projects
implemented by the donors in support of regional NMHSs. The reviews show that current conditions
of the hydrometeorological services fail to meet the hydrometeorological services needs of either their
respective governments or the weather and climate-sensitive social and economic sectors. They also show
that the NMS in each of the three countries reviewed fails to fulfill the country’s regional and international
obligations for weather and climate information, including those under the World Meteorological
Organization’s Global Observation Network.

Table 2.1. Deterioration of Hydrometeorological Observation Networks
                                        Kyrgyz Republic              Republic of Tajikistan         Turkmenistan
 Component of observation          Number in      % Reduction      Number in     % Reduction   Number in   % Reduction
 network                             2008         since 1985         2008        since 1985      2008      since 1985
 Meteorological stations               32              62             57              22          48           52
 Hydrological stations and posts       76              48             81              41          32           45

 Upper air                              0a            100              0b            100          0c          100
 Meteorological radars                  0   d
                                                      100               1             75          0e          100
 Agromet observation stations          31              55             37              46          48           15
 a
   There were three operational upper air stations in Kyrgyz Republic
 b
   There were four operational upper air stations in Republic of Tajikistan
 c
  There were six operational upper air stations in Turkmenistan
 d
   One radar was in pilot operation in Kyrgyz Republic
 e
   One radar was in operation in Turkmenistan
                                                                                                  Chapter II |   15




Overall, the observing networks are unsatisfactory. In each country there has been a persistent downward trend
in the quantity and quality of measurements at most stations in the ground-based meteorological network due
to the deterioration and obsolescence of all of the measurement facilities, equipment, and communications,
which have been in operation for a long time and have exhausted their service life. In particular, the following
examples are notable:


■■ Many meteorological stations were closed due to lack of funds: 22 percent in Tajikistan, 52 percent in
   Turkmenistan, and 62 percent in Kyrgyzstan (Table.2.1).

■■ Hydrological observing networks have been reduced by 40-50 percent (Table 2.1) since the mid-1980s.
   Most equipment has exhausted its service life and is obsolete; spare parts are nonexistent or limited.

■■ Where avalanches are a problem, snow surveys have declined or are nonexistent, preventing timely
   forecasts and warnings of avalanche hazards.

■■ Aerological measurements have stopped in all three countries—a dramatic decline compared to
   13 operational stations some 20 years ago (Table 2.1). The absence of aerological measurements,
   exacerbated by elimination of all upper air soundings in Uzbekistan, significantly affects the quality of
   weather forecasts, as well as the results of global and regional meteorological model calculations for
   the Central Asian Region. At present only Kazakhstan keeps eight upper air stations operational—50
   percent less than in the 1980s.

■■ There is a lack of appropriate communication between the stations and monitoring sites of the
   meteorological and hydrological observation networks and the data collection center at the NMS.

■■ The system of data collection and dissemination is inefficient and fails to ensure reliable data collection,
   archiving, and provision of information products to regional and district-level users.

■■ Available information technologies are obsolete and fail to ensure receipt and transmission of the
   large data amounts required to produce modern information products.

■■ Technologies required to produce and transmit data and information products from NMS offices to
   users are nonexistent at both the central and regional hydrometeorological centers.

■■ Funds allocated from the NMS budget to finance operational costs are insufficient to adequately
   support the operations of stations and monitoring sites;

■■ Scientific and methodological support of the NMSs’ operations is weak.

■■ Metrological support of measurement equipment is almost nonexistent, leading to a considerable
   deterioration of the quality of the NMS observational data.

■■ Staff training is inadequate.
16 |   IMPROVING WEATHER, CLIMATE AND HYDROLOGICAL SERVICES DELIVERY IN CENTRAL ASIA




In addition, nearly all of the means of forecasting and producing information fail to meet modern
requirements for hydrometeorological services provided to public authorities, the economy, and
communities. Without adequate means of production, the capacity to provide services to users is
very limited. Overall forecasts have relatively low skill compared with NMSs outside of the CIS region.




Figure 2.2. Checking and Calibrating Instruments and Facilities in Central Office of Turkmenhydromet




Figure 2.3. Hydrological and Meteorological Stations Buildings and Facilities in the Republic of Tajikistan
                                                                                             Chapter II |   17




Figure 2.4. Current Communication and Data Transmission Equipment at Meteorological Station (photo 1
and 2 – Kyrgyz Republic), and Message Switching Center (photo 3 – Central Office of Turkmenhydromet




Figure 2.5. Data Archive in Kyrgyzhydromet Central Office and Data Records from Observation Sites
18 |      IMPROVING WEATHER, CLIMATE AND HYDROLOGICAL SERVICES DELIVERY IN CENTRAL ASIA




Chapter 3 Assessment of user needs in
hydrometeorological information

3.1 Approaches to needs assessment



W
            hen preparing their modernization programs, NMSs have traditionally focused on the techno-
            logical aspects of hydrometeorological service development. Such an approach aims to improve
            forecast accuracy and timeliness. Inadequate interaction with users, however, usually prevents
NMSs from taking into account actual and especially potential user information needs. A complete ab-
sence or underdevelopment of contacts with users at the modernization package development stage
results in a gap between the opportunities and plans for hydrometeorological service provision and the
understanding of what, how, and where NMSs’ information can be used most effectively to support man-
agement and operational decisions in specific sectors of the economy.

This lack of attention to end users’ current and potential understanding of benefits from better hydro-
meteorological services during an NMS’s modernization may further increase information misalignment
between a hydrometeorological service and its users. To avoid this, it is essential for NMSs to build their
interaction with users on the basis of modern principles, taking into account users’ interest in NMS devel-
opment and demonstrating to them both their own and national benefits, including the economic ones.

There are several key factors, which determine the priority, scale, and sequence of activities to modernize
the National Hydrometeorological Service and to improve its institutional structure. These include assess-
ment and recognition of the current status and trends in the needs for hydrometeorological information
for governmental institutions, users in major producing and nonproducing sectors of the economy, and
the population.

The objectives and expected results of user needs assessment are to (i) identify the causes and factors of
poor interaction between the NMS and its users; (ii) recommend to the NMS the most efficient way to
cooperate with users; and (iii) propose to users how to integrate and apply hydrometeorological informa-
tion and formulate their needs for it.

In each of the three countries, user needs for hydrometeorological information were assessed in two
stages:

First, NMS experts identified the NMS development priorities, proceeding from the analysis of its current
conditions, user needs (as perceived by the NMS), and knowledge of opportunities provided by modern
hydrometeorology. This survey was based on the questionnaire developed during preparation of the Na-
tional Hydrometeorological Modernization Project in Russia (2003-2004)1 and further tailored to estimate
1
    	 Tsirkunov, V., M. Smetanina, A. Korshunov, and S. Ulatov. 2004.
                                                                                             Chapter 3 |   19




the economic benefits from the improved quality of hydrometeorological services following the modern-
ization of national meteorological services in ECA region (2005-2007).2

Second, the key users’ needs in hydrometeorological services were assessed in order to prepare recom-
mendations on building NMSs’ capacity to provide synoptic meteorological and hydrological services and
information, as well as hydrometeorological hazard and disaster warnings to the national government,
economy, and population. The assessment targeted the most significant (in terms of GDP share) industries
and sectors that are vulnerable to EHHs and HHs.

The user needs assessment was based on a special checklist (World Bank, 2008b) developed using WMO
materials, World Bank earlier studies, and the Questionnaire on Assessment of User Needs in Hydro-Mete-
orological Information previously used for a survey conducted with the assistance of the regional project,
Swiss Support to NMHS in the Aral Sea Basin (Tajikhydromet, 2008).

The checklist used to assess the needs of specific weather-dependent sectors included the following sub-
stantive survey blocks:

■■ HH influence by impact (type and degree) and damage significance (one-time and total);

■■ Relevance of forecast products and barriers to their uses;

■■ Hydrometeorological information (HMI) sources, types, and delivery channels and formats;

■■ Quality assessment of delivered forecast products;

■■ Requirements of NMS products formulated with due regard for NMS modernization;

■■ Assessment of and methodologies for estimating economic damage from EHHs and HHs; and

■■ Recommendations and proposals to the NMS to improve and customize hydrometeorological
   services.
The results of the sector expert survey may be divided into two major groups:


■■ General information on the sector’s dependence on weather conditions and hydrometeorological
   hazards, on the amount and quality of HMI used by the sector, and on the current efficacy of HMI
   uses; and

■■ Information on the potential demand for various information types and presentation formats, accuracy
   and timeliness of each hydrometeorological element/event forecast required for sector operations,
   HMI requirements necessary for optimal performance, as well as recommendations and proposals on
   hydrometeorological service improvement and customization.



2	
     World Bank. 2008c.
20 |   IMPROVING WEATHER, CLIMATE AND HYDROLOGICAL SERVICES DELIVERY IN CENTRAL ASIA




3.2 Comparative evaluation of sector needs and NMS capacity

The results of the survey, consultations with NMS staff and sector experts, and discussion of HMI needs of
weather-dependent sectors of each of the three economies were discussed at country-level consultation
workshops on improving the efficacy of weather and climate service delivery (Table 3.1). Each of the
workshops demonstrated that the pressing issue of hydrometeorological service improvement was well
understood by both the NMS (the provider of products and services) and all key users and stakeholders.

Table 3.1. Comparative Assessment of User Needs for Weather, Climate, and Water-related Information
 Sector        Kyrgyz Republic                       Republic of Tajikistan               Turkmenistan
 Emergencies   Weather forecasts up to 15 days,      Weather forecasts up to 5 days       Weather forecasts up to 7 days,
               long term forecasts (4-6 months),                                          hydrological forecasts up to 10 days,
                                                     Emergency forecasts and warnings
               climate outlooks, emergency                                                monthly forecasts
               forecasts and warnings
 Agriculture   Weather and hydrological forecasts    Weather and hydrological forecasts   Weather forecasts up to
 and water     up to 5 days or longer, daily         up to 5 days                         15 days
 resources     standard meteorological data,         Emergency forecasts and warnings     Long range forecasts (up to 4-6
               emergency forecasts and warnings                                           months)
               for water management and crop         Weather forecasts for the paths of
               protection, seasonal forecasts for    cattle drive                         Climate outlooks for 1-month and
               crop management                                                            1-year periods
                                                                                          Emergency forecasts and warnings
                                                                                          Agriculture-specific products related
                                                                                          to crops
 Transport     Impact forecasts and weather          Stream-flow forecasts                Impact forecasts and weather
               forecasts up to 15 days, daily                                             forecasts up to 10 days, daily
               standard meteorological data                                               standard meteorological data
               Emergency forecasts and warnings,                                          Emergency forecasts and warnings
 Energy and    Weather forecasts up to 15 days,      Stream-flow forecasts                Very short-range forecasts
 power         long-term forecasts (4-6 months),     Weather forecasts up to 5 days       Weather forecasts up to 3 days
               climate outlooks, emergency
               forecasts and warnings                Emergency forecasts and warnings     Emergency forecasts and warnings
                                                                                          Climate predictions of water
                                                                                          availability 2-3 years ahead
 Media         Communication channel for             Weather forecasts up to 5 days       Communication channel for
               weather, climate and water                                                 weather, climate, and water
                                                     Emergency forecasts and warnings
               information used by several sectors                                        information used by several sectors
 Planning,                                           Climate data                         Climate data
 public                                              Emergency warnings and emergency     Emergency warnings and emergency
 services                                            monthly forecasts                    monthly forecasts
 Health        Climate data                          Climate data                         Climate data
                                                     Health-related forecasts
 Heating       1-3 day forecasts, current data,                                           1-3 day forecasts, current data,
               seasonal and longer term forecasts                                         seasonal and longer term forecasts
               and analyses                                                               and analyses


Many users need information that the NMSs cannot provide at present. Users are well informed that the
NMS has serious weaknesses, such as (i) a low-density network of weather and gauging stations resulting
in inadequate coverage of the high-altitude zone by meteorological observations; (ii) an almost complete
absence of automated technical facilities, weather radars, modern technologies, and means for remote
data processing and telecommunication; and (iii) critical conditions of facilities and data archive.
                                                                                              Chapter 3 |   21




The situation has a negative impact on the quality of observation data and forecasts (especially forecasts
of hydrometeorological disasters), the efficiency with which public, sector-specific, and user needs can be
met, and the fulfillment of each country’s international and regional obligations, including those under
the Global Observation System.

All sector experts indicated that prognostic and other information products provided by NMHS were
highly relevant for the timely management of decision making on protective actions and for optimal
performance both for the sectors as a whole and their core activities. The experts noted that the use of
hydrometeorological forecast of an appropriate quality and with an appropriate lead time would be an
important means of improving their day-to-day operations and long-term planning.

The experts also formulated and specified their requirements for hydrometeorological information
(hydrometeorological elements and types of observations) necessary for optimal performance, as well as
recommendations and proposals to the NMSs, so that they can improve and customize hydrometeorological
services. Some noted the need to demonstrate the significance of an efficient use of hydrometeorological
information and forecast to obtain additional economic benefits, to conduct targeted advisory activities,
and to improve communication with users.

Joint advisory and training workshops on the use of new hydrometeorological information and forecasts are
expected to be organized through the establishment of training centers. They would support workshops
that could provide for exchange of experience and develop common requirements for new types of
information products, forecast accuracy and lead time, information presentation formats, etc., which
would allow for structuring relations between NMS staff and users on the basis of new principles.

The sector experts, therefore, confirmed the need for NMS radical refurbishment, for introduction of
modern, automated, and distance observation methods and data collection/processing systems, and for
provision of customized hydrometeorological forecast and services to users in the key weather-dependent
sectors of the economy. The experts noted not only their interest in NMS development and modernization
but also their preparedness for higher quality forecast and new types of information products developed
on the basis of modern HMI presentation technologies and accessibility of data and information products.
Some expressed sectoral readiness to provide compensation to their respective NMS for customized or
tailor-made hydrometeorological data and information; other sectoral experts were categorically against
compensation to the NMS.

Nonetheless, the sector experts emphasized that significant economic losses resulted from inadequate
interaction between the NMSs and key HMI users, which related to the fact that the NMSs had no
technical or technological capacity to provide requisite hydrometeorological information and forecast,
especially on the regional level. NMS modernization, therefore, was a critical and topical issue.

They also noted the importance of involving experts from a number of ministries and agencies in determining
user needs for hydrometeorological information and services and in assessing the benefits of the work
for NMS and their users. The work should continue with a view to estimating the optimal level of budget
funding required to minimize economic losses and should identify the most efficient investments.
22 |




Chapter 4 Economic benefits of
improved hydrometeorological
service delivery

4.1 Objectives, scope, and approaches of economic assessment



T
     he economic assessment carried out under this study sought to estimate the potential aggregate
     benefits that accrue to national business activities from the improved quality (accuracy and
     timeliness) of the hydrometeorological information and services delivered by the NMS following its
modernization. The benefits associated with the economic value of hydrometeorological information for
the household sector and the improvement of human life and safety were not assessed.

The assessment approaches envisage generalization and calculation of country-wide losses from EHHs and
HHs and estimation of possible variation of the share and absolute amount of incremental effects (benefits
in terms of potentially avoided losses) due to more accurate and timely hydrometeorological information
and forecasts as a result of modernization program. It was assumed that benefits of modernization would
be realized within seven years (implementation of the program and minimum effective operation of the
new technologies, hardware, and equipment, as well as the NMS fixed assets at the post-implementation
stage). The potential returns on modernization investments, therefore, were calculated by comparing an
aggregate amount of incremental benefits during the seven-year period and the program’s costs.

There are a number of complexities in the assessment of economic benefits for the countries under review
similar to that observed in the other ECA region countries where the team has undertaken economic
review of weather-related damages. The main concern is the absence of systematic recording of damage/
losses (both in physical and value terms) incurred by the economy, its sectors, and population from the
entire range of EHHs and HHs. Thus it was necessary to apply several complementary approaches to
validate the data and ensure the integrity of the results.


4.2 Methods of economic assessment

4.2.1 Benchmarking method
When preparing information for the assessment of economic benefits, no statistical data on the value of
damage caused by hydrometeorological hazards was available from the official sources of statistics (at the
national level, in the ministries, agencies, and in NMSs). In order to obtain the corresponding information,
special consultations with NMSs specialists and experts of the weather-dependent sectors were conducted.

The initial assessment of economic benefits was based on the benchmarking method developed in the
course of the regional review of the ECA national hydrometeorological services. This review was carried out
                                                                                                          Chapter 4 |   23




in 2005-2007 by the World Bank for the countries of Southern Caucasus (Azerbaijan, Armenia, Georgia),
some Balkan countries (Albania and Serbia), as well as for the Republic of Belarus, the Ukraine, and
Kazakhstan. Most of these countries do not record data on the actual total and sector-specific economic
losses caused by hydrometeorological hazards and unfavorable weather conditions.

Benchmarking was developed to estimate economic benefits from the use of hydrometeorological
information and services for the national economy. The assessment was based on (i) available national official
macroeconomic and sector-specific statistics; (ii) weather-dependence of the economy; (iii) vulnerability
of the country’s territory to weather hazards;3 (iv) the NMS status and the quality of hydrometeorological
service provision in a given surveyed country; and (v) the values of the key parameters obtained through
the surveys of experts and studies carried out in other countries.

Benchmarking is a simplified method, and it does not require detailed analytical studies or time-consuming
surveys. Despite the limitations in the application of this method, its findings provide a reasonable estimate
to identify the levels of direct economic losses from weather hazards and disasters, as well as the economic
benefits from the use of hydrometeorological information in a specific country. (A detailed description of the
benchmarking approach, including its main assumptions and limitations, is given in V. Tsirkunov et al., 2006).

Benchmarking comprises a staged approach:

The first stage defines the average values of two key parameters, which are adjusted against the GDP of
the country. These key parameters are

■■ The level of annual direct economic losses caused by hydrometeorological hazards as a share of
   GDP;

■■ The level of annual prevented losses (i.e., losses that are potentially avoided due to the use of
   improved weather forecasts and warnings, as a result of modernization) expressed as a percentage of
   the total losses.

In the second stage, the benchmarks are adjusted following assessment of the key country-specific
parameters (weather and climate conditions, structure of economy, NMS status, and so on).

In the final stage, the estimates obtained for a country are used for calculating the marginal efficacy of the
potential improvement of hydrometeorological services following the proposed modernization program.

4.2.2 Sector-specific assessment
The assessment of the economic efficacy of the NMS modernization is based on comparing the amount
of potentially preventable losses with the required expenditures on the prevention of these losses and
planned expenditures on the modernization of an NMS. With this approach, the economic efficacy the


	 The vulnerability of each territory to weather hazards was assessed as a function of the observed extreme and threshold
3

  values of major meteorological parameters, among which temperature (minimum and maximum), precipitation, and
  wind were considered with characteristics of their statistical distributions.
24 |   IMPROVING WEATHER, CLIMATE AND HYDROLOGICAL SERVICES DELIVERY IN CENTRAL ASIA




NMS modernization is calculated as a ratio of the potential effect of the planned expenditures on the
modernization. The potential effect is expressed as the additional prevented losses from weather hazards
expected due to the improved timeliness and quality of forecasts and warnings with the deduction of
expenditures needed to produce these forecasts and warnings.

This assessment method is based on sector studies for the most important (as a share of GDP) weather-
dependant sectors of the national economy. The sector studies calculate the following two key parameters:
(More details on the method assumptions and sample questionnaires can be found in Tsirkunov, et al.,
2006.)


■■ The potential preventable losses as percentage of the total losses, which could be avoided through
   modernization (multiplication of two ratios: Ri·Si), where Ri is a percentage of the possible preventable
   losses with the current quality of hydrometeorological forecasts (i.e., prior to modernization),
   and Si is the percentage of the possible preventable losses that would accrue due to improved
   hydrometeorological services;

■■ Percentage of the changes in the level of expenditures on preventive (protective) measures as a result
   of more accurate and timely hydrometeorological information and services (Δi).
The findings of the sector experts’ assessments can be divided into two main groups: (i) general information
concerning the scope and quality of the hydrometeorological information used, as well as the level of the
losses incurred due to weather hazards, and (ii) assessment of the key ratios (key parameters) required to
assess the economic benefits from the NMS modernization.

The key parameters are assessed in two stages:


■■ The first stage includes an expert assessment of these parameters for specific sectors. As the basic
   parameters (Ri and Si) are determined using expert assessments, it would be expedient to perform a
   scenario analysis, that is, to use a few (rather than one) values of a coefficient within a certain range.
   The extreme values of the coefficients shall be used for the best and worst (most unlikely) cases and
   the mean value shall be used for the base (most likely) case.

■■ At the second stage, the base case mean estimate is used to calculate the mean values of basic coefficients
   required for a comprehensive assessment of the economic efficacy of the NMS modernization.
On the basis of statistical data or expert assessments of economic losses from weather, the mean values
of basic coefficients, the potential effect, and economic efficacy of the NMS modernization are calculated
respectively.


4.3 Summary of the key economic findings

Assessment of the economic benefits from improved weather service delivery to the economies and
populations of the Kyrgyz Republic and the Republic of Tajikistan as a result of NMS modernization
used three methods: “meteorological risk assessment,” “method of sector-specific assessment,” and
                                                                                                                   Chapter 4 |   25




“benchmarking approach.” For Turkmenistan, initially the sector-specific assessment and benchmarking
approach were tested. It became apparent later that baseline macroeconomic data for Turkmenistan
are not sufficiently reliable to make quantitative economic assessment. The lack of regular records of
economic losses and damage (both in physical and value terms) caused by the complete spectrum of
hydrometeorological phenomena was the main challenge in the economic assessment in all countries.

All assessments indicated that significant economic benefits could be realized from the use of improved
hydrometeorological information and services. The investments in the NMS modernization would yield
significant benefits with relatively high potential returns on investments.

The results of the benchmarking studies, meteorological risk assessments (in parentheses), and sector-
specific assessments (marked with *) where available are summarized in Table 4.1. The benchmarking
studies provide a lower bound on losses and the sector-specific assessments or meteorological risk
assessments provide an upper bound.

Table 4.1. Comparative Results of Economic Assessments Using the Methods of Benchmarking, Sector-
specific Assessments and Meteorological Risk
                                                           Kyrgyz Republic           Republic of Tajikistan   Turkmenistan1
 Average annual losses incurred caused by                  24.9 (27.3) 39.6*            24.9 (29.8) 37.0*         42.0
 weather hazards (US$ million)
 Average annual losses incurred (% of GDP)                   1.0 (1.1) 1.5*              1.04 (1.3) 1.6*          0.57
 Average annual preventable losses            (US$                10.1                          5.8               23.0
 million)
 Average expected annual incremental benefits                  2.9 /(3.8*)                 1.7 /(3.1*)            17.7
 due to improvement of hydrometeorological
 information and services (US$ million)
 Investment efficacy (% across 7 years)                       244 /(318*)                  199 /(357*)            413
 1
     Results for Turkmenistan are indicative due to lack of reliable macroeconomic indicators




4.3.1 Kyrgyz Republic
Based on Table 4.1, the potential annual economic benefits from the implementation of the proposed
Modernization Program for Kyrgyzhydromet (cost estimated at US$8.3 million) range from US$2.9 million
(“benchmarking” assessment) to US$3.8 million (upper bound of “sector-specific” assessment) per year.
Assuming that this annual economic effect is sustainable, within seven years of implementation the total
benefits of program implementation will range from US$21 million to US$27 million. Economic efficacy
of investments in program implementation will vary from 244 percent to 318 percent or, in other words,
each dollar spent on Kyrgyzhydromet modernization may yield at least US$2.4-3.2 of revenues as a result
of avoided damage.

Sector-specific assessments conducted for selected economic sectors (agriculture, water resource
management, and electricity production, which together produce about 3/4 of the GDP generated by key
weather-dependant economic activities of Kyrgyz economy), based on experts’ data and assumptions,
showed that aggregated annual benefits for those segments of the economy in total could be in the range
of US$0.6-1.2 million. Cost-benefit analysis, using data on average annual losses obtained by sector-
26 |   IMPROVING WEATHER, CLIMATE AND HYDROLOGICAL SERVICES DELIVERY IN CENTRAL ASIA




specific assessments, also supported the economic feasibility of the program implementation. The cost-
benefit ratio was 2.1, and discounted payback period was estimated as 4.4 years.

4.3.2 Republic of Tajikistan
The results of the benchmarking assessment for the Republic of Tajikistan showed that the total average
annual amount of direct damage associated with hydrometeorological hazards is not less than US$24.9
million (1.04 percent of the average annual GDP in 2000-2007). Economic assessments of the impact of
meteorological risks of major weather hazards on the national economy were performed on the basis of
available information on the average annual recurrence and damage per event (for mudflows, floods,
avalanches, rainstorms, hail, windstorms, snowfalls, droughts, and frosts). The resulting average annual
weather-related economic damage was estimated to be TJS 98 million, or US$30 million (1.3 percent
of the average annual GDP in 2000-2007). According to the sector-specific assessment using official
data from Committee of Emergency Situations and estimates of potential indirect losses, average annual
economic losses from EHHs and HHs were evaluated in TJS 122 million, or US$37 million (1.6 percent of
GDP).

Potential annual economic benefits from the implementation of the proposed Modernization Program
for Tajikhydromet (estimated cost of US$6.1 million) range from US$1.7 million (“benchmarking”
assessment) to US$3.1 million (upper bound of “sector-specific” assessment) per year. Assuming that this
annual economic effect is sustainable, within seven years of implementation the total benefits of program
implementation will range from US$12 million to US$22 million. Economic efficacy of investments in
program implementation will vary from 200 percent to 357 percent or, in other words, each dollar spent
on Tajikhydromet modernization may yield at least US$2.0-3.6 of benefits as a result of avoided damage.
Sector-specific assessments conducted for selected economic sectors (transport, agriculture, irrigation
and water supply, and electricity production, which together produce about 2/3 of the GDP generated
by key weather-dependant economic activities of the Republic’s economy), based on experts’ data and
assumptions, showed that aggregated annual benefits for those segments of the economy in total could
be in the range of US$1.9-2.6 million. Cost-benefit analysis, using data on average annual losses obtained
by sector-specific assessments, also supported the economic feasibility of program implementation. The
cost-benefit ratio was 2.2, and discounted payback period was estimated as five years.

4.3.3 Turkmenistan
The results of the benchmarking assessments of hydrometeorological services provided by the
Turkmenhydromet indicate that the Turkmenistan economy currently loses annually on average US$42
million. Annual incremental benefits for the national economy that would result from a US$30 million
upgrade and development of the Turkmenhydromet may amount to US$18 million. It was impossible to
undertake a sector-specific assessment for Turkmenistan due to lack of reliable macroeconomic indicators
and lack of data on sectoral losses.

The above estimates for all three countries do not take into account incremental socioeconomic benefits
associated with better performance by the household sector, increases of production, or better business
opportunities. The obtained values, therefore, may be considered a “lower bound:” actual economic
benefits may be much larger.
                                                                                               Chapter 4 |   27




In the absence of systematic registration of economic losses suffered by the economies and populations
of the Kyrgyz Republic, Republic of Tajikistan, and Turkmenistan from the entire range of hazardous
hydrometeorological phenomena, the following would be desirable:

■■ Intensify efforts to develop and improve sector-specific methodologies for calculating economic
   benefits from (economic efficiency of) the use of hydrometeorological information and systematization
   of collected data on economic losses both from specific weather hazards across the national economy
   (“natural” integration of losses) and on a sector-specific basis (“sectoral” integration of losses through
   the summation of sector-specific losses caused by all types of HH).

■■ Elaborate basic principles and mechanisms of interaction with entities in major weather-dependent
   sectors in order to develop and improve the range of standard and specialized hydrometeorological
   products and services promoting, and thereafter grounding on the estimates of weather hazards
   related damage (losses), potentially preventable due to the use of the improved hydrometeorological
   information in specific sectors.

■■ Conduct expert assessments of NMS modernization efficacy for specific regions and the most
   significant weather-dependent sectors in the regions, taking into account the country’s diversity of
   regional climatic and economic conditions.
28 |   IMPROVING WEATHER, CLIMATE AND HYDROLOGICAL SERVICES DELIVERY IN CENTRAL ASIA




Chapter 5 How to Improve Weather,
Climate, and Hydrological Service
Delivery in Central Asia


5.1 Potential Directions for improvement



T
      he reviews of the observational networks and other hydrometeorological infrastructure
      (telecommunication systems, weather forecasting facilities, warning systems for hazardous weather
      events) have shown that the current conditions of hydrometeorological services in the three countries
under review do not meet modern requirements. These substandard conditions have led to a continual
decline in the efficacy of services provided to their governments and to their economic sectors and entities,
as well as a deterioration in their ability to fulfill international and regional obligations, including those
under the WMO Global Observing System.

A mechanism to properly identify user needs and find adequate ways to meet them has not been
established. There are no regular user-focused activities encouraging stakeholders to utilize weather,
agrometeorological, and hydrological forecasts, and only a very basic set of information products is
available. The quality of services delivered to national and regional users is not satisfactory: the NMSs do
not have the technologies and skills required to produce information and information products and to
communicate them from the NMS to users.

In the context of broad-scale international efforts to study climate change and adaptation, the assessment
of contemporary climate should be an integral part of NMSs’ activities, since the NMSs are the government
institutions that hold archives of long-term climate information.

The key objectives of the NMS modernization program are to reduce both the risk to life and the economic
damage caused by weather and climate-related events and to fulfill regional and international obligations.
The assessment of water resources within the region is critical. This requires improving the interaction and
cooperation between NMSs and users of hydrometeorological information and information products. It also
requires strengthening the technical and technological basis of each NMS and retaining their capabilities
by sustaining their institutions, staff, and financial support. Recommendations for NMS modernization
programs are based on the evaluation of their current status made by a team of international experts
in close consultation with each NMS management team. These programs and recommendations were
discussed and supported by stakeholders at national consultation workshops.
                                                                                              Chapter 5 |   29




5.2 National NMS modernization programs

Several modernization options were developed for each NMS based on various improvement outcomes and
on potential availability of funds for modernization and sustainability of investments. Basic modernization
options are estimated to cost approximately US$6.1 million, US$8.3 million and US$30 million for
Tajikhydromet, Kyrgyzhydromet, and Turkmenhydromet, respectively. The greater scope of the investment
program proposed for Turkmenhydromet reflects the greater deterioration of existing NMS infrastructure,
which needs urgent replacement, and the potential availability of national funds both for modernization
and future maintenance.

All modernization programs were structured as investment projects with similar sets of activities or
components. There are three main components in all modernization programs: (A) Technical Design of the
Modernized System; (B) Improvement of the System of Hydrometeorological Monitoring to Provide Timely
Warnings of Extreme and Hazardous Weather Events and to Manage Water Resources, and (C) Institutional
Strengthening and Capacity Building of NMS. The main activities proposed in the modernization programs
are presented in Annex II; a more detailed list and description of activities can be found in the three
national reports.

Component A. The level of detail provided in the proposed modernization options is comparable with the
prefeasibility study. More detailed work on the technical design of the hydrometeorological monitoring
and telecommunication system is needed, which ideally should be based on the overall concept for NMS
development approved by the government. Technical solutions should be based on a comprehensive
review of NMS and the existing international experience gained in establishing such systems, which are
adapted to the particular circumstances and capabilities of each country to ensure a sustainable solution.
Technical specifications and main tender documents for procurement should be developed under this
component to ensure compatibility of all technical devices and systems. In this component, it is crucial to
develop the following:

■■ A detailed concept of NMS development;

■■ Technical design of the hydrometeorological monitoring and telecommunication system;

■■ Technical specifications and main tender documents; and

■■ Specific performance indicators and their monitoring system.

Component B. The main objective of this component is to restore performance of basic observation,
communication, and IT networks, which are the backbone of modern NMS. Improving the system of
hydrometeorological monitoring will enable the NMS to provide timely warnings to agencies responsible
for reducing and preventing damage to the economy and population caused by natural weather events.
Mitigation of weather consequences and better emergency preparedness is an important component of
any modernization program. Improvement of the hydrological observing and forecasting systems is also
essential for efficient national water resources management and for fulfillment of country’s obligations
under international agreements. The following are the main activities proposed for this component:
30 |   IMPROVING WEATHER, CLIMATE AND HYDROLOGICAL SERVICES DELIVERY IN CENTRAL ASIA




■■ Restoration and technical upgrade of the meteorological and hydrological observing networks;

■■ Strengthen the information technology base of the NMSs;

■■ Upgrade meteorological data receiving systems; and

■■ Provide modern computer technologies for processing, forecasting, and presentation of information.

Component C. The main purpose of this component is to provide institutional strengthening and capacity
building to enhance service delivery and to provide staff training and professional upgrading. The follow-
ing are the main activities proposed for this component:

■■ Improve the capacity to understand and interact effectively with stakeholders using staff trained ap-
   propriately;

■■ Provide continuous engagement of stakeholders through frequent meetings and workshops to under-
   stand the changing needs of users;

■■ Establish a customer advisory body, which includes representatives of all stakeholders;

■■ Offer easily accessible products through the web and other media;

■■ Provide well-defined service agreements between the NMS and each customer;

■■ Pay special attention to key user groups; and

■■ Focus on introducing specific climate services.

Operating and maintenance costs. Preliminary assessment of operation and maintenance costs for
the proposed modernization programs were estimated for three national programs. In all cases proposed
modernizations will increase the operational costs, which are necessary to ensure efficiency of observa-
tional networks, data collection, and processing centers. Commitments of the national governments to
meet the costs of adequate operation and maintenance will be one of criteria to mobilize and provide
donor support for hydromet strengthening.

Performance indicators. Implementation of the proposed NMS modernization programs will lead to
substantial improvement in performance and better service delivery. After completion of NMS moderniza-
tion, the following minimum performance indicators should be achieved. More specific verifiable sets of
performance indicators and their monitoring procedures will be developed for each national programs as
part of Component A activities.

■■ Improve accuracy of main meteorological and hydrological measurements; increase forecast accuracy
   by 6-8 percent for 24 hours lead time and by 15 percent for 3-7 day lead time.

■■ At least ten-fold increase in volume of data received from various sources of meteorological informa-
   tion.
                                                                                                 Chapter 5 |   31




■■ Achieve a 90 percent level of timely collection and transmission of data from observation stations and
   improved data communication within NMS.

■■ Increase accuracy of flow measurements in main national river basins.

■■ Transfer to improved model of NMS functioning, including strengthening its institutional and technical
   base, introduction of new techniques, and improvement of staff qualification.

■■ Strengthen financial status of NMS and increase sustainability of operations.


5.3 Services

The blending of social, economic, and environmental information is central to sound planning and deci-
sion making. Timely and accurate weather, climate, and water information and forecasts have many ap-
plications, but the utility of these services is poorly understood, resulting in low demand and lack of invest-
ment. It is very important, therefore, that the NMSs demonstrate tangible benefits. The task for the NMHS
is to understand the user needs for weather, climate, and water information and to create a demand for
them. Most of the value of weather, climate, and water information added or lost in the so-called value
chain between weather and its impact occurs (i) in communicating the information to users, (ii) in the
behavior of users in response to that information, and (iii) ultimately in the effect of their decisions on the
societal or economic outcome. If the user cannot make changes or if there is no effect on the outcome,
the information has no direct value.

There are three areas where value could be increased: (i) improve the forecast or analysis, (ii) improve com-
munication, or (iii) improve the decision process. The modernization of observing systems will go far to
improve forecasts and analyses. Improving communication and decision processes, however, requires the
development of a new way of thinking about services.

Improving decision outcomes depends on cooperation between the provider and user of weather, cli-
mate, and water information to combine this information with vulnerability assessments and with plans
for specific responses. Value is added by increasing the speed with which this information is available and
analyzed.

Increasingly weather, climate, and water services are viewed as a collaborative enterprise between produc-
ers and users. This collaboration ensures value is added where needed and that environmental information
is properly considered and acted upon by users.

The China Meteorological Agency (CMA) has pioneered a practical approach to achieving collaboration by
developing a Public Service Platform for fast, efficient, and unified meteorological service delivery. CMA
has used this approach to strengthen collaboration with many other organizations, including Ministries
of Agriculture, Health, Transportation, Environmental Protection, Land Resources, and Information Tech-
nology, as well as Administrations of Forestry and Tourism. The aim is to realize tangible and quantifiable
benefits for the community by exploiting new operating partnerships between user and provider to share
responsibility for effective delivery of services. This has included the development of new tools and meth-
32 |   IMPROVING WEATHER, CLIMATE AND HYDROLOGICAL SERVICES DELIVERY IN CENTRAL ASIA




ods to strengthen dialog and collaboration between provider and user, especially the implementation of
more interactive early warning systems integrated into every level of governance from the community
level to the national infrastructure.

By separating the service platform from product delivery, emphasis is placed on information sharing,
joint information dissemination, joint research and training, and joint product development between the
meteorological and hydrological service and the user. In addition to information generated by the NMS,
the platform also integrates data from outside partners, both national and international, so that users
have access to all relevant information through a single source through which they can work directly.


5.4 Regional cooperation

The work undertaken within this GFDRR project is now conceived as a part of a broader regional Hydromet
Initiative aimed at NMS strengthening in Central Asia. WMO, ISDR, World Bank, and other development
agencies will support this initiative. Geographical, climatic, transboundary, economic, and social
considerations create a need for greater regional cooperation among the Central Asia countries. National
programs proposed by this study should be viewed as the most urgent investment and capacity-building
programs to improve hydromet service delivery. These programs will work better if complemented by and
embedded in a broader regional framework program. It is hoped that additional regional activities will
be designed with existing and planned national modernization programs in mind. Regional cooperation
may significantly reduce the total costs of investments necessary to provide reliable services for the region,
particularly for basic weather forecasts (collecting upper air data), nowcasting (radars), and climate
information and services.

Opportunities for greater regional cooperation exist in Central Asia. This is in part because of the growing
capacity of both the Russian Federation and China to provide advanced weather, climate, and water
information and due to their adoption of modern methods in service delivery.

Establishing a regional approach to training for all Central Asia countries would be efficient and cost effec-
tive. Such a regional training program should also include cross-sectoral training between the providers and
users of weather, climate, and water information, as suggested in the development of the service platform
and in response to the requests from many different user representatives in each of the three countries.

Directions to be discussed with participating NMSs and donor agencies in Central Asia include (i) creation
of regional numerical weather forecast capability, (ii) establishment of centers or facilities for specialized
support, such as regional drought monitoring, regional calibration, and meteorological support, and (iii)
technical and operational support (O&M).


5.5 Summary of next steps

Preliminary results of the study were presented to government stakeholders at the consultation workshops
in all three countries. It is expected that governments will support the action plan for improvement of
weather, climate, and hydrological services delivery elaborated further in national reports and in this
                                                                                                   Chapter 5 |   33




summary report. Financing of the action plans will likely combine governmental funds, concessional
financing from international financial institutions (IFIs), plus international and bilateral donors’ support.

Plans call for results of this GFDRR work to become an integral part of a broader Central Asia (and
Caucasus) Regional Economic Cooperation Initiative on Disaster Risk Management (CAREC DRMI), which
aims to reduce the vulnerability of Central Asia and Caucasus countries to the risks of disasters. The CAC
DRMI incorporates three focus areas: (i) coordination of disaster mitigation, preparedness, and response;
(ii) financing of disaster losses, reconstruction and recovery, and disaster risk transfer instruments, such
as catastrophe insurance and weather derivatives; and (iii) hydrometeorological forecasting, data sharing,
and early warning.

The World Bank, the UN International Strategy for Disaster Reduction (UN/ISDR) Secretariat, and (for
hydrometeorology) the World Meteorological Organization (WMO), under the CAREC umbrella, would
coordinate the initiative. It will build on the cooperation that already exists in the region and will complement
and consolidate activities of the IFIs, EU, Council of Europe, UN agencies, regional cooperation institutions,
bilateral donors, such as the Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation (SDC), Japan International
Cooperation Agency (JICA), and others to promote more effective disaster mitigation, preparedness, and
response.

In November 2009, the main results of this GFDRR work was reported at a regional Central Asia workshop
(supported by ISDR, WMO, EC, and World Bank) aimed to improve hydrometeorological services and
early warning systems. This workshop served as a forum for all CA NMS to confirm and specify their
commitments towards regional cooperation and launched a regional hydromet support initiative to
facilitate regional cooperation among donors.
34 |




Selected Bibliography and
Supplemental Information Sources
BIBLIOGRAPHY

Asian Development Bank (ADB). 2007. “Kyrgyz Republic: Flood Emergency Rehabilitation Project.
  Performance Evaluation Report.” Project Number: 32415. Loan Number: 1633. March 2007. Operations
  Evaluation Department, Asian Development Bank.
Boltaev, D. 2008. Responses to Questionnaire on Assessment of the National Hydro-Meteorological Service
  Status and Performance (preliminary). Background material prepared for the World Bank as a part of TA on
  Improving Weather and Climate Service Delivery in Turkmenistan.
Ergashov, M. 2005. “Turkmenistan – Weather-Climate Services.” Report prepared for the World Bank.
Korshunov, A. 2008a. Findings of Technical Mission to Kyrgyzstan. Report prepared for the World Bank as a
  part of TA on Improving Weather and Climate Service Delivery in Central Asia. July 13-17, 2008.
Korshunov, A. 2008b. Findings of Technical Mission to Tajikistan. Report prepared for the World Bank as a
  part of TA on Improving Weather and Climate Service Delivery in Central Asia. September 1-4, 2008.
Korshunov, A. 2008c. Findings of Technical Mission to Tajikistan. Report prepared for the World Bank as a
  part of TA on Improving Weather and Climate Service Delivery in Central Asia. October 28-31, 2008.
Kotov, V., and A. Zaitsev. 2008a. Findings of the Technical Mission: Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan. Report prepared for
  the World Bank as a part of TA on Improving Weather and Climate Service Delivery in Central Asia. July 20-
  26, 2008.
Kotov, V., and A. Zaitsev. 2008b. Findings of the Technical Mission: Dushanbe, Tajikistan. Report prepared for
  the World Bank as a part of TA on Improving Weather and Climate Service Delivery in Central Asia. June
  18-28, 2008.
Mayatskaya, Inna. 2005. “Kyrgyz Republic – Weather-Climate Services.” Report prepared for the World Bank.
Mayatskaya, Inna. 2008. Responses to Questionnaire on Assessment of the National Hydro-Meteorological
 Service Status and Performance (preliminary). Bishkek, Kyrgyz Republic.
Rogers, D, M. Smetanina and V. Tsirkunov. 2009a. “Improving Weather, Climate, and Hydrological Services
  Delivery in Kyrgyz Republic.” A report prepared under GFDRR TA project, An Action Plan for Improving
  Weather and Climate Service Delivery in High-Risk, Low-Income Countries in Central Asia.
Rogers, D, M. Smetanina and V. Tsirkunov. 2009b. “Improving Weather, Climate, and Hydrological Services
  Delivery in Republic of Tajikistan.” A report prepared under GFDRR TA project, An Action Plan for Improving
  Weather and Climate Service Delivery in High-Risk, Low-Income Countries in Central Asia.
Rogers, D, M. Smetanina and V. Tsirkunov. 2009c. “Improving Weather, Climate, and Hydrological Services
  Delivery in Turkmenistan.” A Report prepared under GFDRR TA project, An Action Plan for Improving
  Weather and Climate Service Delivery in High-Risk, Low-Income Countries in Central Asia.
Rogers, D.P., Y. Adebayo, C. Clarke, S.J. Connor, R. DeGuzman, P. Dexter, L. Dubus, J. Guddal, L. Jalkanen, A.
  Korshunov, J.K. Lazo, H. Puempel, V. Smetanina, B. Stewart, Tang X., V. Tsirkunov, S. Ulatov, P-Y. Whung,
  and D.A. Wilhite. 2007. “Deriving Societal and Economic Benefits from Meteorological and Hydrological
  Services.” WMO Bulletin.
                                                                                       Selected Bibliography |   35




Safarov, Mahmad. 2005. “Tajikistan – Weather-Climate Services.” Report prepared for the World Bank.
Safarov, Mahmad. 2008a. Responses to Questionnaire on Assessment of the National Hydro-Meteorological
  Service Status and performance (preliminary). Dushanbe, Tajikistan. Background material prepared for the
  World Bank as a part of TA on Improving Weather and Climate Service Delivery in Republic of Tajikistan.
Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation (SDC). 2006. “Swiss Support to the Hydro-meteorological
  Services in the Aral Sea Basin.” Final Phase. Project Document. Swiss Agency for Development and
  Cooperation, Swiss Ministry of Foreign Affairs. August 2006 to July 2009.
Tajikhydromet. 2008. “Survey of Hydrometeorological Provisions for Users in the Republic of Tajikistan and
  Their Needs in Hydrometeorological Information.” Dushanbe, Tajikistan.
Tsirkunov, V., A. Korshunov, M. Smetanina, and S. Ulatov. 2006. “Assessment of Economic Efficiency of
   Hydrometeorological Services in the Countries of the Caucasus Region.” Report prepared as part of
   Weather/Climate Services pilot study in the countries of Europe and Central Asia.
Tsirkunov, V., M. Smetanina, A. Korshunov, and S. Ulatov, 2007. “Assessment of Economic Benefits of
   Hydrometeorological Services in East Europe and Central Asia (ECA) Countries.” In Some Perspectives on
   Social and Economic Benefits of Weather, Climate, and Water-related Information. WMO/TD – No. 1365.
Tsirkunov, V., M. Smetanina, A. Korshunov, and S. Ulatov. 2004. “The Russian Federation Assessment of
   Economic Efficiency of the National Hydrometeorological System Modernization Project.” Report on the
   Results of the Pilot Study for Economic Benefits of Hydrometeorological Information for Russian Economy.
   World Bank, Moscow.
Tsirkunov,V, S. Ulatov, M. Smetanina, and A. Korshunov. 2007. “Customizing Methods of Assessing Economic
   Benefits of Hydrometeorological Services and Modernization Programs: Benchmarking and Sector-Specific
   Assessment.” In Elements for Life. Tudor Rose on behalf of the WMO. Geneva.
UNDP. 2009. “Central Asia Regional Risk Assessment: Responding to Water, Energy, and Food Insecurity.
 Regional Bureau for Europe and CIS.” January 2009. New York.
WMO. 2007. “Socio-Economic Benefits of Meteorological and Hydrological Services.” WMO Bulletin. Vol. 56
 (1). January 2007. Geneva.
World Bank. 2004. “Project Appraisal Document on a Proposed Loan in the Amount of USD 80 Million to the
 Government of the Russian Federation for a National Hydromet Modernization Project.” October 12.
World Bank. 2005. “Drought: Management and Mitigation Assessment for Central Asia and the Caucasus.”
 Report No: 31998-ECA. March 11.
World Bank. 2008. Materials of the Consultation Workshop, “Improvement of Efficiency of Weather and
 Climate Service Delivery In Turkmenistan.” September 30. Ashgabat, Turkmenistan.
World Bank. 2008. Materials of the Consultation Workshop, “Improvement of Efficiency of Weather and
 Climate Service Delivery In Republic of Tajikistan.” November 27. Dushanbe, Republic of Tajikistan.
World Bank. 2008a. Materials of the Consultation Workshop, “Improvement of Efficiency of Weather and
 Climate Service Delivery In Kyrgyz Republic.” December 16. Bishkek, Kyrgyz Republic.
World Bank. 2008b. Sample Questionnaire on Assessment of User Needs on Hydro-Meteorological
 Information And Forecasts.
World Bank. 2008c. “Weather and Climate Services in Europe and Central Asia: A Regional Review.” World
 Bank Working Paper No. 151. Washington, DC.
36 |   IMPROVING WEATHER, CLIMATE AND HYDROLOGICAL SERVICES DELIVERY IN CENTRAL ASIA




SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION SOURCES

Asian Development Bank (ADB). Key Indicators for Asia and the Pacific 2008. www.adb.org/statistics
Asian Disaster Preparedness Center. http://www.adpc.net/
Central Asia Regional Economic Cooperation (CAREC). http://www.adb.org/carec/
Emergency Events Data Base (EM-DAT). http://www.emdat.be/
Global Facility for Disaster reduction and Recovery (GFDRR). http://gfdrr.org/
Information Resource on Donors Activities in the Kyrgyz Republic. http://www.donors.kg/en
Interstate Statistical Committee of the Commonwealth of Independent States. http://www.cisstat.org/
ReliefWeb. http://www.reliefweb.int/
SDC in Central Asia. http://www.swisscoop.tj/
The Global Disaster Alert and Coordination System. http://www.gdacs.org/
United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (UNESCAP)
http://www.unescap.org/icstd/SPACE/documents/DISASTER/Study_Report/AnnexI.asp
United Nations. International Strategy for Disaster Reduction.http://www.unisdr.org/
United Nations Development Programme. Europe and CIS. http://europeandcis.undp.org/
United Nations Development Programme. The Kyrgyz Republic. http://www.undp.kg/
United Nations World Food Programme. http://www.wfp.org/
WMO Public Weather Services Programme. http://www.wmo.int/pages/prog/amp/pwsp/
publicationsguidelines_en.htm
World Meteorological Organization (WMO). http://www.wmo.int/
                                                                                                        |   37




Appendix I. Main Geophysical
and Hydrometeorological
Characteristics

1. Kyrgyzstan

Northern and northwestern Kyrgyzstan, which includes Chuisk and Talas Valleys with surrounding
mountain ridges, is noted for a moderately warm and sufficiently moist climate with maximum precipitation
in spring and early summer and moderate amount of winter precipitation. The second half of summer in
the valleys is dry.

Northeastern Kyrgyzstan includes Issyk Kul hollow. Maximum amount of precipitation in summer and
insignificant amount in winter are typical for this region. Due to the presence of the ice-free, sub-saline
Lake Issyk Kul located in the lower part of the hollow, the climate in this region is close to a marine one.
The water body of Lake Issyk Kul tends to decrease air temperature in winter, though in summer this
influence is almost negligible.

Southwestern Kyrgyzstan includes Fergana, Alai, and Chatkal Valleys with surrounding mountain ridges.
This is the warmest and most moist area with considerable amount of winter precipitation. Otherwise the
annual precipitation pattern is similar to the northwest region: maximum precipitation occurs in spring in
the lower part of the region and shifts toward early summer in the highlands. The second half of summer
has small amounts of precipitation with droughts occurring in the lower areas in August and September.
This climatic region has the highest air temperatures in the warm season.

Inner Tyan Shan is the coldest and has a semi-arid climate noted for little evaporation at low temperatures.
In the highlands, where the amount of atmospheric deposition exceeds evaporation, glaciers and snow
patches occupy large areas. The annual precipitation pattern is similar to the southwest climatic region
with maximum deposition occurring in May, June, and July.


There are more than 40,000 rivers and streams in the Kyrgyz Republic with a combined length of roughly
150,000 km and draining some 47 cubic km of water a year. The main source of water for the rivers is
melt water from numerous glaciers and snowfields in the mountains. The contribution of rainfall amounts
to less than one fifth of the water flow. The River Naryn is the longest river in the Republic (535 km in
length). Formed by the confluence of the Big and Little Naryn Rivers, just above the town of Naryn, it
collects the waters of several large tributaries, such as the At Bashi and Kekemeren, until it flows into the
Toktogul Reservoir and then flows south breaking through the Ferghana Range into the Ferghana valley,
amassing yet more tributaries until it eventually flows as the Syr Darya into the Aral Sea. The water is used
extensively for hydroelectric power generation, flowing into the giant Toktogul reservoir, and for cotton
farming in neighboring Uzbekistan.
38 |   IMPROVING WEATHER, CLIMATE AND HYDROLOGICAL SERVICES DELIVERY IN CENTRAL ASIA




2. Tajikistan

Wide valleys and plains rising up to 1,000 m contain the main arable farming and cotton growing
areas, including the southwestern part of the country, Gissar, Vaksh, Lower Kafirnigan, and Kulyab valleys,
as well as the Fergana valley with adjoining flatlands of the Sogd region. In the summer, these valleys
and plains are noted for high temperatures associated with a thermal depression. Fair and hot weather
predominate in throughout the summer months with the highest temperatures between 43-47°C. The
mean monthly temperature in July (the hottest month) is between 28-30°C.

The cold season is characterized by Arctic air intrusions where air temperatures, even in southern areas, can
fall to between -24°С and -30°С on some days. Mean monthly temperatures in January are, however, mostly
positive, though in some northern areas (Khujand) the average temperature may be below freezing.

Large temperature variations, frequently passing through 0°C, are typical for this zone. Spring frosts in
most areas end in late March, and the first autumn frosts occur in the second half of October. The valleys
of southwestern Tajikistan have the longest frost-free periods (up to 260 days).

The transitory zone between valleys and highlands (up to 2,500 m) includes the Zeravshan Valley, the
mountain areas of Central Tajikistan, and a part of Western Pamir. In summer, fair and dry though cooler
weather dominates. Temperatures gradually decreasing with altitude characterize this zone. Orography
in particular impacts temperature. In winter months, air temperatures on open slopes and in passes are
higher than in the closed depressions where strong cooling occurs. Correlations between concave and
convex terrain forms are opposite in summer.

High-altitude areas (above 2500 m) include Central and Eastern Pamir, and mountain ridges. At these
altitudes, the diurnal and seasonal temperature variations are high. Eastern Pamir has especially severe
climate conditions. Winters are long and cold with mean January temperatures ranging from -14°C to
-26°C. The absolute low is -63°C (Bulunkul). Summers are short and cool with the mean air temperature
not exceeding 15°C. The absolute maximum temperatures are between 20-34°C. This region has up to
111 frost-free days, but frosts occur daily in the coldest areas.

The distribution of precipitation depends mainly on the location and orientation of mountain ranges and
consequently on the air mass circulation. Tajikistan has two distinct humid zones. An arid climate zone
encompasses the valley in Western and Northern Tajikistan, piedmonts of the Turkestan Ridge, as well as
the vast high-mountain area in the Eastern Pamir with 50-300 mm of precipitation per year. The remainder
of the country, referred to as the semi-arid zone, has up to 900 mm of rainfall everywhere except on the
upwind southern slopes of the Gissar Ridge where precipitation can exceed 1800 mm per year.

The rivers of Tajikistan are important sources feeding the Aral Sea. They are essential for cotton growing
and for the hydropower industry of Central Asia and Tajikistan. There are four main watersheds: Syrdarya
River (northern Tajikistan), Zeravshan River (central Tajikistan), Pyanj River (southwestern Tajikistan and
the Pamirs), and the basin of saltwater lakes in the Eastern Pamirs. The major rivers of Tajikistan include
the Pyanj, Vakhsh, Syrdarya, Zeravshan, Kafirnigan, and Bartang. There are 947 rivers of more than ten
km in length, and the total length of rivers is 28,500 km with an average flow of about 56 km3 y-1. Mean
                                                                                             Appendix I |   39




annual runoff varies from 1 l s-1km-2 in the plains up to 45 l s-1km-2 in the mountains. In high-water
periods, characterized by intensive snow melting and heavy rains (April-August), many rivers bear a lot of
suspended particles (over 5 kg m-3) (State of the Environment Report, Tajikistan, 2002).


3. Turkmenistan

Semi-desert climatic zone has a mean annual temperature of 15.6°C. Annual precipitation varies from
180 to 250 mm. Cold season precipitation (85-95 percent of the annual amount) prevails in this zone. The
western part of the zone is affected by Atlantic, Black Sea, and Caspian cyclones while the eastern part
is usually influenced by southern cyclones (South Caspian, Murghab, and Upper Amu Darya). The central
part is subject to the influence of northwestern and northern cold invasions and dry masses of Arctic air.

A high-pressure belt is located over the semi-desert zone during the cold season, which is associated with
fair weather and low winds. At the same time, frequent cold air outbreaks cause increased winds and
clouds. Average air temperatures in January range from –1.6°C in the west to 1.1°C in the east, short-
term temperature drops are possible to –28°C in the east and to –35°C in the north, as well as temperature
increases to 12-16°C. In summer where the average July temperature is 31.4°C, temperatures frequently
reach 40-45°C. Droughts, hot winds, and dry weather conditions occur frequently in the semi-desert
zone.

Desert climatic zone is a desert, which occupies about 80 percent of Turkmenistan’s territory. There are
three major types of deserts: clay, sandy, and rocky. A highly continental climate and low moisture content
characterize the zone. Yearly evaporation rate exceeds precipitation amount by a factor of ten or more
and by 20 to 70 times during the three summer months. Mean annual temperature rises up to 16.5°C
while the amount of precipitation decreases to 90-130 mm per year.

The zone has a long hot summer and rather cold winter for these latitudes with large annual and
daily temperature variations, dry air, and few clouds. January is the coldest winter month with average
temperatures ranging from –3.2 to –4.8°C. At the same time, even during the coldest winter months,
temperatures can occasionally reach 12-22°C. Cold season precipitation makes up 60-84 percent of
the total annual amount. Dust storms usually accompany the passage of cold fronts. Anomalously high
summer air temperatures are related to the development of thermal depressions. The warm season is
noted for frequent droughts, occurring during hot winds, moderately dry, and dry weather conditions.

High weather instability and variability characterize winter, especially in the northern part of the zone
where frequent changes of positive and negative temperatures are observed. Summer in the desert zone
is long, hot, and dry with stable weather noted for dryness, dustiness, lack of clouds, and large daily
variations of air and soil temperatures. In the daytime, the soil surface may warm up to 78°C while at
nights during inversions it can occasionally drop down to 0°C.

Mountain and piedmont areas in Turkmenistan demonstrate a marked vertical variation in climate. The
change in vertical climatic zones is similar to that of horizontal zones.
 In the cold season, highland areas are exposed to snow avalanches.
According to avalanche survey reports produced by Kyrgyzhydromet,
about a half (105 thousand km2) of the overall territory of the Kyrgyz
        Republic is exposed to the risk of avalanches annually.
                                                                                                              |   41




Appendix II. Key Hydrometeorological
and Climate Hazards

1. Kyrgyz Republic

Among EHHs in the Kyrgyz Republic, mudflows and floods generated by snow thaw and rainstorms
are the most hazardous. They cause significant economic damage by destroying roads, railways, bridges,
dams, irrigation facilities, agricultural crops, and livestock, and sometimes cause human losses. In spring
and summer the whole territory of Kyrgyzstan is exposed to mudflows and floods. In addition there are
2,000 highland outburst-risk lakes in the Kyrgyz Republic. For 200 of these, the probability of an outburst
is high. Outbursts damage not only industry and population but also neighboring countries. For example
in 1998, an outburst of the Kurban-Kul highland lake triggered a mud flood on the Shakhimardan River,
which flowed through neighboring Uzbekistan, causing human losses. In the Kyrgyz Republic more than
300 settlements are located in areas of probable lake outbursts.

In the cold season, highland areas are exposed to snow avalanches. According to avalanche survey
reports produced by Kyrgyzhydromet, about a half (105 thousand km2) of the overall territory of the
Kyrgyz Republic is exposed to the risk of avalanches annually. The avalanche season is between five and
seven months long. Depending on terrain elevation, however, avalanches can occur at any time. Annually,
from 800 to 1500 avalanches of various volumes are recorded. Most of them cannot be surveyed since
vast highland areas are inaccessible and unknown. Gigantic avalanches and with a total volume exceeding
a million cubic meters are not infrequent events in highland areas.

In terms of harm, late spring and early fall frosts have a significant impact on agriculture. While events,
such as hail, squall, etc., are local in character, frosts can cover vast territories at a time. Frosts are classed
as EHH if air or soil surface temperature drops below 0°C in the growing season over an area covering
more than 30 percent of farmland territory. If air or soil surface temperature drops in the growing season
over an area covering less than 30 percent of the farmland territory, frosts are classed as HH. The risk of
frosts in the warmest regions of Kyrgyzstan, the cotton growing areas, while infrequent can be particularly
harmful. Early fall frosts in October are also a problem.

Meteorological and hydrological droughts are becoming more frequent in the Kyrgyz Republic similar
to other countries of Central Asia. Meteorological drought refers to a precipitation deficit compared to
long-term averages and is specific to location and season. Hydrological drought is a deficit of surface
water or surface water supply resulting from precipitation shortfalls. Since farming is mainly irrigated, the
next significant risk factor is low precipitation and lack of water in rivers in the growing season (April-
September). Drought is very dangerous, particularly in spring or early summer.

Strong winds affect a limited region but damage houses, power and communication lines, and crops,
and they hamper shipping operations.
42 |   IMPROVING WEATHER, CLIMATE AND HYDROLOGICAL SERVICES DELIVERY IN CENTRAL ASIA




Precipitation as hail damages agricultural crops annually. Infrequent heavy precipitation (40-75 mm
per day) can occur in winter, damaging houses and buildings (ruining roofs), hampering traffic, and
forming avalanche centers. In summer, rainstorms form mudflow centers and causes crust on farmlands
and crop lodging.

2. Republic of Tajikistan

In the Republic of Tajikistan, hazardous events are associated typically with precipitation in the form of
heavy rains, snowfall, and hail with most of the emergency situations caused by heavy rains. Heavy
precipitation presents the highest hazard by triggering EHHs and other impacts from mudflows, floods,
and snow avalanches.

Heavy rains, exceeding 20 mm per half day, cause mudflows. Mudflows make rivers spill over the banks,
causing floods for dozens of kilometers. Heavy rainfall, over 30 mm a day, contributes to erosion, causes
serious damage to agriculture, and provokes mudflow, landslide events, and floods.

Snowfalls trigger descent of avalanches. Heavy snowfall and avalanches create snowdrifts on the roads
resulting in traffic disruption. They also increase loads on roofs of buildings, break fruit and ornamental
trees, worsen conditions for feeding animals, and create poor visibility at airports.

Hail frequently damages agriculture. Large hailstones not only damage farmlands and orchards but also
kill animals and birds. Starting in 1970s, the number of days with hail in lowland and foothill areas has
decreased. In mountainous areas, the occurrence of hail has not changed, and in some areas it has
increased. In valleys and piedmont areas, late winter and spring have the highest number of days with
heavy precipitation; in highland areas, these occur in summer. Heavy precipitation in areas below 2,000 m
contributes to the formation of high floodwaters and mudflows, which are observed frequently in the
foothills and mountainous areas of Tajikistan. In high-altitude areas, floods can result from breakthroughs
in temporary (glacial) lakes. According to data in the Republic of Tajikistan 2002 State of the Environment
Report (see Republic of Tajikistan, 2002), mudflows threaten some 85 percent of the Republic’s area, and
32 percent of the area is situated in the high mudflow risk zone.

High floodwaters are usually short term but cause huge damage to settlements and to the national
economy. Observations during the last 30-40 years show an increase in the number of days with disastrous
floods.

Heavy snowfalls occur most frequently in active orographic areas higher than 1,400-1,500 m (above sea
level), i.e., in piedmont and mountain regions. Snow avalanches occur in areas higher than 1,500-2,000
m. Basic conditions for the formation of avalanches are slopes with a gradient of 30-50°, snow cover of
more than 30 cm and relevant meteorological conditions. In the Republic of Tajikistan, the major reason
for avalanches is fresh snow formation (60-70 percent). Avalanches normally occur between November
and April, and occasionally in May. Avalanches in March are the most hazardous.

Strong winds are often observed in the bottlenecks of valleys (Khudjand). Winds at speeds of 20 ms-1
are annually recorded in the Northern Tajikistan and Eastern Pamir. Dust storms are distributed unevenly
                                                                                               Appendix II |   43




over the country, mainly occurring in the southern deserts and arid regions for one to four months in the
spring-summer period. They raise thousands of tons of soil and sand into the air, considerably increasing
the concentration of suspended particles in the atmosphere. A lot of farms suffer from these events,
which decrease crop productivity.

Extremely high temperatures, greater than or equal to 40°C, occur over the entire plain areas of
the country. With increasing maximum temperatures, the number of days with temperature above
40°C increases. Observational data indicate an upward trend of 30 percent in the number of days with
temperatures above 40°C in almost all the plains territory.

Drought is one of the severe meteorological phenomena often closely associated with an extended period
of high temperatures. Agriculture is most often exposed to hazardous events of which drought is the most
important. Local droughts occur in Tajikistan every year. Severe droughts have occurred eight times in the
last 60 years. In these years, rain-fed farmlands and winter pastures suffered the most. In contrast in the
area of irrigated agriculture, high temperatures facilitated early ripening of fruits and berries. Drought,
combined with increasing poverty and decline in productivity of agriculture, aggravates the problem of
food security in Tajikistan.

Low temperatures, where the daily mean temperatures are less than or equal to -10°C, are also considered
dangerous weather events. These drops cause damage not only to fruit farming and cattle breeding but
also to water resources, energy, and transport sectors.


3. Turkmenistan

In Turkmenistan, floods and mudflows often occur in mountain basins of small rivers, flowing down from
southwestern, northwestern, and northeastern slopes. In Turkmenistan rainstorms generate mudflows
with intensive snow melting only occasionally the cause. Short destructive floods and mudflows frequently
occur in mountain and piedmont areas in spring. Mudflows cause enormous damage to populated areas
and economy: they wash out crops, destroy dams and irrigation facilities, take out bridges, and erode
unpaved roads, highways, and railways.

Strong winds represent one of the most widespread hazardous weather events in Turkmenistan. The
wind is considered strong if wind speed exceeds 15 m/s. Speed equal to 20 m/s is a criterion of a hazardous
event, and 30 m/s is a particularly hazardous one. Strong wind damages buildings and industrial facilities,
complicates all kinds of traffic, and destroys crops and trees. Strong winds are classified as local and
frontal ones. Local winds occur in specific geographical areas; frontal winds occur at the interface of two
air masses.

Dust storms usually start at wind speeds of 8-12 m/s, and cause significant deterioration of visibility. Vast
masses of sand in the Kara Kum Desert facilitate dust storms all year round.

Drought is a major natural disaster, however, there are no reliable drought forecasts in Turkmenistan.
Agricultural meteorology uses various techniques and approaches to identify drought onset. Indices for
44 |   IMPROVING WEATHER, CLIMATE AND HYDROLOGICAL SERVICES DELIVERY IN CENTRAL ASIA




drought evaluation include the amount of precipitation, air temperature, evaporation rate, and heat
balance. Reduced productivity of agricultural crops is an agronomical drought indicator. Since the Kara
Kum Desert occupies 80 percent of the country, droughts represent a critical problem for Turkmenistan.
Successful operation of cattle-breeding farms directly depends on pasture productivity defined by climate
conditions of the territory. In dry years grasslands burn out in the sun, and productivity of pasture vegetation
may be reduced by 50-70 percent.

Dry winds complicate atmospheric drought and frequently cause very significant damage to the national
economy. For example, a cotton plant exposed to a strong dry wind just once may lose up to 60-80
percent of their blossoms. Weak dry winds annually occur throughout the whole country. Strong dry
winds are observed in southeastern, southern, and southwestern areas.

Frosts occur when air or ground temperature falls below 0°C during the growing season against the
background of positive daily average air temperatures. Frost information is, above all, required to evaluate
an area’s frost susceptibility, to calculate the timing for sowing, to decide on the appropriate location for
heat-loving crops, and to perform agricultural and climate assessment of agricultural crop growing in spring
and autumn seasons. Spring and autumn frosts occur annually in Turkmenistan, creating unfavorable
conditions for the growth and development of agricultural crops and often restricting the use of climatic
resources in growing season. In some years, frosts cause considerable damage to agriculture, reducing
yields in certain areas.

Heavy rainfall of 12 mm and more within less than 12 hours, although infrequent, is considered a
hazardous weather event. More than 30 mm of rainfall within the same period is especially hazardous.
These events result in mudflow, congested traffic, erosion of roads, flooding of foundation ditches and
basements. Long periods of rain may be especially hazardous, causing catastrophic damage to many
economic sectors.

Extreme heat, an air temperature exceeding 40°C regardless of duration of occurrence, is hazardous.
These conditions can encompass the whole of Turkmenistan’s territory except the mountain, far northern
and Caspian coast areas. High temperatures cause extensive damage to agriculture, especially cotton
and fruit trees. Recurrent heat represents a special risk to the economy. The impact of high temperatures
(above 45°C) over several days may reduce cotton productivity by 10-30 percent. The annual number of
days with high air temperature (above 45°C) ranges from 14 to 50.

Severe frost, air temperature below -10° C, is hazardous, and persistent cold temperatures below this
are especially hazardous. At these temperatures many subtropical crops, such as orange, mandarin, fig,
pomegranate, walnut, and grapes die or freeze down to roots. Severe cold (below -25°C) kills animals in
pastures. Low temperatures also significantly impede the operation of main gas and oil pipelines, motor
and railway transport, and communal facilities.

Heavy snowfalls occur mostly in northern, northeastern, and piedmont areas. Large accumulations
followed by abrupt increases in temperature in the spring create the risk of floods and mudflows, causing
significant damage to dams, populated areas, agricultural crops, and power lines.
                                                                                               Appendix II |   45




Heavy hail causes considerable damage to agriculture. The amount of damage depends on the size of
hailstones, their density, deposition intensity, as well as on the type agricultural crops. Although hail is a
rare and short-term event, it may cause enormous damage to the affected area. Hailstones, ranging from
5 to 30 mm, are observed in Turkmenistan. Hailstones of 6-8 mm may damage cotton and vegetable
shoots, and those over 10 mm hurt sunflower, corn, and orchards. Hailstones of 30 mm and more cause
significant damage to everything outside.

Apart from local dust storms, catastrophic dust cyclones occur every 8-15 years, transporting vast
amounts of loamy dust from Arabian and Iranian deserts. The amount of dust deposited on the ground
after a dust cyclone can be up to 6-30 tons per hectare. Squally winds, hail, and heavy rainstorms usually
accompany dust cyclones, causing catastrophic destruction.
46 |




Appendix III. Basic NMS
Modernization Options
for Kyrgyzhydromet,
Tajikhydromet, and
Turkmenhydromet

1. Kyrgyz Republic

                         Kyrgyzhydromet: Main Modernization Components and Activities
                                                                                                              Estimated cost
 Main components             Subcomponents and activities                                                       (US$1000)
 A.	 Technical design        Technical design of hydrometeorological monitoring and telecommunication               500
                             system
 B.	 Improve system of       B1. Technical upgrading of observational network                                      4385
     hydrometeorological     Restoration and technical upgrade of meteorological observational network             1175
     monitoring to
     provide timely          Resume temperature-wind atmosphere sounding                                            360
     warnings of extreme     Renew key observation sites of hydrological network and equip operating posts         1655
     and hazardous           with required additional instruments
     weather events and      Restore snow avalanche observation network                                             755
     to manage water
     resources               Establish quality control of hydrometeorological data and products                     440
                             B2. Strengthen IT base of Kyrgyzhydromet                                              2380
                             Upgrade data collection and communication system                                       300
                             Improve data processing; adjust numerical weather forecast and runoff modeling         830
                             for Kyrgyzstan
                             Create data base management system and archives; data digitizing, storage,             750
                             printing, and dissemination of information products
                             Provide software and hardware for recognition of information on paper and              500
                             storage of digitalized paper records
 C.	 Institutional           C1. Enhance service delivery                                                           625
     strengthening and       C2. Staff training and professional upgrading                                          400
     capacity building
                             Total cost                                                                           8,290
                                                                                                            Appendix III |   47




2. Republic of Tajikistan

                        Tajikhydromet: Main Modernization Components and Activities
                                                                                                           Estimated cost
Main components                                    Subcomponents and activities                              (US$1000)
                              A. Technical design of hydrometeorological monitoring and                          400
A.	 Technical design
                              telecommunication system
                              B1. Technical upgrade of observational network                                    3450
                              Technical upgrade of hydrological gauges                                           950
                              Restoration and technical upgrade of meteorological observational network          975
B.	 Improve system of         Introduce automatic snow survey systems                                            375
    hydrometeorological
    monitoring to provide     Modernize meteorological radars                                                    800
    timely warnings of
    extreme and hazardous     Improve quality and reliability of measurements                                    350
    weather events and to     B2. Strengthen IT base of Tajikhydromet                                           1125
    manage water resources    Introduce modern communication facilities and technologies for data                585
                              reception and processing
                              Create data base management system and archives; data digitizing, storage,         540
                              printing, and dissemination of information products
C.	 Institutional             C1. Enhance service delivery                                                       660
    strengthening and         C2. Staff training and professional upgrading                                      455
    capacity building
                              Total cost                                                                       6,090
48 |   IMPROVING WEATHER, CLIMATE AND HYDROLOGICAL SERVICES DELIVERY IN CENTRAL ASIA




3. Turkmenistan

                        Turkmenhydromet: Main Modernization Components and Activities

                                                                                                             Estimated cost
 Main components                Subcomponents and activities                                                   (US$1000)
                                Technical design of hydrometeorological monitoring and                             940
 A.	 Technical design           telecommunication system

 B.	 Improve system of          B1. Technical upgrade of observational network                                   20,020
     hydrometeorological         Surface observing network                                                        5,100
     monitoring to provide
     timely warnings of          Upper air sounding systems and meteorological radars                             9,590
     extreme and hazardous      Modernize the hydrological network                                                4,270
     weather events and to       Creation of quality control system for data and hydromet products                 860
     manage water resources

                                B2. Strengthen IT base of Turkmenhydromet                                         5,150
                                Refurbish data collection and telecommunication centers; introduce new            2,250
                                technologies
                                Archive equipment                                                                 2,900
                                C1. Strengthen institutional, legal, and regulatory framework and                 1,480
                                staff training
                                Bring scientific and methodological framework into compliance with WMO             300
                                guidelines and recommendations
                                Draft and enforce guidelines on how to conduct observations (including             580
                                remote sensing), and how to process, store, and submit information
                                Prepare training, professional development, and staff motivation program;          600
                                launch its implementation, including procurement of equipment for
                                training center
 C.	 Institutional              C2. Enhance Service Delivery                                                      1,230
                                Study user needs; evaluate efficacy of hydromet service delivery and user          550
 D.	 strengthening and          training
     capacity building          Develop technologies and procedures for disseminating urgent information           380
                                on natural disasters, technologies to present weather forecasts on TV, and
                                develop NMS web site
                                Improve National Climate Service                                                   300
                                C3. Improve natural disaster and hazardous hydrometeorological                    1,180
                                event warning system
                                Procure an autonomous emergency hydrometeorological support system                 790
                                and introduce meteorological drop kits
                                Develop warning procedures and data bases; introduce detailed                      390
                                visualization equipment
                                Total cost                                                                       30,000
Special thanks and appreciation are extended to the partners who support GFDRR’s work to protect
livelihood and improve lives: ACP Secretariat, Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Denmark,
European Commission, Finland, France, Germany, India, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, the
Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, United Kingdom, United States,
UN International Strategy for Disaster Reduction, and the World Bank.




Russia Country Office
36/1 Balshaya Molchanovka Str.,
121069 Moscow, Russia
Tel.: +7 (495) 745 7000
Fax: +7 (495) 745 7002
www.worldbank.org




IMPROVING WEATHER, CLIMATE AND HYDROLOGICAL SERVICES
DELIVERY IN CENTRAL ASIA
(KYRGYZ REPUBLIC, REPUBLIC OF TAJIKISTAN AND TURKMENISTAN)
Cover photo: Boomskoye gorge, flood-lands of River Chous in Kyrgystan
(from Kyrgyzhydromet’s photomaterials)




alexpublishers.ru
