                                    102642




Assessment of the Economic
Impact of Cruise Ships to Vanuatu
Report
AUGUST 2014
This study into the economic impact of cruise ships to Vanuatu was commissioned by
the Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, Carnival Australia and IFC, a
member of the World Bank Group.
It was conducted by consultancy firm Net Balance Management Group Pty Ltd using methodology similar
to that of studies undertaken in Australia and the Caribbean on a regular basis.

Data for the study was provided by Carnival Australia and Royal Caribbean Cruises International.


About the Australian Aid Program
On 18 June 2014, Australia’s Minister for Foreign Affairs launched a new development policy, Australian aid:
promoting prosperity, reducing poverty, enhancing stability. Australia’s aid program has a stronger focus
on private sector development, including aid for trade, recognising that the private sector is the primary
driver of economic growth and poverty reduction. Australia is investing in education, health, humanitarian
assistance, and empowering women and girls, reflecting the links between human development and
economic growth. Australia’s aid effort is focused firmly in the Indo-Pacific.


About the International Finance Corporation
The International Finance Corporation (IFC), a member of the World Bank Group, is the largest global
development institution focused exclusively on the private sector. Working with private enterprises in
about 100 countries, IFC uses capital, expertise, and influence to help eliminate extreme poverty and boost
shared prosperity. In FY14, IFC provided more than $22 billion in financing to improve lives in developing
countries and tackle the most urgent challenges of development. For more information, visit www.ifc.org.

IFC’s work in the Pacific is guided by the Pacific Partnership, through which IFC works with the Australian and
New Zealand governments to stimulate private sector investment and reduce poverty in the region.


About Carnival Australia
Carnival Australia was formed in July 2004 to meet the growing demand for cruising and the number of
Carnival Corporation & plc cruise companies homeporting ships from Australia and New Zealand. Since
then, Carnival Australia has led the rapid expansion of the industry, which has tripled in the past five years
alone and now sees well over 600,000 Australians take a cruise holiday each year. Today Carnival Australia
represents three homeported brands in Australia – Carnival Cruise Lines, P&O Cruises and Princess Cruises
– as well as another four international cruise brands that visit the region annually – Cunard Line, Holland
America Line, P&O Cruises World Cruising and Seabourn. For more information,
visit www.carnivalaustralia.com.
Table of Contents
Executive Summary	                        1

Future outlook	                           3

Summary of Methodology	                   4

Background	5

Summary of Findings	                      6

Employment	15

Summary of Investment Opportunities	      16

Limitations of this study	                19

Glossary	20

Introduction	21

Direct economic impact	                   23

Indirect economic impact	                 35

Investment opportunities to increase
the economic impact of cruise tourism
in Vanuatu	                               44

Appendix 1: Methodology	                  56

Appendix 2: Direct impact analysis	       63

Appendix 3: Cost structures and
assumptions	                              68

Appendix 4: Assumptions for
Cost Benefit Analysis	                    77

Appendix 5: Long list of initiatives to
enhance cruise ship economic impacts
from consultations	                       88

Appendix 6: Tanna maps	                   92
                                               ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
                                                                                                              AUGUST 2014 REPORT




 Executive Summary
The World Bank Group, DFAT-Australia, and Carnival Australia have partnered to conduct this study of the
economic impact of cruise ship tourism in Vanuatu. Data gathering and analysis for this study was carried
out by Net Balance Management Group.

Over the past 10 years, Vanuatu’s cruise arrivals have grown by 15% per year. Cruising to Vanuatu has been
buoyed by an advantageous location within a few days’ sail of Australia, a varied destination offering centred
on Port Vila, and consistently positive passenger feedback. In 2013, more than 240,000 people arrived in
Vanuatu by cruise ship. This translates into 490,000 passenger days.

The goal of this study is to quantify the economic impacts of cruising, and to provide data on the cruise
sector’s effect on economic activity. The study then identifies a set of investment opportunities that can
help to increase the economic benefits of cruise tourism in Vanuatu. This report therefore seeks to provide
a platform that can be used by government, the private sector and donor partners to support further
strategic, targeted development of cruising.

Data on tourism, and by extension on cruise tourism, is not readily available in Vanuatu. This report is
an attempt to capture initial economic information about the cruise industry and to provide a point of
departure for additional research into the economic, social and environmental impacts of the cruise sector.


Key Findings
The key results from the study are summarised in the bullet points below. All amounts are in
Australian dollars ($).

     •	 Cruise companies, their passengers and crew spent $34.6 million in Vanuatu in 20131. This is
        equivalent to approximately 10% of Vanuatu’s exports2. Private businesses receive 90% of this
         expenditure.
     •	 Additional indirect stimulus impacts, estimated at $18.6 million, resulted from second round
         spending by businesses benefiting from direct cruise-related expenditure.
     •	 Each cruise ship voyage brings an average of $260,000 in spending to Vanuatu3 and one cruise ship
         passenger brings $125 of spending.
     •	 Additional economic benefits estimated at $30 million over 10 years, have been identified through
         priority investments profiled in this report; these opportunities are focused on destination
         development and providing improved access to the cruise market for Vanuatu businesses and
         individuals.
     •	 	In Vanuatu, the cruise industry is estimated to generate up to 3,250 total employment opportunities4.
     •	 Cruise passengers spend $96 per day in Port Vila, $45 per day in Luganville and $11 per day
        in Mystery Island5.
     •	 Port Vila receives 85% of all passenger expenditure in Vanuatu (and 80% of all direct expenditure).
        This is due to Vila’s high number of calls and well-developed excursions and shopping opportunities.

1	   Expenditure impact is extrapolated from detailed data gathered at the three major ports of call: Port Vila, Luganville, and Mystery
     Island. It is assumed that the three remaining ports of call, Champagne Beach, Wala and Pentecost, see benefits similar to Mystery
     Island. The capacity of some ships (the Carnival Spirit) is almost 20% greater than some others and this assumes the mix of ships
     would remain the same over time. The projected number of calls to each port in Vanuatu was sourced from the cruise industry.
2	   VNSO, 2012 National Accounts of Vanuatu
3	   Calculated as direct expenditure of cruise tourism in 2013 divided by the number of Carnival and RCI unique ship voyages to Vanuatu
     in 2013. This is an average and impact varies by the number of calls and mix of ports included in a particular itinerary.
4	   The wage portion of cruise tourism spend in 2013, divided by average salary in relevant sectors leads to an estimate of 1,170 full
     time equivalent (FTE) jobs resulting from cruise ship activity. Given the nature of employment in developing countries in the sectors
     concerned, which rarely corresponds to a notion such as FTE, a range has been provided to account for part-time (not less than
     33%) employment opportunities resulting from cruise tourism . 1,061 businesses working in sectors that supply cruise tourism were
     registered in the municipalities of Port Vila and Luganville in 2013.
5	   Average spend of all passengers going ashore at each port, including local portion of tour spend and including passengers who went
     ashore but did not spend money.


                                                                                                                                           1
ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
AUGUST 2014 REPORT




                                                    •	 The survey found a strong positive correlation between passenger satisfaction and spending: the
                                                       more satisfied a passenger with the variety of things to see and do, the longer they stay ashore,
                                                       and the more they spend.
                                                    •	 The survey found some unmet demand in sales of handicrafts, clothing and jewelry, pointing to
                                                       the need for better market research to capitalize on missed sales opportunities.
                                                    •	 Port Vila receives 85% of all passenger expenditure in Vanuatu (and 80% of all direct expenditure).
                                                       This is due to Vila’s high number of calls and well-developed excursions and shopping opportunities.

                                                    •	 The survey found a strong positive correlation between passenger satisfaction and spending: the
                                                       more satisfied a passenger with the variety of things to see and do, the longer they stay ashore, and
                                                       the more they spend.
                                                    •	 The survey found some unmet demand in sales of handicrafts, clothing and jewelry, pointing to the
                                                       need for better market research to capitalize on missed sales opportunities.
                       In the coming years, cruise industry related expenditure coming into Vanuatu is expected to grow with
                       increases in size and number of cruise ships traveling into the South Pacific.

                       FIGURE 1: SUMMARY OF ECONOMIC IMPACTS, VANUATU


                                                    45
                                                                Direct       Indirect                                            $42.8m
                                                    40

                                                    35     $34.6m                   $34.7m                 $34.5m
                       Expenditure ($AUD million)




                                                    30

                                                    25
                                                                                                                                           $23.1m
                                                    20
                                                                    $18.6m                   $18.7m                 $18.6m

                                                    15

                                                    10

                                                     5

                                                     0
                                                                 2013                    2014                    2015                   2016




2
                                                   ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
                                                                                                AUGUST 2014 REPORT




 Future Outlook
 In 2014, Vanuatu is scheduled to host more than 230 cruise ship calls across 6 ports: Port Vila, Santo
 (Luganville), Mystery Island, Pentecost, Champagne Bay and Wala. The three ports of Port Vila, Luganville
 and Mystery Island host 85% of all cruise ship calls to Vanuatu.

 Cruise tourism in Vanuatu is anchored around Port Vila, which is a popular destination with passengers
 and is one of two Vanuatu destinations, along with Luganville, which allows ships to moor alongside a
 wharf. While Luganville wharf awaits repairs and potential upgrade to services, Port Vila remains the
 key destination in Vanuatu which allows ships to receive critical supplies and to complete customs and
 processing formalities in Vanuatu. Ensuring that Port Vila can continue to accommodate more ships, and
 ships of increasing size, are key to supporting the stable development of cruise tourism in the medium term.

 A development plan for the industry which seeks to support Vila being able to moor two ships
 simultaneously, or, alternatively, to develop Luganville as a functional alternative to Vila, is important if
 Vanuatu seeks to receive an increasing portion of the expected growth of the cruising industry over the
 coming 5 to 10 years.

 Looking beyond the objective of increasing revenues by increasing the number of cruise ship visits, Vanuatu
 can also enhance and more equitably distribute the economic benefits it sees from the cruise industry. This
 study profiles a set of investments that can help Vanuatu to achieve these goals. The investments can be
 broadly categorized into the following types:

               •	 Improvements to mapping and repairs/upgrades to critical infrastructure
               •	 Development of a limited number of new destinations
               •	 Ensuring Vanuatu’s businesses and individuals have more direct access to the cruise market
 While this report presents investments through the lens of net economic benefit, this analysis does not
 capture distributional effects, which will clearly be larger for some opportunities than others. Investments
 that can measurably improve the circumstances of a diverse set of communities in a sustainable manner
 can be given particular attention if a wider segment of the population is to be included in the economic
 benefits brought by the cruise industry



 FIGURE 2: POTENTIAL GROWTH IN DIRECT ECONOMIC IMPACTS FROM
 INVESTMENT OPPORTUNITIES

               60
                          Direct expenditure - organic growth
                          Key infrastructure investments                   $4.2m
               50         Market access investment
                                                                           $8.8m

               40
$AUD million




               30



               20
                                      $34.6m                               $42.8m

               10



                0
                                       2013                                 2016

                                                                                                                 3
ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
AUGUST 2014 REPORT




                       Summary of Methodology
                       A survey of passengers and crew was undertaken in Port Vila, Luganville and Mystery Island between
                       March and May 2014. These three ports account for 85% of all cruise calls to Vanuatu. Carnival brand (P&O,
                       Princess, Carnival, Holland America) and Royal Caribbean ships participated in the survey. A total of 4,039
                       passenger and 926 crew surveys were processed for data (this excludes unusable surveys). Passenger
                       surveys reported on behalf of 8,839 passengers, given an average of 2.2 people per party. Passengers’
                       response rate was 21%, in line with methodology parameters.



                       The study was structured to capture the direct and indirect economic impact of cruise ships in Vanuatu:



                            •	 The direct impact is the cash-flow generated by cruise ship activity in Vanuatu: direct expenditure by
                               passengers, crew and the ship operator on goods and services. Data was captured through surveys
                               of passengers and crew on board ships, as well as through information obtained from cruise ship
                               companies.
                            •	 Indirect stimulus impact has been calculated as the second round of expenditure on the cruise
                               tourism supply chain: local businesses using cash-flows received from cruise ship activity to purchase
                               the inputs required to carry out their business activities. Indirect stimulus impact therefore measures
                               the value of cash redistribution of cruise ship tourist expenditure through the economy6. Data was
                               collected through a survey of businesses in Port Vila and Mystery Island; methodology included face
                               to face interviews and focus groups with businesses and government.
                            •	 Direct employment impact is estimated through a business survey and face to face interviews
                               carried out in Port Vila. The total employment was calculated using estimated average full time
                               monthly wage and proportion of cruise ship tourism expenditure flowing to wages for each sector.
                               A range was then provided between the resulting number of FTE jobs and part time jobs, to account
                               for the nature of employment in a number of sub-sectors affected by cruise (handicrafts, transport).
                            •	 Induced impacts measure the economic impact of flow on expenditure by private beneficiaries
                               who indirectly benefit from cruise ship tourism spending – for example when employees spend
                               their salaries on purchases or living expenses. These impacts have not been considered as part
                               of this study. 




                       6	   For example, indirect economic impacts are created when a tour operator spends money on fuel and salaries to carry out its
                            activity. New beneficiaries (fuel provider, employees) are then involved.

4
                                                ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
                                                                                                              AUGUST 2014 REPORT




Background
Globally, the cruise ship industry has grown substantially over the past decade and while the Pacific
islands have participated in this growth, the Pacific region most likely accounts for only about 2% of global
passenger numbers7. The Australian market accounts for about 70-75% of regional passengers, with New
Zealand the next most important source market.

Increasing numbers of cruise ships (P&O brand) are now being based year-round at Australian ports (Sydney
& Brisbane). The general pattern is for itineraries to be focused on Australian, New Zealand and nearby
Asian destinations over the September – March Australian summer period; with Pacific island destinations
being favoured during the April/May – July/August period8.

In terms of overall passenger numbers for cruises departing and returning to Australia, Carnival Australia9
is the biggest operator in the region (about 60%). Royal Caribbean is the next largest (about 35%); but with
no full-time Australian-based ships. In line with global trends, the sizes of vessels operating in the region are
increasing, with most now having 2,000 plus passenger capacity.

Despite its small share of the global market, the Pacific cruise ship business is growing steadily; with
annual growth of about 20% to 25% experienced over the past 5 years, with New Caledonia and Vanuatu
destinations accounting for the large majority of this growth.

The majority of cruise ships visiting the Pacific islands operate out of bases in Sydney and Brisbane.
Customer preference for relatively short duration (7 to 10 day) itineraries and maximum port calls,
effectively restricts most itineraries to New Caledonia and southern/western Vanuatu destinations.
Other destinations, such as Samoa and Tonga, are disadvantaged by distance (and required sailing days)
from Australian ports. The trend to shorter duration itineraries has also meant that cruise ship calls at Fiji
destinations, while they have experienced some growth (roughly 15%-20% over the past 5 years), have
experienced much lower growth than calls in Vanuatu and New Caledonia. The latter have increased by
about 80% over the same period.




7	   Cruise Lines International Association (CLIA) Australasia data indicate that the Australasian region accounted for nearly 6% of
     global deployments in 2013, and about 30% of the region’s deployments targeted the South Pacific.
8	   Though some ships are focused on New Caledonia & Vanuatu on a year-round basis.
9	   Carnival, P&O Cruises and Princess brands.

                                                                                                                                       5
ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
AUGUST 2014 REPORT




                       Summary of Findings
                       On average, one cruise ship voyage brings in $260,000 and one ship passenger brings $125 to the economy,
                       in direct expenditure. While these headline numbers present an overall picture, impacts are not evenly
                       distributed, with Vila stops capturing more spending per call and per passenger, given the number of
                       activities and shopping opportunities.

                       TABLE 1: DIRECT ECONOMIC IMPACT PER SHIP CALL AND PER PASSENGER (2013)

                                                                   DIRECT IMPACT PER                    DIRECT IMPACT PER
                        PORT
                                                                       SHIP CALL                           PASSENGER

                        Port Vila                                        $243,900                                $117

                        Luganville                                       $133,600                                $64

                        Mystery Island                                    $43,100                                $21


                       Remaining data in this report refers to the three surveyed ports of call: Port Vila, Luganville and Mystery
                       Island, unless specifically noted. These ports account for the majority of the cruise sector’s total impact
                       on Vanuatu.


                       Direct Economic Impacts
                       The main sources of direct economic expenditure in country are:

                           •	 expenditure by passengers going ashore on the day of their visits (including local portion
                              of pre-purchased tours)

                           •	 expenditure by cruise companies on services such as port agent services, and port/landing
                              fees and dues;

                           •	 expenditure by crew members going ashore (concentrated on food/beverage and local
                              transportation).

                       Passengers, crew and the cruise companies spent a total of $34.6 million in Vanuatu in 2013; of this direct
                       expenditure, the 3 surveyed ports account for $33.0 million. When extrapolated over a whole year, this
                       direct expenditure translates into the following impact for industries servicing the cruise sector in Vanuatu.




6
                                                       ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
                                                                                                                           AUGUST 2014 REPORT




FIGURE 3: DIRECT EXPENDITURE (3 PORTS) PER INDUSTRY (AUD)




                                                            ECONOMY

                                                             33 million




                                                                                                                                          Million
                       TOURS AND
                     ENTERTAINMENT                  DUTY FREE            SOUVENIRS                       GOVERNMENT
                        10 million                  4.2 million           4.1 million                        3.4 million




                                  TRANSPORT           SERVICES                                        FOOD
                                                                        RETAIL                     & BEVERAGE
                                   3.2 million        3.2 million      2.6 million                 2.3 million




FIGURE 4: SUMMARY OF DIRECT EXPENDITURE BY SOURCE AND INDIVIDUAL
EXPENDITURE PER PORT

Direct spend by Source                                                   Individual spend per Port


                30                                                                  150
                                                                                  160
               30
                        $1m

                25
               25                         Direct spend by passengers                                                Passenger Spend
                                          Direct spend by crew                      120            $51              Crew Spend
                                                                                  120
                                          Direct company spend
                                                      $8.8m                                                                      $8.8m
                20
               20
                                                                            $AUD million




                                                                                            90
$AUD million




                15
               15                                                                          80

                       $23m
                                                                                            60                       $29
                10
               10
                                                                                                   $96
                                                                                           40
                                                                                            30
                55
                                                                                                                     $45
                                                          $2m                                                                       $5
                        $4m                $1m
                00                        $0.6m          $1.4m                              00                                      $11
                      Port Vila        Luganville    Mystery Island                              Port Vila        Luganville   Mystery Island




                                                                                                                                                    7
ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
AUGUST 2014 REPORT




                       Direct expenditure by passengers dominates total direct impact, especially in Port Vila, where both
                       excursions and shopping opportunities are well developed10.

                       The number of visits to a port of call is as important a driver of overall impact as individual spend, as can
                       be seen from a comparison of Luganville and Mystery Island – while average passenger and crew spend in
                       Mystery Island is only 22% of spend in Luganville, the number of calls to Mystery Island render total annual
                       impacts larger. Luganville, which has the alongside berthing facilities favoured by the industry, is scheduled
                       to receive more visits in 2014 than 2013, but the state of repair of the wharf has been one of the factors that
                       has slowed growth in ship calls.

                       Figure 5 presents a comparison of the share of expenditure on key items, per port of call. According to
                       industry data, on average 97% of passengers go ashore in Port Vila, and 91% go ashore in Luganville, where
                       ships dock and the same in Mystery Island, where passengers are tendered to shore11. The breakdown
                       shows that the patterns of spending vary between ports of call, as expected given different spending
                       opportunities in each location.

                       FIGURE 5: PASSENGER SPEND BREAKDOWN



                                           Tours    Duty Free       Transport          Clothing         Souvenir       Food&Beverage            Other
                          Port Vila
                          Luganville
                       Mystery
                        Island




                                       0     10    20       30        40        50        60       70        80        90       100       110       120
                                                                                         $AUD



                       Australian and New Zealand passengers were found to spend more at each port than ‘international’ (chiefly
                       North America and Europe) passengers coming to the region.




                       10	 Note that expenditure by the cruise companies has been allocated to each location based on number of calls . It may however go
                           back to companies or government bodies based in Port Vila. In Mystery Island, the landing fees are paid directly to the land owning
                           community and can be allocated to community projects (schools, health services, etc). This is classified under “government” for
                           convenience. No indirect economic impact has been calculated on these landing fees.
                       11	 Based on information provided by the cruise companies on the ships surveyed in March – May 2014. These estimates were used in
                           the extrapolation of the impacts over a whole year, as only people going ashore have the opportunity to spend.

8
                                          ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
                                                                                            AUGUST 2014 REPORT




  FIGURE 6: PASSENGER SPEND COMPARISON, BY PASSENGER ORIGIN12

                     80
                                                                         Australia/NZ       International

                     70


                     60
Expenditure ($AUD)




                     50

                     40


                     30


                     20


                     10


                      0
                          Overall         Port Vila             Luganville              Mystery Island




  The most significant factor influencing levels of passenger spending is class of ship. Driving this difference
  are the premium ships’ longer itineraries and higher number of port calls. Vanuatu results are in line with
  global industry data, which shows that premium ships tend to have lower average spend per call. When
  extrapolating for a year of economic impact, survey data was weighted to account for this difference.




  12	 Pre-booked tour spend is excluded

                                                                                                                   9
ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
AUGUST 2014 REPORT




                       FIGURE 7: PASSENGER TOUR AND OVERALL SPEND COMPARISON, BY SHIP CLASS

                          Passenger spend comparison by ship class
                        Port Vila
                        Luganville




                                                                                                                      Premium
                                                                                                                      Contemporary
                       Mystery
                        Island




                                      0              20              40             60                80            100              120
                                                                            Spend (mean AUD $000)


                          Tours purchased in advance (% of passengers on average per ship)
                        Port Vila




                                                                                                                      Premium
                        Luganville




                                                                                                                      Contemporary




                                      0              10              20               30              40             50               60

                                                                   Tours purchased in advance (% of average ship)



                       A number of driving factors of passenger expenditure were explored:

                                     •	 There is a significant difference in total expenditure per passenger on the day of the visit between
                                        those who purchased tours in advance and those who did not for both Port Vila and Luganville, with
                                        passengers spending less if they pre-purchased a tour. There are also differences for certain items
                                        of expenditure, with slightly less spend on transport and duty free for those who pre-purchased tours,
                                        but slightly more on souvenirs.

                                     •	 There is a significant negative correlation between total passenger spend and trip duration, i.e.
                                        passengers on longer cruises spend less, as previously observed by cruise companies.

                                     •	 There is a strong correlation between the amount of expenditure and the ship class (contemporary
                                        / premium) but no difference in the makeup of expenditure, i.e. passengers on contemporary ship
                                        spend more than premium passengers do, on the same items.

                                     •	 There is a strong positive correlation between satisfaction with the variety of things to see and do and
                                        expenditure on souvenirs, entertainment and total spend per passenger.

                                     •	 There is a positive correlation between the number of hours spent ashore and the mean expenditure
                                        (up to 7 hours, after which mean expenditure reduced).




10
                                                                                                                                                   ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               AUGUST 2014 REPORT




FIGURE 8: CORRELATION BETWEEN SATISFACTION WITH VARIETY OF THINGS TO
SEE AND DO AND MEAN EXPENDITURE


                                                     9
                                                                                  Souvenirs                                                                      Entertainment activities
                                                                                  Entertainment venues                                                           Total spend
                                                     8

                                                     7




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Total spend ($AUD)
                                                     6
        Item spend ($AUD)




                                                     5


                                                     4

                                                     3

                                                     2

                                                     1

                                                     0
                                                              Not at all                                              Not very                                              Somewhat                                        Very                       Extremely
                                                              satisﬁed                                                satisﬁed                                               satisﬁed                                     satisﬁed                      satisﬁed




FIGURE 9: PERCENTAGE OF PEOPLE WHO STATED THEY WOULD HAVE SPENT MORE
IF MORE WAS AVAILABLE



                                                     35                             Passengers who spent                                                             Passengers who did not spend
Percentage of passangers who would have spent more




                                                     30


                                                     25


                                                     20


                                                     15


                                                     10


                                                         5


                                                         0
                                                             Tours (on the day)


                                                                                     Transport


                                                                                                 Food and beverages


                                                                                                                        Entertainment activities


                                                                                                                                                     Entertainment venue


                                                                                                                                                                           Clothing


                                                                                                                                                                                      Watches and jewellery


                                                                                                                                                                                                              Souvenirs


                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Services


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Duty free


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Telecommunications


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Supermarket




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            11
ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
AUGUST 2014 REPORT




                       Between 20% and 33% of passengers who spent money on food and beverages, clothing, watches and
                       jewellery, and souvenirs declared that they would have spent more on those items, if more options had
                       been available. Survey data shows greater opportunities for increasing purchases from customers already
                       spending money, than from finding additional sales through growing the customer base. These findings
                       point to a need for additional research on passenger purchasing preferences.

                       Passengers were also asked to rate their likelihood of returning to Vanuatu for a land-based or resort
                       vacation within the next three years. Vanuatu results were in line with responses seen globally:
                       approximately 30% of respondents said they were either very likely or extremely likely (4 or 5) to return
                       for a resort holiday. Responses did not differ strongly by port – with the exception of Luganville, where
                       respondents were more negative.



                       FIGURE 10: PASSENGER LIKELIHOOD OF RETURNING TO VANUATU FOR A VACATION
                       IN THE NEXT THREE YEARS, BY PORT OF CALL
                       (1=Not at all likely, 5=Extremely likely)


                           50
                                                                                                    1 or 2     3     4 or 5


                           40




                           30
                       %




                           20




                           10




                            0
                                       Port Vila                   Luganville      Mystery Island              Overall



                       As a next step, Vanuatu can include a relevant question in upcoming international visitor surveys, to assess
                       the share of tourists arriving by air that have previously visited on a cruise.

                       There was a significant positive correlation between passengers’ likelihood of returning for a land-based
                       vacation and total spend per passenger at Port Vila and Luganville. There was significantly less correlation
                       at Mystery Island, pointing to either the nature of that port experience, or again to opportunities to increase
                       the variety of activities offered.




12
                                                                        ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
                                                                                                                                   AUGUST 2014 REPORT




FIGURE 11: TOTAL SPEND PER PASSENGER (AUD) AGAINST LIKELIHOOD OF
RETURNING TO VANUATU FOR A VACATION IN THE NEXT THREE YEARS,
BY PORT OF CALL
(1=Not at all likely, 5=Extremely likely)


               100




                 80




                 60
Spend ($AUD)




                 40




                 20




                       0
                               1        2       3         4        5        1       2         3      4        5   1       2    3      4         5
                                              Port Vila                                 Luganville                        Mystery Island




Per person, spending by crew members is roughly half of that by passengers. Overall, however, spend is
a function of volumes; as there are fewer crew members than passengers on board a ship (around 700-
800 for 2000 passengers), and a smaller proportion of the crew goes ashore (about 25% in Port Vila and
Luganville and half this figure in Mystery Island), aggregate spend of ship crew is much smaller than that of
passengers. A relatively high share of crew spend is allocated to food and beverage and transport.

FIGURE 12: CREW SPEND BREAKDOWN
          Port Villa
          Luganville
Mystery
 Island




                           0                  10                   20                   30               40               50               60
                                                                                    ($AUD)

                                   Food&Beverage              Transport         Supermarket       Entertainment Venues
                                   Clothing         Duty Free          Tours & Entertainment         Souvenir     Other


                                                                                                                                                    13
ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
AUGUST 2014 REPORT




                       Indirect Economic Impacts
                       Indirect or stimulus impact occurs when businesses use cash-flows received from cruise ship activity
                       to purchase the inputs required to carry out their business activities. As these businesses employ people
                       and purchase goods and services, money is recirculated through the economy, effectively “multiplying”
                       the direct impact. Overall the indirect economic impact is estimated at about 59% of the overall direct
                       expenditure with businesses (“second round” impacts only)13. This means that “leakages” out of the
                       economy correspond to 41% of the direct expenditure with businesses, bearing in mind that no leakage
                        has been calculated or included on direct expenditure with Government.

                       FIGURE 13: SUMMARY OF INDIRECT ECONOMIC IMPACTS

                                      35


                                      30


                                      25
                                               Leakage

                                      20
                       $AUD million




                                             Government                          Mystery Island
                                      15                                          Luganville


                                      10
                                               Private                              Port Vila
                                             beneﬁciaries
                                       5


                                       0

                                                Indirect                         Indirect by port




                       As there is no income tax in Vanuatu, government benefits from the Value-Added Tax and the import duty
                       (except on Duty Free items). The major part of the indirect economic impact (85%) benefits businesses
                       and individuals. “Leakages” occur when cash-flows end up benefitting offshore operators (see glossary).
                       Leakages are particularly significant in small island economies that depend heavily on imports.




                       13	 The indirect impact is calculated on the direct spend by passengers and crew members. As most of the direct company spend is
                           made of payments to government (and staff), no indirect economic impact is calculated on this portion of the direct expenditure.

14
                                                                                ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
                                                                                                                                                              AUGUST 2014 REPORT




 Employment
 Overall, it is estimated that the number of jobs created/sustained by cruise ship tourism in Vanuatu
 ranges from 1,170 FTE jobs to 3,250 part time jobs.14

 Direct employment impacts were derived and calculated using average full time salaries for employees
 in each sector. This information was obtained from interviews with businesses linked to the cruise
 ship industry15. However, it is recognized that the nature of employment in Vanuatu, in sectors such as
 handicrafts and transport in particular, varies from that of developed economies, having more part time and
 unregistered employment. In this sense, an approach such as “employment opportunities provided” may be
 more appropriate.

 World Bank research, based on census data and data from the National Provident Fund, has found that
 approximately 12% of all working-age Ni-Vanuatu are formally employed16. For the purposes of this study,
 to capture the potential for a large proportion of the workforce to be part time, a range has been provided
 between an assumption of complete full time employment and part time employment (assumed to be
 greater than 33%).

 FIGURE 14: EMPLOYMENT IMPACTS



                 1200
                                                               Lower bound estimate (full time)                           Upper bound estimate (part time)

                 1000



                  800
Number of jobs




                  600



                  400



                  200


                    0
                        Tour operators




                                         Land transportation




                                                                    Duty Free




                                                                                     Restaurant and cafes




                                                                                                            Handicrafts




                                                                                                                                     Retail




                                                                                                                                                   Services




 A larger number of people can be assumed to benefit, as informal economic activities and subsistence
 agriculture are often combined with more formal means of employment, and full time employment may
 often not be sought by individuals. In particular in locations such as Mystery Island, the concentration of
 jobs on handicrafts and services reflects a more informal range of offering. It is therefore likely that services
 and goods sold to tourists would represent a part time activity, but the sole source of cash income for the
 individuals concerned.

 14	 This number includes the 120 ni-Vanuatu employed on P&O cruise ships
 15	 No impact on employment by government was included, as fees and contributions go to the general budget and it would be difficult
     to assess what proportion of the government employees are directly dealing with cruise-related issues.
 16	 Well-being from Work in the Pacific Islands Countries, World Bank, East Asia Pacific, 2013.

                                                                                                                                                                              15
ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
AUGUST 2014 REPORT




                       Summary of investment
                       opportunities
                       As a part of the research for this report, 10 initiatives to increase economic benefits of cruise tourism were
                       identified and costed out. The costing is based on standard assumptions (provided in the annexes), using
                       best available information at the time of data gathering. Initiatives were selected through a consultation
                       process involving the cruise industry, DFAT-Australia and stakeholders in-country.

                       Key criteria for selection were (i) potential to significantly increase the volume and/or the value of cruise
                       ship visits to the country; (ii) not fully covered through ongoing or planned initiatives. A balance between
                       infrastructure initiatives and initiatives to increase market access was sought. A summary of high-level
                       results is given below and more detail can be found in the body and annexes to the report.

                       TABLE 2: SUMMARY COST BENEFIT ANALYSIS OF INVESTMENT OPPORTUNITIES
                       IN CRUISE – AUD MILLION

                        INFRASTRUCTURE / DESTINATION                                                 NPV*
                        DEVELOPMENT                                          NET BENEFIT           BENEFITS             COSTS
                        Home-basing a cruise ship in the Pacific**                 $6.1               $6.1                $0.0
                        Opening Tanna as a destination - Lowanatom                 $5.9               $11.8               $5.9
                        Opening Tanna as a destination - Waesisi                   $4.9               $7.8                $2.9
                        Opening SW Bay                                             $3.7               $4.8                $1.1
                        Mystery Island: inner and outer
                                                                                   $1.3               $1.4                $0.1
                        anchorage mapping
                        Luganville: wharf repair                                   $1.1               $19.1              $18.0
                        Opening Ureparapara                                        $1.1               $2.2                $1.1
                        MARKET ACCESS
                        Increasing local purchasing by cruise companies            $8.6               $9.5                $0.9
                        Employment for ni-Vanuatu people on board
                                                                                   $1.2               $4.9                $3.7
                        P&O ships
                        TVET business training for cruise micro-
                                                                                   $0.9               $1.0                $0.1
                        entrepreneurs
                        Handicrafts enhancement program                            $0.7               $1.1                $0.4

                       * Costs and benefits of infrastructure investments are estimated over 10 years. Cost and benefits of local
                       purchasing and handicrafts estimated over 5 years; employment estimated over 3 years (a training cycle)
                       and TVET business training over 2 years.

                       **Home basing a cruise ship in the Pacific is a relatively complex initiative that requires substantial
                       additional scoping, making it a longer-term initiative than comparable items in this chart; it is included here
                       for purposes of assessment against other potential infrastructure investments.




16
                                      ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
                                                                                          AUGUST 2014 REPORT




Key points from the assessment of infrastructure investment opportunities


   •	 Tanna destination development and Luganville wharf repair / redevelopment. Only the expected
      benefits arising for cruise ship tourism have been calculated here; actual benefits are likely larger due
      to impact on overall trade of goods.

   •	 Repairing Luganville wharf is an imperative if it is to retain cruise traffic, as its current state poses
      significant safety concerns. It is recommended that a scoping of repair costs be undertaken, (rather
      than a full redevelopment of the wharf precinct), to gain an exact understanding of the minimum
      investment required. The cost-benefit uses estimates for wharf repair only, as provided by Sanma
      Provincial Government Council. Wharf repair and targeted upgrade of services at Luganville could
      also help to reduce any future capacity constraints and congestion in Port Vila due to increase in
      cruise traffic.

   •	 Capacity constraints at Port Vila. Port Vila, accounting for more than half of total port calls, is the
      main destination for cruise vessels coming into Vanuatu, and is likely to continue to play this role
      in future, due to positive passenger feedback and the requirements of ships on Pacific voyages. A
      sustainable development plan for cruising to Vanuatu should account for potential continued growth
      in number and size of ships coming to Vanuatu and needing to berth in Vila. Two approaches to
      managing this are enhancing the capabilities of the cargo wharf now being upgraded, to allow it to
      take cruise vessels when required, or revamping Luganville as a functional secondary option. The
      costs and potential benefits of these options are clearly different as revamping Luganville would
      likely have greater distributional effects (and address potential congestion resulting from two ships
      simultaneously in Vila) but would also require more resources.

   •	 Hydrography mapping in Mystery Island. The cost of the mapping is minimal compared to the
      benefit this call brings to the local community (both in landing fees and benefits to the local market
      stall vendors). It should be considered a pre-requisite to further developing the destination from a
      value point of view (e.g. tours).

   •	 Home basing a cruise ship in the Pacific. This is a longer term and more complex initiative than
      comparators on this chart, as it would introduce a fundamentally new offer to the market. Demand
      for such an offer requires further research. It would also require the involvement and cooperation
      of a number of entities, public and private. The benefits and costs noted here are for Vanuatu only.
      The calculation assumes a ship is based in Fiji. Basing a ship in the Pacific does not require additional
      investment for Vanuatu, unless the success of the initiative is such that airport infrastructure needs
      to be upgraded (being considered by the government independently of the impact of cruise ships).

   •	 Cannibalization. An important consideration is the potential for new destinations to “cannibalise”
      traffic from existing destinations, as they may prove to be more popular. This has not been considered
      as part of the cost-benefit analysis (as much of the dynamic is currently not predictable), and every
      call has been considered additional to Vanuatu. This should be put in the perspective of an overall
      increase in traffic as additional, and often larger, ships are added to schedules (Carnival and RCI
      expect to add 6 ships in the region by 2016).




                                                                                                                  17
ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
AUGUST 2014 REPORT




                       Key points from assessment of market access programs to increase the value of cruise tourism:


                          •	 Accessing the cruise market requires focused support. While the cruise industry presents an
                             important market opportunity for Vanuatu businesses, market access initiatives would require a
                             comprehensive approach. Support would need to be targeted to helping firms supply the cruise
                             market specifically (including marketing), and structured to meet the specific needs and challenges
                             of a small set of firms that have potential to become direct suppliers. If Vanuatu businesses were to
                             gain access to sales channels onboard cruise ships, key distributional effects would be additional
                             employment/wages generated, including through business models that aggregate the output of
                             smaller producers, such Tanna Coffee (which currently supplies P&O ships). Close involvement of the
                             industry is needed for these initiatives to succeed.
                          •	 Handicrafts have important distributional effects. A comprehensive handicraft enhancement
                             program, building on New Zealand’s existing Ambassador Program and the proposed South Pacific
                             Regional Handicraft Project, has the potential to add value and to deliver distributional impacts to the
                             outer islands for the poorest segments of the population, which would make this initiative uniquely
                             valuable.
                          •	 Local sourcing for cruise ships. P&O source Tanna Coffee and Vanuatu water for their ships.
                             Increasing local purchasing would require a program of support to Vanuatu producers to meet
                             operator requirements in terms of quantity, quality, and consistency; initial opportunities exist with a
                             limited number of businesses that are already exporting and/or local market leaders.
                          •	 Employment on board cruise ships. The full value of training and upskilling of tourism staff in a
                             rotational arrangement is difficult to assess through an initial cost-benefit review, as most of the
                             value will accrue to individual employees in the sector over time. It would nevertheless represent a
                             significant underpinning of the industry’s commitment to ‘local content’ in the short/medium term.




18
                                     ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
                                                                                          AUGUST 2014 REPORT




Limitations of this Study
 •	 The focus of the report is predominantly on economic impact from cruise tourism expenditure.
    The report does not aim to assess the environmental impacts – such as pollution effects and the
    management of waste streams – that result from cruise traffic. While the cruise industry aims to
    apply best environmental and social management practices to its activities globally, a review of
    environmental issues including: i) control of pollution in sensitive areas; ii) application of regional and
    national environmental standards; and iii) public health infrastructure to manage sewage and other
    waste streams, is warranted in order to have a more complete picture of the overall impact of cruise
    tourism.
 •	 A number of additional impacts, related to pressure on existing infrastructure coming from cruise,
    have not been quantified through the impact calculations undertaken for this report: the opportunity
    cost of delays to cargo ships that are unable to berth in Port Vila while cruise ships are in port, and
    potential traffic congestion in Vila town on cruise ship days are examples. These broader impacts,
    which relate to the state of infrastructure and provisioning at ports of call, are outside the scope of
    this study. The urban development and wharf redevelopment programs coming online in Vila are
    looking at these issues in detail; Luganville wharf redevelopment should assess the value of 2 berths
    during the feasibility.
 •	 The study does not assess in detail the relationship between cruise and land-based tourism or the
    economic value that each brings. A brief review of findings of the 2010 Millennium Challenge Account
    study, which provides these comparisons, is included in the report.
 •	 The tax revenue impact for the Government of Vanuatu has been considered as part of calculation
    of the indirect stimulus in terms of import duty and VAT. Business registration fees have not been
    included, as these could not be accurately apportioned.
 •	 A full list of people and business interviewed is not included in this report, for reasons of
    confidentiality. Data was aggregated so that information cannot be traced to any particular business.
    Similarly, for reasons of commercial confidentiality, information provided by the cruise ship companies
    has been aggregated.
 •	 Data on tours booked by cruise companies on behalf of passengers was collected directly from the
    cruise companies, and included in the direct economic impact totals.
 •	 For purposes of extrapolation, it was assumed that the three ports of call not surveyed (Wala,
    Pentecost, and Champagne Bay) would see benefits similar to Mystery Island. Call frequency is taken
    from cruise company data.Limited data is available on the Vanuatu economy. Estimates of sector
    employment as well as general information for indirect impact, was sourced through a direct survey of
    businesses, stakeholder interviews and focus groups, then cross-referenced with available data.
 •	 The overall sampling rate used for (passenger) spend analysis was 21.4%, after filtering. While the
    response rate and the large number of passengers surveyed allowed for a low error margin on overall
    spend, the discrepancies in response rates between ships did not always allow for a detailed statistical
    assessment of sub-samples.




                                                                                                                  19
                                      ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
                                                                                        AUGUST 2014 REPORT




Glossary
Direct expenditure impacts – Captures the impacts arising from the direct cash-flows from cruise ship
activity in Vanuatu. The direct economic impacts directly benefit those businesses where cruise tourists
spend their money.

Direct spend –Refers to expenditure (i.e. cash flows) in Vanuatu from either cruise ship operator, cruise ship
passenger or staff member. These are the cash-flows causing the direct economic impacts.

Government – Refers to any government agency in Vanuatu, as a recipient of benefit from the cruise ship
expenditure, or as a legislator / regulator.

Indirect stimulus impacts – The flow on expenditure that is made by businesses that directly receive
cruise ship tourist customers to deliver their services or products to the cruise ship tourist. These impacts
include the payment of wages to employees, payment for intermediate goods or services, and tax to the
Vanuatu Government. The indirect impacts occur as a result of the money being recirculated through the
economy by these businesses or individuals, as they carry out their activity.

Intermediate consumption – Consumption of goods and services that occurs by businesses and sole
operators to deliver a good or service.

Leakage –Income that is not used to stimulate the economy. For this assessment, leakage is used to
describe the flow of money going offshore, thereby being lost to the local Vanuatu economy.

Private beneficiaries –Beneficiaries receiving income from cruise ship tourism who are located in Vanuatu.
This category includes owners of businesses where cruise tourists spend their money, employees of these
businesses and also includes downstream businesses who sell services or products to the businesses
where cruise tourists directly spend their money (e.g. electricity companies, local maintenance businesses,
or local retail businesses).




                                                                                                            20
ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
AUGUST 2014 REPORT




                       Introduction

                       Approach and methodology
                       This study was structured to capture the direct and indirect economic impact of cruise ships in Vanuatu:

                            •	 The direct expenditure information was captured through surveys of passengers and crew on board
                               those ships, as well as through data obtained from cruise ship companies.
                            •	 The indirect stimulus impact data was collected through a survey of businesses, primarily in Port
                               Vila, and included face to face interviews, and focus groups with participation from businesses and
                               government.
                            •	 The direct employment impact was estimated using the same information collected through
                               a business survey and face to face interviews carried out in Port Vila. The total employment was
                               calculated using estimated average full-time monthly wage and proportion of cruise ship tourism
                               expenditure flowing to wages for each sector. To provide a range, to capture the potential for a high
                               proportion of the workforce to be working part time, one third of a full-time wage was assumed.
                            •	 Leakage has been estimated based on the findings of face to face interviews and business surveys as
                               well as understanding of the ownership structures of key industries.
                            •	 Induced impacts can be calculated through measuring the economic impact of flow on expenditure
                               by the private beneficiaries who indirectly benefit from cruise ship tourism spending.1 These impacts
                               have not been considered as part of this study. Calculating this would require understanding how the
                               indirect private beneficiaries spend the money they receive from the cruise ship tourism.
                            •	 A total of 4,039 passengers and 926 crew usable2 surveys were completed over the period March to
                               May 2014. Passenger surveys reported on behalf of 8,839 passengers (2.2 people on average per
                               party). Passengers’ response rate was 21%, which is in line with what can be expected for surveys not
                               offering incentives. The sample was at the lower end of the pre-determined range of surveys sought
                               to ensure that a low error margin could be obtained.3
                            •	 Ports of call surveyed were Port Vila, Luganville and Mystery Island, which represent 85% of calls in
                               Vanuatu in 2013 and 88% of calls in 2015 according to projections.


                       Comparison with / lessons from previous studies
                       The survey was structured to be in line with studies of the cruise sector carried out globally. Questionnaires
                       and approach to surveying passengers and crew are based on the BREA methodology. The outcomes of
                       the Vanuatu research, including levels of passenger and crew spend, are broadly aligned with results seen
                       in the Caribbean. On a number of important measures – the share of cruise passengers willing to return for
                       a land-based vacation, differences between premium and contemporary cruise passenger spending – the
                       findings of this study align with global data gathered by the cruise industry over several years.

                       Two previous studies of cruise tourism in Vanuatu were reviewed and findings compared to this report.
                       The South Pacific Tourism Organisation (SPTO) recently produced data on cruise passenger spending
                       in Vanuatu. The study’s methodology differed from that of this report, taking a different approach by
                       surveying passengers at the wharf and using enumerators. The study did not publish data on crew spend
                       and did not calculate indirect stimulus effects of expenditure.




                       1	   This happens when employees spend their salaries on purchases or living expenses.
                       2	   A number of surveys had to be excluded due to multiple ports being selected or obvious errors in the expenditure reported. Crew
                            surveys from staff who did not go ashore were also excluded.
                       3	   The proportion of cruise members surveyed is not as relevant, as only a small proportion of crew members go ashore.

21
                                           ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
                                                                                         AUGUST 2014 REPORT




The SPTO study (2013) found that the average spend for cruise ship tourists was $116 in Port Vila and $26 in
Mystery Island. Given some difference in methodology, these results are similar to findings of this study of
average spend at Port Vila port call of $96, and Mystery Island of $11. The differences may be explained by
differences in the mix of ships whose passengers were interviewed, as this influences the expenditure.

The Millennium Challenge Account (MCA) undertook an assessment of tourist spending in Vanuatu in June
2008.4 The scope of the research included international resorts, international cruise ships, yachts and local
tourism. The sample size included approximately 1,500 air passengers (interviewed on departure) and
750 cruise passengers. Direct comparisons are difficult, given the differences in methodology including
categories of spend, study timeframes, the structure of the survey questionnaire and methodology of
interviewing passengers. The methodology used for determining indirect impact is, however, broadly
aligned to the MCA study of the tourism industry, which also surveyed businesses to estimate intermediate
consumption.

The average spend per cruise tourist in the MCA baseline study was found to be 20,160 vatu or AUD $2355
(the survey was undertaken in Port Vila only). This is compared to the finding of this project of AUD $96 for
Port Vila. A number of factors could explain the difference:

     •	 Margins by intermediaries may have been integrated differently;
     •	 The MCA surveys were undertaken at the wharf, not on the ship;
     •	 The spending of cruise ship tourists may have decreased between 2008 and 2014, given changes in
        the market and potential increase in diversity of visitors.
Due to methodological differences these questions cannot be answered from a desktop review of the MCA
study. Broadly speaking the key items of expenditure (tours, duty free, land transport and general shopping)
ranked the same in both surveys.

The MCA survey’s scope also provides an opportunity to compare the expenditure of cruise ship tourists
against resort tourists. According to the MCA survey, cruise ship tourists spend on average modestly more
than tourists staying at a resort; average daily spend was $181 for a resort tourist compared to $235 for a
cruise ship tourist. However, this seems counter-intuitive, as resort tourists are likely to spend more on food
and beverages and, of course, accommodation (which often constitutes roughly a third of daily spend). In
the MCA research, the average length of stay was 7.7 days for a resort tourist compared to 1 day for a cruise
ship tourist, generating a total (direct) spend of $150 million for the former, compared with $20 million for
cruise ship tourists.

Clearly, given the accommodation expenditure of resort tourists and the higher average length of stay –
tourist per tourist, the MCA study found that resort tourists bring more economic impact to the country.
At the same time, the predictability of the cruise market, where calls are known in advance, and Vanuatu’s
advantageous geographical position for ex-Australia cruise travel, have resulted in strong cruise market
growth, with cruise tourists now making up two-thirds of all visitors to Vanuatu.

A comprehensive view of tourism development in Vanuatu can take into account the differences between
these groups of tourists and derive separate strategies for attracting each. As arrivals continue to grow,
encouraging both air and cruise visitors to spend time in the outer islands, in order to reduce congestion
and backlogs (in tour bookings) in Port Vila and to increase the distributional effects of tourist expenditures
would support development of the industry.




4	   TRIP consultants, 2008
5	   Average 2007 exchange rate was used to determine AUD.

                                                                                                             22
ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
AUGUST 2014 REPORT




                       Direct economic impact

                       Summary
                       Based on the information collected the overall direct economic impact in 2013 has been estimated at $33
                       million for the 3 ports of call surveyed, or $34.6 million extrapolated across all ports of call. The share of calls
                       for each of the 3 surveyed ports in 2013 is estimated to be 48% for Port Vila, 30% for Mystery Island and 7%
                       for Luganville. A detailed breakdown is presented in Table 3 below. The activity (visits to various ports of call)
                       varies year on year. In particular, Luganville is scheduled to receive more visits in 2014 than 2013.

                       This direct expenditure can be considered in the context of an overall figure of $367M for exports of
                       goods and services for Vanuatu in 20126. The direct expenditure at all ports of call represents 9.4% of total
                       exports7.

                       TABLE 3: TOTAL ESTIMATED DIRECT SPEND (2013 CALLS – IN AUD)

                        LOCATION                CALLS    PASSENGER                DIRECT              DIRECT              DIRECT SPEND          TOTAL
                                                RCI AND  -DAYS                    COMPANY             SPEND BY            BY CREW
                                                CARNIVAL                          SPEND               PASSENGERS          MEMBERS

                        Port Vila               114            237,364            $4,200,000          $22,529,000         $1,080,000            $27,809,000

                        Luganville              16             33,298             $607,000            $1,437,000          $93,000               $2,137,000

                        Mystery Island          71             147,851            $1,422,000          $1,607,000          $32,000               $3,016,000

                        Total                   201            418,513            $6,229,000          $25,573,000         $1,205,000            $33,007,000

                        Total
                        extrapolated for
                                                237                                                                                             $34,559,000
                        all Vanuatu ports
                        of call

                       Direct company spend is mostly related to port fees, but also includes corporate expenses and salaries paid
                       out to Ni-Vanuatu people employed on board some ships.8 This has been allocated based on the number of
                       calls in each location (see analysis in the corresponding section below).


                       Analysis of direct spend
                       Data collected from 4,039 surveys representing 8,839 passengers and 926 crew members was analysed
                       and key results are presented below. More detail on the methodology is presented in Appendix 1.

                       Expenditure by cruise passengers
                       The central element of the passenger survey was expenditure on the day of the ship’s visit to the port of call
                       targeted. Data on pre-booked tours was included in total spend by passengers.9




                       6	   VNSO, 2012 National Accounts of Vanuatu.
                       7	   Although all these impacts may not be considered as exports.
                       8	   This reduces the port fees due in Port Vila and Luganville, as an employment incentive by the Vanuatu government.
                       9	   This information was obtained directly from the cruise companies for the year 2013 to allow the extrapolation to the whole of 2013.

23
                                              ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
                                                                                                           AUGUST 2014 REPORT




The proportion of passengers who went ashore was also derived from the surveys to feed into the
extrapolation of results (Figure 310). It is worth noting that the proportion of people going ashore and
spending money varies significantly depending on the port of call, a reflection of the spending opportunities
available at the respective destinations.

FIGURE 15: PROPORTION OF PASSENGERS GOING ASHORE (SURVEYED SHIPS)


                                           Percentage of passengers going onshore
    100                                    Percentage of people who went onshore and spent no money on the day (*)



    80




    60
%




                 97%                                    91%                                   91%
    40




    20
                                                                                                             35%

                                                                       15%
     0                            8%

                      Port Vila                             Luganville                          Mystery Island




(*) The percentage representing people who spent no money includes those who may have pre-booked
tours, which are considered separately.

Patterns of spending vary between ports of call given the different spending opportunities on offer. When
extrapolating for a whole year, the direct expenditure impact was calculated by port and ship class to
account for the differences in expenditure patterns.




10	 Based on information provided by the cruise companies on the ships surveyed in March – May 2014. This was used for the
    extrapolation of results to a whole year of economic impacts, as only passengers going ashore have the opportunity to spend.

                                                                                                                                   24
ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
AUGUST 2014 REPORT




                       FIGURE 16: PASSENGER SPEND BREAKDOWN (2014 SURVEY)


                                            Tours           Duty Free        Transport          Clothing        Souvenir        Food&Beverage             Other
                          Port Vila
                          Luganville
                       Mystery
                        Island




                                       0       10         20         30          40        50     60       70         80        90      100         110     120
                                                                                                 $AUD



                       FIGURE 17: BREAKDOWN OF AVERAGE DAILY EXPENDITURE, BY PORT (AUD)

                                             Port Vila $96 direct spend                                Mystery Island $11 direct spend
                                                per passenger day                                            per passenger day

                          Food&Beverage                  Other                                                    Other              Tours
                               $5.84                     $11.63                                                    $2                 $2


                                                                                  Tours
                                           Souvenir                               $34.72
                                            $7.52
                                                                                                        Food &
                                                                                                       Beverage
                                             Clothing                                                     $2
                                                                                                                                         Clothing
                                              $10.17                                                                                        $3

                                                       Transport     Duty Free                                       Souvenir
                                                        $12.00        $14.26                                           $2



                                                                                                                Transport $0     Duty Free $0

                                            Luganville $45 direct spend
                                                per passenger day

                             Food&Beverage
                                  $2.58                  Other
                                                         $4.34


                                           Souvenir
                                            $3.83                                Tours
                                                                                 $20.13


                                            Clothing
                                             $6.54


                                                         Transport
                                                           $7.13


25                                                                      Duty Free
                                                                         $0.68
                                                                                                                          ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
                                                                                                                                                                          AUGUST 2014 REPORT



TABLE 4: WEIGHTED SPEND BY PASSENGERS

                                             PORT VILA                                              LUGANVILLE                                        MYSTERY ISLAND


                        AVERAGE                                                 AVERAGE
                                                  WEIGHTED                                                WEIGHTED                                               WEIGHTED
                       SPEND PER                                     TOTAL     SPEND PER                                   TOTAL       AVERAGE                                      TOTAL
CATEGORY                          SHARE OF ALL      AVERAGE                               SHARE OF ALL      AVERAGE                               SHARE OF ALL     AVERAGE
                      PASSENGER                                   PASSENGER   PASSENGER                                 PASSENGER     SPEND PER                                  PASSENGER
                                   ONSHORE         SPEND PER                               ONSHORE         SPEND PER                               ONSHORE        SPEND PER
                      WHO SPENT                                  EXPENDITURE WHO SPENT                                 EXPENDITURE   PASSENGER                                  EXPENDITURE
                                     VISITS       PASSENGER                                  VISITS       PASSENGER                                  VISITS      PASSENGER
                     ON THAT ITEM                                   (M AUD)  ON THAT ITEM                                 (M AUD)        (AUD                                      (M AUD)
                                                     (AUD)                                                   (AUD)                                                  (AUD)
                         (AUD)                                                   (AUD)

Tours
                        51.89        49.0%           25.42           5.9         41.46        33.2%          13.76         0.4            -                           -               
(pre-purchased)2

Tours (on the day)      52.86        17.6%               9.31        2.2         36.24        17.5%          6.36          0.2          16.50        12.0%          1.98            0.3

Duty Free               44.46        32.1%           14.26           3.3         32.94        2.1%           0.68          0.0            -                           -               

Transport               19.21        62.5%                12         2.8         22.40        31.8%          7.13          0.2            -                           -               

Clothing                20.39        49.9%               10.17       2.4         16.85        38.8%          6.54          0.2          10.59        27.9%          2.96            0.4

Souvenir                15.34        49.0%               7.52        1.8         10.45        36.6%          3.83          0.1          7.63         30.5%          2.33            0.3

Food & Beverage         13.89        42.0%               5.84        1.4         10.12        25.5%          2.58          0.1          7.12         29.3%          2.09            0.3

Watch and
                        31.87        14.2%               4.52        1.1          7.54        8.0%            0.6          0.0          4.87          6.6%          0.32            0.0
Jewellery

Entertainment           18.68        16.1%               3.01        0.7          9.52        20.6%          1.96          0.1          5.59          7.2%           0.4            0.1

Other                   24.36        10.7%                2.6        0.6          6.39        8.8%           0.56          0.0          7.42          8.4%          0.62            0.1

Supermarket              7.32         8.5%               0.62        0.1          6.20        7.3%           0.45          0.0          2.08          1.0%          0.02            0.0

Services                 9.62         4.4%               0.42        0.1         8.20         4.0%           0.33          0.0          7.71          6.2%          0.48            0.1

Entertainment
                        31.58         1.1%               0.36        0.1         24.53        1.0%           0.25          0.0          15.43         1.0%          0.16            0.0
Venues

Communications           6.13         1.6%                0.1        0.0         10.71        1.9%            0.2          0.0            -                           -               

Total (weighted)                                     96.15           22.5                                    45.23         1.4                                      11.35           1.6


                                                                                                                                                                                          26
ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
AUGUST 2014 REPORT




                       Unweighted spend gives an indication of the unit spend. However, some categories may not be meaningful
                       given the small number of respondents. The breakdown shows that the patterns of spending vary between
                       ports of call, as could be expected. There are a number of factors affecting this, in particular availability of
                       activities and goods at each location:

                           •	 Tours remain the biggest spend by far, in Port Vila (36%) and Luganville (45%), while in Mystery
                              Island there are currently no pre-booked accredited tours available. Tours (17% of total passenger
                              expenditure) in Mystery Island include, for example canoe and snorkelling activities.
                           •	 Duty free is a significant item of expenditure in Port Vila (15% of total) and is not readily available in
                              other locations.
                           •	 Land transport (private taxis and minibuses) is the second highest item of expenditure, in Luganville
                              (12%) and Port Vila (16%), mostly for those who want the freedom to organise their own visit. This is
                              a ‘reserved’ ni-Vanuatu business, i.e. only ni-Vanuatu people can undertake this activity. There is no
                              road on Mystery Island.
                           •	 Clothing expenditure is also significant in all locations (11% in Port Vila, 14% in Luganville, 26% in
                              Mystery Island), although it is mostly purchased from market stall holders in Luganville where there
                              are not many actual shops, and Mystery Island, where there are none. In Port Vila there are a number
                              of clothes retail shops catering to tourists.
                           •	 Souvenirs and handicraft are sold in all locations by market stall holders. The section on indirect
                              economic impacts elaborates on the characteristics and distributional impacts particular to this
                              sector.
                           •	 Food and beverage complement the tourist purchasing ‘basket’, with significant differences in what is
                              on offer in various locations (Port Vila offering a much larger range of opportunities).

                       Factors driving passenger spend
                       While there was a strong correlation between the class of ship and expenditure (Premium ship passengers
                       spending less, except in Mystery Island, where they spent the same), the causal link could not be identified
                       with certainty. It is thought that Premium passengers are more habitual cruisers11 who do not spend as
                       much time on activities as Contemporary passengers. Other factors that could be associated with the ship
                       class were explored:

                           •	 The income of the main respondents had little influence over the amount spent.
                           •	 There is a significant negative correlation between total spend and trip duration, i.e. passengers on
                              longer cruises spend less, as previously observed by cruise companies. This correlation is evident
                              with both first time visitors and repeat visitors, and also with premium and contemporary class ships
                              up to two weeks. However, total spend per passenger by repeat visitors on Premium ships has a weak
                              positive correlation with trip duration up to two weeks to Port Vila12.
                           •	 There appeared to be less spending on cruise during school holidays, but the sampling period does
                              not allow for sufficient confidence in this conclusion.
                       In addition, the following potential influencing parameters were also explored:

                           •	 There was a strong positive correlation between passenger satisfaction with the variety of things
                              to see and do and mean expenditure on souvenirs entertainment and total spend per passenger.
                              Similarly, there was a strong positive correlation between satisfaction with shopping opportunities
                              and mean expenditure on clothing, souvenirs, duty free and total spend per passenger. This does
                              not demonstrate a causation, simply a logical relationship between the satisfaction of having found
                              something that appealed and a corresponding need or purchasing intention.




                       11	 The question of repeat visit to Vanuatu was asked, but not the question of frequency of cruising. It is suggested that such a
                           question be added in future questionnaires.
                       12	 It should be noted that Contemporary cruises are for up to 2 weeks, while Premium cruises are for up to 4 weeks.

27
                                                     ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
                                                                                               AUGUST 2014 REPORT




FIGURE 18: CORRELATION BETWEEN SATISFACTION WITH VARIETY OF THINGS TO
SEE AND DO AND MEAN EXPENDITURE



                     9
                              Souvenirs                 Entertainment activities
                              Entertainment venues      Total spend
                     8

                     7




                                                                                                               Total spend ($AUD)
                     6
Item spend ($AUD)




                     5


                     4

                     3

                     2

                     1

                     0
                         Not at all          Not very          Somewhat              Very     Extremely
                         satisﬁed            satisﬁed           satisﬁed           satisﬁed    satisﬁed



FIGURE 19: CORRELATION BETWEEN SATISFACTION WITH SHOPPING
OPPORTUNITIES AND MEAN EXPENDITURE



                    16
                              Food and Beverages        Souvenirs                                         90
                              Clothing                  Duty Free
                    14        Total Spend                                                                 80

                    12                                                                                    70
                                                                                                               Total spend ($AUD)
Item Spend ($AUD)




                    10                                                                                    60

                                                                                                          50
                     8
                                                                                                          40
                     6
                                                                                                          30
                     4
                                                                                                          20

                     2
                                                                                                          10
                     0
                                                                                                          0
                         Not at all          Not very          Somewhat              Very     Extremely
                         satisﬁed            satisﬁed           satisﬁed           satisﬁed    satisﬁed




                                                                                                                                    28
ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
AUGUST 2014 REPORT




                       Passengers were asked to rate their likelihood of returning to Vanuatu for a land-based or resort
                       vacation within the next three years. There was a significant positive correlation between passengers’
                       likelihood of returning and total spend per passenger at Port Vila and Luganville, but less of a correlation
                       at Mystery Island.

                       There was a significant difference in total expenditure per passenger on the day of the visit between those
                       who purchased tours in advance and those who did not, for both Port Vila and Luganville; passengers spent
                       less if they pre-purchased a tour. There are also differences for certain items of expenditure, with slightly
                       less spend on transport and duty free for those who pre-purchased tours, but slightly more spending on
                       souvenirs. This is generally consistent with the expectation that people going on a tour may have less time
                       or interest to go shopping.

                       TABLE 5: COMPARISON OF SPEND BETWEEN PASSENGERS WHO PURCHASED TOURS
                       IN ADVANCE AND THOSE WHO DID NOT

                                                                                           MEAN TOTAL
                                                                                                                 MEAN SPEND ON   MEAN SPEND ON      MEAN SPEND ON
                                                                                            SPEND PER
                                                                                                                  TRANSPORT        SOUVENIRS          DUTY FREE
                                                                                           PASSENGER
                                         LOCATION
                                                                                           Pre-     Tours     Pre-     Tours     Pre-     Tours     Pre-     Tours
                                                                                        purchased not pre- purchased not pre- purchased not pre- purchased not pre-
                                                                                          tours   purchased  tours   purchased  tours   purchased  tours   purchased

                                        Port Vila                                         $67         $80         $10     $18     $8          $7     $13      $19

                                         Luganville                                       $31         $32          $6     $9      $4          $3     $1       $1



                       FIGURE 20: TOURS PURCHASED IN ADVANCE



                                                                                   80
                       Tours purchased in advance (% passengers on average ship)




                                                                                          Contemporary        Premium

                                                                                   70


                                                                                   60


                                                                                   50

                                                                                   40


                                                                                   30


                                                                                   20


                                                                                   10


                                                                                    0
                                                                                                  Port Vila                            Luganville




29
                                                                                                                                ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       AUGUST 2014 REPORT




Passengers were also asked to indicate how well informed they were of tours and activities at the port of
call, and there was no correlation between this and total spend per passenger at any of the ports.

In terms of the opportunities for spending, the following points were noted:

Between 20% and 33% of passengers who spent money on food and beverages, clothing, watches and
jewellery and souvenirs declared that they would have spent more on those items, if available.

People who did not spend money on certain items were generally less likely to spend more even if available.
However, 10% of those who spent no money on clothing declared that they would have spent on this item,
indicating a potential gap in the market.

FIGURE 21: PERCENTAGE OF PASSENGERS WHO WOULD HAVE SPENT MORE,
IF MORE WAS AVAILABLE



                                         35                        Passengers who spent                                                           Passengers who did not spend


                                         30
% passengers who would have spent more




                                         25


                                         20


                                         15


                                         10


                                          5


                                          0
                                              Tours (on the day)


                                                                    Transport


                                                                                Food and beverages


                                                                                                     Entertainment activities


                                                                                                                                  Entertainment venue


                                                                                                                                                        Clothing


                                                                                                                                                                   Watches and jewellery


                                                                                                                                                                                           Souvenirs


                                                                                                                                                                                                       Services


                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Duty free


                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Telecommunications


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Supermarket




This suggests that there are different categories of passengers, the ‘spenders’ and the ‘non spenders’,
the latter not willing to spend much money while cruising. This implies that marketing strategies should
aim to identify and target the ‘spenders’ and make sure that their needs and wants can be satisfied by what
is on offer.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 30
ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
AUGUST 2014 REPORT




                         FIGURE 22: SHARE OF ALL PASSENGERS STATING THEY WOULD HAVE SPENT MORE,
                         IF MORE OPTIONS WERE AVAILABLE, PER PORT

                                                      25                        Port Vila                             Luganville                                              Mystery Island                              Weighted average across 3 ports




                                                      20




                                                      15
                         %




                                                      10




                                                       5




                                                       0
                                                           Tours (on the day)


                                                                                 Transport


                                                                                                 Food and beverages


                                                                                                                             Entertainment activities


                                                                                                                                                        Entertainment venue


                                                                                                                                                                                   Clothing


                                                                                                                                                                                                  Watches and jewellery


                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Souvenirs


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Services


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Duty free


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Telecommunications


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Supermarket
                         There is a positive correlation between the number of hours spent ashore and the mean expenditure
                         (up to 7 hours, after which the correlation becomes less clear).

                         FIGURE 23: HOURS SPENT ASHORE AND MEAN PASSENGER EXPENDITURE

                                              120
                                                                                Port Vila
                                                                                Luganville
                                              100                               Mystery Island
                       Mean Spend Per Passanger ($)




                                                      80



                                                      60


                                                      40



                                                      20



                                                       0
                                                                       1                     2                           3                                     4                              5                           6               7                      8                        9                 10 or
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            more
                                                                                                                                                                                  Hours spent ashore
31
                                                     ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
                                                                                                      AUGUST 2014 REPORT




Spend reported by crew members
The same analysis was applied to expenditure by crew members. As expected, a smaller proportion of crew
members go ashore, as only those with leave on that day can disembark the ship (see Table 6). Similar to
passenger spend, the crew spend figures vary significantly depending on the port of call, shown below.

TABLE 6: PROPORTION OF CREW WHO WENT SHORE (SURVEYED SHIPS) BY
DESTINATION

 PORT(S) OF CALL                                                         PORTION OF CREW GOING ASHORE

 Port Vila                                                                               24%

 Luganville                                                                              26%

 Mystery Island                                                                          13%




FIGURE 24: CREW EXPENDITURE BREAKDOWN
   Port Villa
   Luganville
Mystery
 Island




                0              10               20             30              40                50       60
                                                             ($AUD)

                    Food&Beverage         Transport      Supermarket      Entertainment Venues
                    Clothing        Duty Free    Tours & Entertainment     Souvenir     Other




The spend pattern for crew members varies more across destinations than the passenger spend:

           •	 Food and beverage dominate in all locations.
           •	 Transport is a significant spend in Port Vila and Luganville.
           •	 Supermarket / grocery shopping is also significant, whereas it is not prominent in passengers’
              purchases.
Crew members spend much less on Duty Free and Clothing.




                                                                                                                      32
ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
AUGUST 2014 REPORT




                        Direct expenditure by cruise companies
                        The following expenses constitute direct expenditure by the cruise companies into the Vanuatu economy
                        (estimates for 2013 calls).

                        FIGURE 25: ESTIMATED CRUISE COMPANY EXPENDITURE BY PORT OF CALL

                                        4.5
                                                                                      Port Fees
                                        4.0                                           Community - landing fees   $4.2m
                                                                                      Company expenses on goods and services
                                        3.5                                                                    $8.8m
                                               $1.6m

                                        3.0
                       Million ($AUD)




                                        2.5

                                        2.0

                                        1.5
                                               $2.6m
                                        1.0
                                                                                                            $1.0m

                                        0.5                                $0.2m
                                                                           $0.4m                            $0.4m
                                        0.0
                                              Port Vila                  Luganville                      Mystery Island



                        The majority of cruise company expenses relate to port fees that flow to government. However,
                        for Mystery Island, this expense flows directly to the local community. The money is managed by a cruise
                        ship committee and is allocated to projects benefiting the whole community.

                        Company expenses on goods and services are comprised of port agent services and local procurement.
                        Most of the cruise companies’ procurement is centrally managed, with containers shipped to home ports all
                        around the world. Only some of the brands have flexibility to source local products from the ports of call the
                        ships visit, apart from purchasing emergency supplies when needed. In Vanuatu, a recent agreement has
                        been made to supply bottled water to some of the ships, as well as some local coffee. Ships are also refilling
                        with fresh water supplied by a local company. Additionally, crew transfers, port agent fees and corporate
                        expenses benefit the hospitality and services sectors. These company expenses have been allocated
                        based on the number of calls in each location; however, it is likely that most of the benefit flows back to
                        Port Vila, where the major businesses are located.




33
                                               ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
                                                                                                                AUGUST 2014 REPORT




Donations by passengers
P&O passengers donate $1 to Save the Children for community initiatives in Vanuatu, a program in
place since early 2013. The program is structured as opt-out, with passengers having to ask to have the
contribution removed from their bill; they can also make additional contributions. These donations have
not been included in the overall expenditure figures used in this report. In 2013, P&O Cruises raised over
$280,000 through the Save the Children fund. By mid-2014, over $440,000 had been raised and three
projects - two kindergartens and an aid post - have already been completed.

The latest project will see $270,000 from the Partnership devoted to replacing a pre-1970s health facility
on Aneityum. The new dispensary will include a consultancy room, treatment room, in-patient room,
delivery room for maternity services, a waiting area as well as pharmaceutical and equipment storage.


Direct economic impact per call and per passenger
The following table shows the total direct expenditure impact of a ship call and a ship passenger, per port.
Note that this differs from passenger spend as it represents the whole of the direct economic impacts
divided by the number of calls and the number of passenger-days.

TABLE 7: DIRECT ECONOMIC IMPACT PER SHIP CALL AND PER PASSENGER CALL (2013)13


                                            DIRECT EXPENDITURE PER                      DIRECT EXPENDITURE PER
PORT
                                            SHIP - CALL                                 PASSENGER - CALL


Port Vila                                   $243,900                                    $117

Luganville                                  $133,600                                    $64

Mystery Island                              $43,100                                     $21




13	 This is different to passenger expenditure as it comprises all expenditure (including crew and operator).

                                                                                                                                34
ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
AUGUST 2014 REPORT




                       Indirect economic impact
                       Direct expenditure by cruise companies, their passengers and their crew, has an indirect economic
                       impact through the businesses, individuals and government authorities that they interact with. As these
                       businesses employ people and purchase goods and services, money is recirculated through the economy
                       and the direct impact is ‘multiplied’. Other businesses, individuals and government (through taxes) benefit
                       from this.

                       This effect was estimated from a survey of key businesses which sought to establish their expenditure
                       structure. This indirect impact was classified in three categories: leakage (i.e. imports); tax and benefits to
                       government; and private benefits. Within this last category, a further type of leakage may occur, if foreign
                       owned businesses send profits offshore. As this is a question that cannot be elicited through interviews,
                       qualitative comments have been made where relevant.

                       A schematic version of the indirect expenditure stimulus flows is presented in the diagram below.

                       FIGURE 26: INDIRECT EXPENDITURE IMPACT FLOWS (%)




                       This means that for each dollar spent across the range of goods and services listed on the left hand side
                       of the diagram, 59% creates flow-on impacts locally and 41% ‘leaks’ to international beneficiaries. Out of
                       the 59% of local impact, 10% goes to government (taxes and contributions) and the rest (49%) to private
                       beneficiaries (businesses and individuals). The stimulus impact to businesses is therefore 49%.

                       Compared to the 41% leakage reported here, the MCA survey found that 30% of gross revenue was used
                       to purchase goods and services from overseas. This is likely due to differences in methodology. Other
                       explanations could be due to the differences in the distribution of the whole of the tourism sector, as
                       opposed to cruise ship tourism. For example, a larger proportion of air tourists visited the outer islands than
                       cruise ship tourists. This tourism is likely to result in less international leakages, due to the type of services
                       and products available for purchase on the outer islands.

                       Leakage in the Pacific islands can reach very high levels; according to Lal and Fortune (2000) some
                       estimates show that this can reach up to 80% in isolated undeveloped areas. In Fiji, about 60% of tourists’
                       expenditure is estimated to leak out of the country14, the 41% figure for Vanuatu, calculated in this study,
                       is significantly lower than that experienced by some Pacific islands. It must be noted that this leakage only
                       relates to specific tourism related activities, in particular services such as tours which do not rely much on
                       imported products, and are less affected.




                       14	 Levett and McNally, 2003

35
                                                 ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
                                                                                                          AUGUST 2014 REPORT




Differences between locations surveyed
An important distinction needs to be made between Port Vila and Luganville, and Mystery Island. There are
no organised tours at present on Mystery Island, nor any permanent residents or businesses. However, on
cruise ship days people come from the neighbouring island of Aneityum to sell goods and services to cruise
ship visitors disembarking on Mystery Island. For this reason, the cost structure for the operations are
much simpler than elsewhere, and a greater proportion of passenger expenditure therefore flows directly
to the community. A management committee coordinates the Mystery Island activities and manages
the anchorage fees paid by the cruise companies. The revenue derived from these activities mostly
complements subsistence farming for people involved.

Because of this important difference and to be able to use Mystery Island as an example for other potential
ports of call in Vanuatu, the indirect impact flows for Mystery Island are presented in a separate section to
those for Port Vila and Luganville.


Indirect impact flows per industry (Port Vila and Luganville)
Tour operators
The tour operator businesses in Port Vila and Luganville15 range from providing fishing and snorkelling
trips, to helicopter flights over the island (Port Vila only), to companies that manage the transfers of cruise
ship tourists from the port to other tours, or that provide their own tours. Due to the differences in cost
structures, this sector has been separated into two groups:

    •	 Activities – tour operators that provide tours only, ranging from fishing, snorkelling to cultural and
       nature visits. They are more labour intensive.
    •	 Transfers – tour operators that have licences to transfer tourists from the Port to tours. These
       operators often also provide their own tours of the island or directly to a natural attraction, and/or act
       as an intermediary for other tour operators. They are more capital intensive.
Tour expenditure in both locations includes tours purchased by cruise companies on behalf of passengers.
The average salary for employees in this sector is estimated to be slightly higher than minimum wage
at 35,000 vatu per month. Salaries can be significantly higher for some tour operators due to the skills
required for the job, for example, Helicopter Vanuatu and Big Blue diving and snorkelling operation.

Table 8 outlines key findings of the indirect economic impact analysis. 16

TABLE 8: KEY FINDINGS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS

                                                                         PORT VILA                       LUGANVILLE

% of cruise ship tourist expenditure benefiting tour
                                                                              38%                              46%
operators

 Employment impact 16                                                      299-898                           44-133

 Salary per month                                                                         35,000 vatu

 Indirect expenditure impact (ex. leakages)                                           $AUD 6.7 MILLION

 BENEFICIARIES OF EXPENDITURE (% FLOW FROM EVERY DOLLAR SPENT)

Local private                                                                                 57%

International                                                                                 33%

Vanuatu Government                                                                            10%

15	 No tour is available as yet in Mystery Island.
16	 An alternative way to calculate employment impact of the sector results in employment estimated to be approximately 190 people
    in the Port Vila area. Based on the surveys completed by Net Balance, each tour operator business has an average of 10 employees.
    This compares to findings in the MCA survey, which found that the tour operator and inbound operator sector employed 206 FT
    staff and 92 PT staff in the approximately 20 businesses they surveyed (across the country).                                   36
ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
AUGUST 2014 REPORT




                       Land transportation
                       This category refers to the land transportation by private taxis and mini-buses operating at the wharf and in
                       town, and excludes tour operators already mentioned above. The cost structure of the different operators
                       (owner-drivers or drivers sharing profit) have been found to be similar, hence no distinction has been made
                       below. However, in terms of distribution effects, the impact of sharing a profit between owner and drivers
                       may be socially significant. Table 9 outlines key findings from the economic analysis of cruise ship tourism
                       expenditure.

                       TABLE 9: KEY FINDINGS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS OF LAND TRANSPORT

                                                                                                     PORT VILA                       LUGANVILLE

                        % of cruise ship tourist expenditure benefiting
                                                                                                         13%                               16%
                        transport operators

                        Employment impact                                                              179-538                            14-43

                        Salary per month                                                                             30,000 vatu

                        Indirect expenditure impact (ex. leakages)                                               $AUD 1.9 MILLION

                        BENEFICIARIES OF EXPENDITURE (% FLOW FROM EVERY DOLLAR SPENT)

                        Local private                                                                                     46%

                        International                                                                                     41%

                        Vanuatu Government                                                                                13%

                       This expenditure only applies to Port Vila and Luganville, as there is no requirement for land transportation
                       on Mystery Island. In Port Vila, land transportation from the wharf is reported as an issue by many
                       stakeholders, as taxi drivers compete, sometimes aggressively, for fares.

                       Employment impact
                       The employment impact is difficult to gauge, as taxi and minibus drivers are operating on different margins
                       on cruise days and non-cruise days, when they are effectively providing a public transport service to
                       the local population. It is therefore difficult to conclude whether the marginal impact of the cruise ship
                       passengers is mostly to provide employment or increase profit.

                       Anecdotal evidence is that about 200 taxis routinely wait for passengers at the wharf in Port Vila. The land
                       transport association (VELTA) indicated that they had 644 members in 2013, but the number of taxis and
                       minibuses is likely to be significantly higher, as association membership is not mandatory at this stage. The
                       association estimates that there are over 1,000 buses and 500 taxis in Port Vila.

                       Given the difficulties associated with estimating the wage cost for this sector, the FTE employment impact
                       of cruise ship tourism expenditure has been calculated using an assumed monthly salary equivalent to the
                       minimum salary. Using this figure, and the total profit estimated to be earned by the sector for the total
                       spend from cruise ship tourism, the range of employment effect17 is estimated to be 179-538 for Port Vila
                       and 14-43 for Luganville.

                       Duty free
                       Port Vila has several (7) duty free shops, and spending on duty free consistently comes first in the spending
                       estimates as it is known as a good location in the region for such purchases. Duty free spending will be
                       minimal in Luganville and Mystery Island, although the SPTO survey reported some duty free purchases on
                       Mystery Island.


                       17	 The range is calculated using an assumption of a FTE wage and 33% of FTE wage, to capture the potential for a large part of the
                           workforce to not be working full time.

37
                                       ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
                                                                                           AUGUST 2014 REPORT




By definition, the indirect impact of duty free shopping comes from the operation of the shop, as products
sold do not attract local taxes.

The margins vary a lot across products sold at the duty free outlets. Personal information from several
operators indicated that margins on alcohol are extremely low and this is used as a marketing tool to attract
tourists. Higher margins are made on other products, including some retail/ merchandising products, that
are not duty free. Concern was also expressed by local shop owners at the cruise companies advertising
that they will match any low price on duty free alcohol found in town.

TABLE 10: KEY FINDINGS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS OF DUTY FREE

                                                                PORT VILA                    LUGANVILLE

% of cruise ship tourist expenditure benefiting tour
                                                                    18%                          2%
operators

 Employment impact                                                 81-244                        1-2

 Salary per month                                                              60,000 vatu

 Indirect expenditure impact (ex. leakages)                                 $AUD 1.5 MILLION

BENEFICIARIES OF EXPENDITURE (% FLOW FROM EVERY DOLLAR SPENT)

Local private                                                                     32%

International                                                                     65%

Vanuatu Government                                                                 3%

It is noted that the Luganville impact may be the result of reporting errors by passengers, as there is no real
possibility of duty free in Luganville.

Restaurants and cafes
There are a broad range of outlets that sell food and beverages to cruise ship tourists. Anecdotal
information collected during in-country surveys was that cruise tourists tend to purchase drinks and
snacks, as opposed to meals. Table 11 outlines the key findings of the economic assessment of indirect
impact of cruise tourist spending.

TABLE 11: KEY FINDINGS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS OF RESTAURANTS
AND CAFES

                                                                   PORT VILA                   LUGANVILLE

% of cruise ship tourist expenditure                                    8%                          9%

Employment impact                                                     56-169                       4-12

Salary per month                                                                 35,000 vatu

Indirect expenditure impact (ex. leakages)                                     $AUD 1.4 MILLION

BENEFICIARIES OF EXPENDITURE (% FLOW FROM EVERY DOLLAR SPENT)

Local private                                                                        51%

International                                                                        38%

Vanuatu Government                                                                   11%




                                                                                                             38
ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
AUGUST 2014 REPORT




                       Local craft and souvenirs
                       Local craft and souvenirs account for approximately 15% of cruise tourist spending across 3 locations
                       (including Mystery Island).

                       The relatively high proportion flowing offshore is due to the high proportion of imported goods that are sold
                       in the local handicraft markets. The domestic distributional effects of this spending, however, are positive
                       as the money goes directly to local stall holders who may have limited alternative sources of income or
                       access to other employment. Despite this, a high proportion of this expenditure flows out of the local
                       economy because of the high proportion of imports sold directly to tourists and also as a component of
                       locally made handicrafts. Initiatives to increase local content are in train and examined in section 3 of this
                       report. Table 12 outlines the key findings from the analysis of the indirect economic impacts from cruise
                       ship tourism expenditure.

                       TABLE 12: KEY FINDINGS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS OF LOCAL CRAFT AND
                       SOUVENIRS

                                                                                       PORT VILA                 LUGANVILLE

                        % of cruise ship tourist expenditure                               13%                       16%

                        Employment impact                                                87-262                     7-20

                        Salary per month                                                           38,000 vatu

                        Indirect expenditure impact (ex. leakages)                               $AUD 2.8 MILLION


                        BENEFICIARIES OF EXPENDITURE (% FLOW FROM EVERY DOLLAR SPENT)

                        Local private                                                                  54%

                        International                                                                  32%

                        Vanuatu Government                                                             14%


                       Retail
                       In the retail sector, most of the products are imported, either directly from China, Australia or New Zealand
                       (for up-market brands). There are a few shops that sell local products (for example the Kava retail shop in
                       Port Vila’s main street), but the proportion of locally sourced products in the overall spend by passengers
                       can be considered as very small.

                       The retail shops likely to be visited by cruise ship tourists vary greatly, from shops selling very cheap
                       souvenirs to those selling international branded apparel. The expenditure structure has been assumed to
                       be the same as the duty free shops. However, VAT has been modelled differently.

                       As is to be expected, the government receives a much higher percentage of the retail cruise tourism dollar
                       than for duty free retailing, (12% compared to 3% for duty free). Most of the difference in proportion of
                       expenditure being allocated to government is a transfer from international beneficiaries. Key findings are
                       outline in Table 13.




39
                                       ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
                                                                                            AUGUST 2014 REPORT




TABLE 13: KEY FINDINGS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS OF THE RETAIL SECTOR

                                                                   PORT VILA                LUGANVILLE

% of cruise ship tourist expenditure                                    10%                     10%

Employment impact                                                    102-307                    6-19

Salary per month                                                               35,000 vatu

Indirect expenditure impact (ex. leakages)                                 $AUD 1.3 MILLION

BENEFICIARIES OF EXPENDITURE (% FLOW FROM EVERY DOLLAR SPENT)

Local private                                                                      39%

International                                                                      49%

Vanuatu Government                                                                 12%


Services
This corresponds to services such as spas, hairdressers and telecommunications, and is a minor expense
in the cruise ship visitors’ budget. Utility costs are most significant in the delivery of these services. All
spas interviewed promoted the fact that they use local products. For other services, products have been
assumed to be minimal. The sector is diverse and it was difficult to cover the full range of businesses that
sit within it. However, it can be reasonably assumed that activity in the sector results in a high proportion of
spending flowing to private local beneficiaries.

TABLE 14: KEY FINDINGS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS OF THE SERVICES
SECTOR

                                                               PORT VILA                 LUGANVILLE

% of cruise ship tourist expenditure                               1%                        1.5%

Employment impact                                                 12-37                       1-3

Salary per month                                                              35,000 vatu

Indirect expenditure impact (ex. leakages)                                $AUD 0.3 MILION

BENEFICIARIES OF EXPENDITURE (% FLOW FROM EVERY DOLLAR SPENT)

Local private                                                                    68%

International                                                                    26%

Vanuatu Government                                                               6%

Note that this does not include services provided by Port agents nor the direct employment of ni-Vanuatu
people on board some ships (which have been included in the overall employment impact, where an
additional 140 FTEs have been added). These FTEs are however included in the overall employment figures
presented below.




                                                                                                               40
ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
AUGUST 2014 REPORT




                       Indirect expenditure (Mystery Island)
                       All activities at this destination are assumed to be organised and operated by locals, except for the bar
                       operated by the cruise company (which is not organised by all ships).

                       This means that relatively little indirect expenditure is generated through the purchase of goods and
                       services within the economy, but as it allows people to take a large portion of the earnings as salaries and
                       profits, it can be assumed that the majority of these proceeds are allocated to purchases that benefit the
                       community (such as school fees, investment in domestic improvements, health facilities, etc.).

                       Overall, for each dollar spent on Mystery Island the following beneficiaries receive money:

                           •	 30% to international beneficiaries (imports)
                           •	 5% to government beneficiaries
                           •	 65% to local beneficiaries.

                       Expenditure table
                       This table has been established based on interviews carried out by IFC on Mystery Island on a typical cruise
                       visit day. Where possible, the best estimates collected from operators themselves were averaged and are
                       expressed as a percentage.

                       TABLE 15: COST BREAKDOWN PER ACTIVITY (MYSTERY ISLAND)

                                                               PHOTOS &
                        EXPENDITURE           TOURS AND                          FOOD AND
                                                               CULTURAL                            HANDICRAFT SERVICES
                        CATEGORY              ACTIVITIES                         BEVERAGE
                                                               EXPERIENCE

                        Staff costs                 17%              11%               14%                                 85%

                        Cost of goods (*)                                              62%               55%

                        Equipment&
                                                    7%                2%               2%                                  1%
                        maintenance

                        Transportation
                                                     1%               1%               2%                1%                4%
                        costs

                        Profit margin               75%              86%               20%               44%               10%
                       (*) Only this category of goods translates in leakages (import) and government benefit (VAT and import
                       duty). All the other categories are considered local private benefits. See assumptions.

                       Employment impact
                       As employment is informal and complements other activities (mostly agricultural), the most representative
                       employment figure is the number of work-days for the community attending to the ships visits multiplied
                       by the number of ship visits to Mystery Island. The calculation is attached as a footnote, and suggests an
                       overall employment impact of 135 full-time equivalent jobs or a range of between 404 (assuming one third
                       of a full-time salary) and 135.

                       This is to be compared to the number of residents on Aneityum – 915, of which 600 are living in the
                       immediate vicinity of Mystery Island (2009 Census).




41
                                     ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
                                                                                       AUGUST 2014 REPORT




Overall impact modelling
The overall direct spending by cruise tourists and cruise companies translates into:

   •	 salaries (hence livelihood) and profits for business owners, and employment impacts,
   •	 further spending in the local economy by business operators (intermediate consumption),
   •	 government revenues (through taxes and contributions),
   •	 ‘leakages’ when intermediate consumption is from imported sources, or profits are exported.

Overall estimated impact on employment
The employment effects of cruise ship tourism for all three locations are outlined per sector
in the table below.

TABLE 16: ESTIMATED EMPLOYMENT IMPACTS FROM CRUISE SHIP TOURISM IN
ALL THREE LOCATIONS

EXPENDITURE                 RELATED                    RELATED                    % TOTAL
CATEGORY                    EMPLOYMENT                 EMPLOYMENT                 EMPLOYMENT
                            (ASSUMING FTE)             (ASSUMING 33% OF
                                                       FTE)

Tour operators                         355                       1,077                       35%

Services                               177                        535                           1%

Land transportation                    194                        587                        13%

Local craft and souvenirs              180                        544                        16%

Retail                                 108                        329                        10%

Duty free                              82                         248                        17%

Food and beverages                     71                         216                           9%

Total                                 1,167                      3,537

This employment impact does not include employment resulting from government revenues derived from
cruise ship visits. It includes an estimate of the employment of the company expenditure on port agent
services and includes the ni-Vanuatu employees on board the ships.




                                                                                                       42
ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
AUGUST 2014 REPORT




                       Overall estimated indirect impacts
                       The table below outlines the estimated indirect economic impacts from cruise ship tourism for all three
                       locations.

                       TABLE 17: INDIRECT ECONOMIC IMPACTS FROM CRUISE SHIP TOURISM
                       IN ALL THREE LOCATIONS

                        EXPENDITURE                 DIRECT EXPENSE                                          PRIVATE
                                                                         LEAKAGE               TAX
                        CATEGORY                    (YEARLY $AUD)                                           BENEFICIARIES

                        Tour operators                 $10.0 million             33%               10%              57%

                        Land transportation            $3.2 million              41%               13%              46%

                        Duty free                      $4.2 million              65%               3%               33%

                        Food and beverages             $2.3 million              38%               11%              51%

                        Local craft and souvenirs      $4.1 million              32%               14%              54%

                        Retail                         $2.6 million              49%               12%              39%

                        Services                       $0.4 million              26%               6%               68%

                        Total                          $26.8 million             41%               10%              49%


                       TABLE 18: DIRECT EXPENDITURE AND ECONOMIC BENEFICIARIES OF CRUISE SHIP
                       TOURISM BY PORT LOCATION

                                                    DIRECT
                        EXPENDITURE                                                                            PRIVATE
                                                    EXPENSE            LEAKAGE             GOVERNMENT
                        CATEGORY                                                                               BENEFICIARIES
                                                    (YEARLY $AUD)

                        Port Vila                     $23.6 million           42%                 10%                 48%

                        Luganville                    $1.5 million            33%                 12%                 55%

                        Mystery Island                $1.6 million            30%                 5%                  65%




43
                                      ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
                                                                                        AUGUST 2014 REPORT




Investment opportunities to
increase the economic impact of
cruise tourism in Vanuatu

Investment in infrastructure
1. Opening Tanna as a destination
Tanna is an attractive cruise destination for several reasons:

   •	 It is located to the south of the archipelago and being closer to Australia / New Zealand / New
      Caledonia, would be a valuable and convenient stop in the itinerary.
   •	 It has great natural beauty and, because of the active volcano, there is a relatively high ‘destination
      awareness’ amongst Australians and New Zealanders and a point of differentiation compared to other
      destinations; it also has cultural appeal; and is therefore relatively easy to market.
The drawback of the island is the lack of natural harbours capable of accommodating large ships;

   •	 Sulphur Bay and Port Resolution could be too shallow to accept large cruise ships, according to
      the initial high level information available from the cruise companies, and this would need to be
      ascertained prior to undertaking any initial hydrographic work. Government indicated that they have
      Sulphur Bay on their list of locations for hydrographic survey, to satisfy the needs of cruise companies.
      It is recommended that this should not be undertaken prior to a broader assessment of the suitability
      of Sulphur Bay.
   •	 While the north east coast (Waesisi) is, relatively, better for anchoring and for the proximity to the
      volcano, road access from there to the volcano remains rough, and the distance to other attractions
      is greater than for an anchorage on the west coast.
   •	 Lowanatom on the west coast is another option (according to the Carnival maritime team) It has
      a white sand beach, but does not have a safe harbour, and, given the current state of the roads, is
      thought to be about 1.5 to 2.5 hours drive away from the volcano.
   •	 In any new location, a detailed investigation would need to be preceded by maritime weather
      monitoring, including assessment of swell, current and wind as a first step to assess the safety of the
      proposed location. Neither coast has been monitored for currents and sea conditions as yet and this
      preliminary work will need to be undertaken regardless of the location.
Roads on Tanna are not sealed and are sensitive to weather conditions.

   •	 The Vanuatu Transport Sector Support Program (VTSSP) is assisting in the maintenance of roads
      on Tanna (and three other islands), with funding from the Australian and New Zealand governments.
      The main roads are assumed to be adequately maintained to allow the transportation of tourists
      in 12 seater buses. However, some secondary roads, not part of the VTSSP programs, are in
      poor condition, and depending on the location, would need to be rehabilitated to allow access to
      attractions.
   •	 The south road on Tanna, for which funding has been recently committed (with a low interest rate loan
      from China’s Exim Bank), will not give a significant advantage in terms of access to tourist attractions,
      as they are mostly located in the north (see maps in Appendix on the road and the attractions
      identified). The latest information is that this road will not be sealed, to save on costs.




                                                                                                            44
ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
AUGUST 2014 REPORT




                       Developing the location would therefore require investing in the following areas:

                           •	 Preliminary weather monitoring at the two locations
                           •	 A hydrography survey for the chosen location
                           •	 A destination impact study would need to be commissioned
                           •	 Landing facilities (assuming this is not Port Resolution, where adequate landing facilities exist), toilets
                              and huts / shelters
                       As the potential of the east and west coast as anchorage points are as yet unknown, two options were
                       defined – one close to the cultural attraction and the population clusters on the west coast, and the other
                       one on the east coast, closer to the volcano. The differentiator between the two options is that in the latter,
                       minimal movement of passengers has been assumed.

                       Option 1: Waesisi – eastern anchorage. Assumptions made:
                           •	 On the east coast, Waesisi was assumed to be the most likely anchorage. Based on map observation
                              and conversations with a range of specialists, it was assumed that 2 km of roads would need to be
                              rehabilitated at standard cost18, to facilitate access to the east coast road, which leads to the north of
                              the volcano. An additional 3 km of road leading from the main road to the volcano has been assumed
                              to be rehabilitated too, but no investment in access upgrade (and security measures) to the top of
                              the volcano itself has been provided for. It is assumed that this would be a tour reserved for a small
                              number of passengers in fit physical condition and accepting to waive the risks of undertaking the
                              volcano ascension19.
                           •	 Cultural activities have been assumed to be brought to Waesisi (i.e. people would come to the location
                              rather than have visitors moving), although there are also some points of attraction a short distance
                              from Waesisi, where passengers could potentially be transferred to (see map in Appendix).

                       Option 2: Lowanatom – western anchorage. Assumptions made:
                           •	 Lowanatom is about 30 minutes to some of the main cultural attractions, by road (see map in
                              Appendix). Investment in buses would be required to transport passengers to the activities. This
                              investment would however also benefit the local population, as buses can be used for community
                              transport when not transporting cruise passengers.
                           •	 Although a full assessment would be required, it has been assumed that enough attractions would
                              be accessible by road to cater for cruise tourists needs in the short term. This may involve short trips
                              on secondary roads in a poorer state than the main roads. Villages such as Yakel, while of potential
                              interest, are likely to be too difficult to access.
                           •	 A provision of 50% of the routine maintenance budget of the main roads maintained under the VTSSP
                              program has been assumed for additional maintenance needs and safety measures, required as a
                              result of increased traffic.
                       Based on the assumptions made, the net economic benefit over 10 years is estimated at:

                                                                             OPTION 1 (WAESISI)                        OPTION 2 (LOWANATOM)

                        Net economic benefit (NPV)                                   $AUD 4.9 MILLION                         $AUD 5.9 MILLION

                        NPV of costs (public costs)                                  $AUD 2.9 MILLION                         $AUD 5.9 MILLION

                        NPV of benefits (mostly private benefits)                    $AUD 7.8 MILLION                        $AUD 11.8 MILLION
                       The break-even period for the investment is 6 years for Waesisi and 7 years for Lowanatom.




                       18	 As provided by the Vanuatu Transport Sector Support Program
                       19	 It is unlikely that standard tour assurance could be obtained for such a tour, Adrian Mooney, pers. communication

45
                                       ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
                                                                                        AUGUST 2014 REPORT




2. Opening South West Bay, Malekula as a destination
Malekula is an attractive cruise destination as it is located half way up the archipelago, between Santo and
Efate. This provides good opportunity for ‘island hopping’ and also offers some great cultural experiences,
in particular the opportunity to experience the culture of the unique Small Nambas tribe.

Developing the location would therefore require investing in the following areas:

   •	 Preliminary weather monitoring
   •	 A hydrography survey for this location
   •	 A destination impact study would need to be commissioned
   •	 Landing facilities, toilets and huts / shelters
It is assumed that no road development would be required. There are a few small communities on SW Bay
and the attraction would be the cultural experience and the environment, all of which are accessible without
travel to the interior.

The black sand beach has been noted as a ‘harder sell’ for some cruise passengers.

Based on the assumptions made, the net economic benefit over 10 years could be estimated at:

                                                       OPTION 1 –                     OPTION 2–
                                                      WOODEN JETTY                  CONCRETE JETTY

Net economic benefit (NPV)                            $AUD 3.6 MILLION              $AUD 3.2 MILLION

NPV of costs (public costs)                           $AUD 1.1 MILLION              $AUD 1.6 MILLION

NPV of benefits (mostly private benefits)             $AUD 4.7 MILLION              $AUD 4.7 MILLION
The break-even period is 5 years for the concrete jetty.

3. Opening Ureparapara (Banks Islands) as a destination
Ureparapara is an unspoilt island destination which is an old volcanic cone that has been breached by the
sea, and hence very picturesque. The community of about 500 people living on the island still follows a
traditional way of life.

In terms of location, the Banks Islands are at the north of the archipelago on the way to Lord Howe Island
and the Solomon Islands. This provides some opportunities for the longer cruise itineraries.

Developing the location would therefore require investing in the following areas:

   •	 Preliminary weather monitoring
   •	 Hydrography survey for this location
   •	 A destination impact study would need to be commissioned
   •	 Landing facilities, toilets and huts/shelters
It is assumed that no road development would be required – there does not appear to be any road on
Ureparapara at the moment. The attraction would be the environment and the cultural experience, and
people from the community from Leserepla could come to the beach to provide fresh produce, canoe
tours, walking tours, cultural experiences and handicrafts. The community is about 3km away from the cove
in the centre of the island where the ship would dock, subject to hydrography surveys.




                                                                                                             46
ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
AUGUST 2014 REPORT




                       Based on the assumptions made, the net economic benefit over 10 years is estimated at:

                                                                                           NPV

                        Net economic benefit (NPV)                                                          $AUD 1 MILLION

                        NPV of costs (public costs)                                                        $AUD 1.1 MILLION

                        NPV of benefits (mostly private benefits)                                          $AUD 2.1 MILLION

                       The break-even period is 6 years.

                       4. Mystery Island: inner and outer anchorage mapping
                       International safety standards now require that cruise companies use electronic charts when approaching
                       coastal destinations. With over 60 calls a year, Mystery Island is a popular ‘remote’ destination. There are
                       two anchorage possibilities; an ‘outer’ anchorage, that is easier for ships to approach but more exposed to
                       high winds, making passenger disembarking by tender more difficult than the ‘inner’ anchorage, which is
                       considerably more sheltered, and closer to shore.

                       It is understood that Mystery Island is on the government’s supplementary program for electronic
                       mapping20, which should follow on shortly from the current survey program of four locations21. The funding
                       for this program still needs to be secured22.

                       The lack of electronic maps jeopardises the development of Mystery Island as a destination over the
                       medium term, as more stringent requirements are applied by cruise companies over time. Accessing
                       the inner anchorage is considered more risky without electronic maps. If ships can only access the outer
                       anchorage (more accessible without electronic maps), getting passengers ashore is more difficult in
                       windy conditions, and this has led, in the past, to call cancellations, occuring more frequently than at other
                       destinations. It is likely that electronic mapping of the inner anchorage will have the effect of reducing the
                       number of cancellations due to adverse weather. Avoiding even a small number of cancellations (5 per year)
                       shows a net benefit (see below). By contrast, if all calls were cancelled due to the absence of electronic
                       mapping, the net benefit of avoiding this result would be very significant.

                       Based on the assumptions made, the net economic benefit over 10 years could be estimated at:

                                                                                           NPV

                        Net economic benefit (NPV)                                                         $AUD 1.3 MILLION

                        NPV of costs (public costs)                                                        $AUD 0.1 MILLION

                        NPV of benefits (mostly private benefits)                                          $AUD 1.4 MILLION

                       The minimum break-even period is 1 year, i.e. the benefits of 5 calls balances out the likely cost of the
                       survey.

                       5. Luganville: wharf repair / improvement
                       Luganville and Port Vila provide Vanuatu’s only wharves that allow cruise ships to dock alongside, rather
                       than anchorages that require passengers to be ferried to shore in smaller vessels. This gives Luganville a
                       competitive advantage in the region as alongside dockings greatly facilitate passenger transfer between
                       ship and shore. This avoids calls being cancelled when the weather is inclement, and also reduces the strain
                       on cruise ship crews.



                       20	 Toney Tevi, Maritime Department, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, personal communication
                       21	 Luganville, Champagne Beach, Wala, and Pentecost: these were identified by the country risk assessment undertaken by
                           Land Information New Zealand and through consultation with the Vanuatu Government (assessing the costs and benefits of
                           hydrographic survey and charting, a Vanuatu case study, SPC-NZ Aid Programme, 2014)
                       22	 This was the situation at the time of our enquiry (June 2014)

47
                                                ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
                                                                                                                AUGUST 2014 REPORT




The Luganville wharf is currently in a poor state of repair and has been judged dangerous by a significant
amount of industry representatives, to the extent that it has been decided not to stop at Luganville until the
wharf is repaired and/or upgraded.

An upgrade project for the wharf and the ‘precinct’ around it, complete with a passenger terminal for cruise
ship visitors, has been discussed, but funding remains unsecured at the time of the drafting of this report.23
The project includes an extension of the wharf, enabling a container ship to dock at the same time as a
passenger ship, which would also benefit trade.

The full project is estimated at $AUD 98 million or VUV 8.8 billion – with $AUD 18 million estimated for repair
of the wharf alone. By way of comparison, the costs for the repair of the Simonsen wharf (domestic wharf,
Inter-Island project) is currently estimated at $AUD 12-13 million, which renders $AUD 18 million for the
international wharf a reasonable estimate. Our enquiries revealed that no independent feasibility study or
engineering evaluation for the minimal repair of the wharf has yet been conducted.

This provides two options to Luganville: simple repair of the current wharf, with gradual development of
attractions over time to service cruise passengers and attract more calls, or a full upgrade along the lines of
the project that has been discussed over the past months.

This report has costed the repair of the current wharf alone (estimated at $AUD 18 million), as this meets
basic requirements to open up Luganville to cruise shipping. This investment is essential to the economy of
Luganville, and, as mentioned above, a repaired wharf that is safe for cruise and commercial vessels to berth
would significantly increase the town’s potential to develop its general tourism and broader trade activity,
not only cruise tourism.

However, cruise itineraries are driven largely by passenger feedback and Luganville is consistently rated the
least favourable destination in Vanuatu by cruise passengers in surveys. This is probably due to a range of
factors, including the small number of activities available, and the very limited range of shops and cafes in
town for those who do not partake in the activities that are on offer.

The risk of development of the wharf alone, from the cruising perspective, is that frequency to Luganville
will continue to remain limited until the destination can improve the passenger experience. As such, a
significant investment in a passenger terminal and other convenience facilities, without addressing the
basic issues of increasing range of activities and shopping opportunities (differentiated from Port Vila), is
unlikely to have the desired effect.

Improving the destination as a whole would go beyond infrastructure, and require a more complete package
including investment in activities, amenities and tours.

Based on the assumptions made, the net economic benefit over 10 years is estimated at:

                                                        NPV

Net economic cost (NPV)                                                     $AUD 1.1 MILLION

NPV of costs (public costs)                                                 $AUD 18 MILLION

NPV of benefits                                                            $AUD 19.1 MILLION




23	 China’s EXIM bank has shown interest in a project initially valued at $AUD 98 million or VUV 8.8 billion.

                                                                                                                                48
ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
AUGUST 2014 REPORT




                       Investment to improve market access
                       The following projects are targeting local capacity building and would benefit primarily ni-Vanuatu people.
                       Beyond the net economic value calculated, they are likely to have a distributional impact skewed in
                       favour of those most in need of assistance (including people with little access to training or employment
                       opportunities). Clearly, the way these projects are structured and implemented will play an important role in
                       delivering these distributional and longer term capacity building benefits, which cannot be captured in this
                       initial assessment.

                       6. Employment for ni-Vanuatu people on board P&O ships
                       At present, there are 40 crew members employed on board each of the three P&O ships visiting Vanuatu,
                       providing employment for a total of 120 locals. To encourage this practice, the Vanuatu government is
                       granting P&O a linked discount on port fees in Port Vila and Luganville. There is a potential for increasing this
                       number as new P&O ships are brought to the region.

                       However, training for new recruits is directly undertaken on the job by P&O, and many find the transition
                       difficult, not being familiar with the on-board environment. This results in high turnover. A preparatory
                       cultural induction seminar could ease this transition and ensure that recruits feel better prepared for their
                       new working life.

                       There are also opportunities for those interested in pursuing a career on the ships to progress through the
                       ranks and increase their salaries and job satisfaction; and for those interested in a career in hospitality to
                       work in the sector onshore.

                       This initiative would see a coaching and training program developed for ni-Vanuatu people interested in
                       pursuing employment opportunities within the cruise industry, or using it as a stepping stone to a career in
                       tourism or hospitality (overall 150 people trained in year one, leading to 130 jobs in addition to the current
                       120 jobs offered to ni-Vanuatu people on board the ships). Thanks to ongoing training and appropriate
                       industry placement, a proportion of the staff would have the opportunity to progress through the ranks and
                       obtain better salaries.

                       The initiative could include:

                          •	 a one-week initial induction / familiarisation course with a curriculum developed in partnership
                             with the cruise operators, for recruits to better prepare themselves for life at sea and the work
                             environment of a cruise ship,
                          •	 alternate periods of formal training and work placement, both on board the ships and onshore,
                          •	 formal training tied to the curriculum for certificates in hospitality, with specific input from the cruise
                             operators and Vanuatu hospitality industry (100, 80 and 60 trainees over three years at various levels
                             of qualification),
                          •	 supplementary training for company supervisory staff, to improve their capacity to better manage,
                             coach and nurture trainees.
                       Based on the assumptions made, the net economic benefit over 3+1 years (i.e. a training cycle + 1 year of
                       additional benefit for those progressing to the highest qualification level) could be estimated at:

                                                                    NPV

                        Net economic cost (NPV)                                     $AUD 1.3 MILLION

                        NPV of costs                                                $AUD 3.7 MILLION

                        NPV of benefits                                             $AUD 4.9 MILLION




49
                                          ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
                                                                                                  AUGUST 2014 REPORT




7. TVET business and financial training for micro-entrepreneurs working with cruise
tourists or wanting to get involved in cruise tourism
Financial and business literacy has been identified as a critical need across a number of sectors in Vanuatu,
including in the tourism and hospitality sector, where people may wish to develop tourism oriented activities
but lack the confidence and basic skills to build their own business. Increasing the number of such activities,
in particular outside of Port Vila, could enable greater local value to be created from cruise tourism. This
would be of benefit to businesses, cruise companies and tourists, as those destinations became a more
attractive visitor proposition.

Increasing skill levels in existing businesses through business management and accounting training, would
have a positive knock-on effect in terms of increased margins, profits and, potentially, capacity to invest and
expand.

Australian Government funded Vanuatu Technical and Vocational Education and Training (TVET) Centres
currently facilitate a range of business and financial training courses, in partnership with local training
providers and industry coaches. This initiative would aim to increase the reach of the TVET Centres and
tailor services to specifically target cruise tourism. Effective collaboration with the cruise operators would
help ensure that relevant and appropriate modules were developed.

Based on the assumptions made, the net economic benefit over 2 years (period over which benefits are
assumed to accrue), assuming 200 people are trained, could be estimated at:

                                                 NPV

Net economic cost (NPV)                                           $AUD 0.9 MILLION

NPV of costs                                                      $AUD 0.1 MILLION

NPV of benefits                                                    $AUD 1 MILLION


8. Increasing local purchasing by cruise companies
Procurement of food, beverage and consumables by cruise companies is typically managed globally, with
containers being shipped all over the world to home ports. This is cost-effective for the industry, while
supply quality and consistency are guaranteed through the industry’s leverage with global suppliers.

The cruise industry is one of very few market aggregators in Pacific tourism. The industry controls an
important share of demand in a sector which is otherwise chiefly made up of small operators and family-
owned businesses. In this aggregator role, the industry can significantly increase market opportunities for
businesses operating in Vanuatu and the rest of the Pacific. Market opportunities made available by the
cruise industry have the potential to dwarf the supply chains that many of these firms currently access,
leading to more sustainable business opportunities for Pacific companies that can make the leap. Pacific
SMEs identify lack of market access as the number one barrier to growth and development of their business
(rated as more critical even than finance) and there is a strong case for taking a detailed look at how to
increase local purchasing by the cruise industry.

A 2012 FAO report points to opportunities to create positive linkages between tourism and agriculture in
Pacific Island countries.24 It cites processed agricultural products, including various root crop chips, sauces/
chutneys, jams, soaps, massage oils, vanilla beans, coffee, cocoa, kava, noni juice and various craft items
produced in Tonga and Samoa. Some case studies in island countries show that small scale opportunities
also exist with specific products and cruise ship companies, for example bananas in Dominica.25 The
Overseas Development Institute studied linkages between tourism and food procurement in Gambia (West
Africa) and suggested that such linkages can lead to significant improvement for the poorest segment of
the population26.



24	 http://www.fao.org/docrep/015/an476e/an476e00.pdf
25	 http://www.caricom.org/jsp/community/agribusiness_forum/sector_success_stories.pdf (page 7)
26	 http://www.odi.org/sites/odi.org.uk/files/odi-assets/publications-opinion-files/98.pdf (page 25)

                                                                                                                  50
ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
AUGUST 2014 REPORT




                       A number of challenges inhibit take-up, both on the demand and on the supply side. From the perspective
                       of the industry, there are two major hurdles:

                       (i) local supply encroaching on long-term, global contracts (including cost implications);

                             he capacity of local producers to professionalise so as to supply products on time, in sufficient
                       (ii) t
                            quantities, and at a uniform level of quality.

                       While it is clear that barriers to local sourcing are significant, they are not beyond those seen in other
                       industries when SMEs wish to enter global supply chains. One important opportunity is the lack of
                       significant technical barriers: smaller suppliers do not have to meet stringent design and manufacturing
                       requirements in order to take advantage of a number of opportunities. The key identified barriers are
                       contractual and cost-based on the demand side, and increased professionalism on the supply chain; these
                       issues can feasibly be addressed in a staged manner, given cooperation of the cruise industry and focused
                       funding support from donor agencies and governments.

                       P&O have in the past months introduced Vanuatu Water and Tanna Coffee on board their three ships that
                       sail year-round from Australia. These products identify two different mechanisms for entering the cruise
                       ship supply chain. Water is placed in each cabin and charged to the customer upon consumption while
                       Tanna coffee is distributed through coffee bars that are not included in the package (additional cost to
                       customers).

                       Further opportunities exist. Depending on the product and how it enters the distribution chain (e.g. primary
                       supplier or additional choice/expense for passengers), the impact of sourcing local products can vary
                       dramatically.

                       A number of immediate opportunities were identified in researching this report, which either expand the
                       range of products sourced locally or look to increase sales volumes for those already available, including:

                           •	 coffee and bottled water (increase take up and marketing effort),
                           •	 local beer,
                           •	 beauty products (although these are sold through concessionaires, see above),
                           •	 fresh fruit and vegetables.
                       Of the items listed, all but fresh fruit and vegetables are essentially ‘market ready.’ These items could be
                       targeted for Phase I of a staged pilot program, which can provide lessons for expansion of the range of
                       products targeted by local procurement schemes of cruise companies.

                       However, to obtain the full benefits that have been costed through this study, and related distributional
                       impacts on poorer segments of the population, a more detailed look at the fresh fruit and vegetable supply
                       chain, as well as additional opportunities to supply the ships, would be required.

                       Given the size of demand of the cruise industry, capturing even a relatively small portion of the procurement
                       of these products would be extremely beneficial to Vanuatu businesses, creating significant additional
                       production and employment.

                       The items forming the basis for study were carefully selected but do not imply any commitments from the
                       industry. It is, however, significant that the relatively conservative assumptions used for this report have
                       resulted in local sourcing projecting the highest net benefit to Vanuatu of all investment opportunities
                       costed.

                       This initiative would require significant engagement and effort from the cruise companies. Additional
                       stakeholders, such as donor partners and governments, would need to partner with the industry to lower
                       the risks of the initiative, especially in its early stages. To achieve the impact targets outlined in this report,
                       the program would need to be strategic, rather than relying on ad-hoc initiatives with ‘ready to market’




51
                                       ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
                                                                                        AUGUST 2014 REPORT




products. Funding would need to be allocated to planning, training management, and results monitoring.
The partnership between the cruise industry and stakeholders would need to:

   •	 identify suppliers for pilot opportunities, providing finance;
   •	 work with the supplier to specify products and contracts;
   •	 to lower initial industry risk, develop a method of staged entry for products that have rudimentary
      supply chains (i.e. additional product choice rather than primary supplier);
   •	 support the development of adequate logistical arrangements / storage facilities to accommodate
      procurement from Port Vila;
   •	 market local products sold on-board;
   •	 once the concept is proven and products are able to enter the primary supply chain, adjust
      expectation of margins on substitutable mass-market products procured globally.
To take this forward, investment is required from the cruise companies, but with the following expected
benefits:

   •	 additional revenue for Vanuatu businesses and related job creation, by means of the cruise tourism
      supply chain;
   •	 an enhanced ‘Pacific’ experience for cruise passengers, with related marketing opportunities for
      differentiation;
   •	 an improved Corporate Social Responsibility profile, and enhanced license to operate.
Based on the assumptions made, the net economic benefit over 5 years (period over which benefits are
assumed to accrue) could be estimated at:

                                                 NPV

Net economic cost (NPV)                                          $AUD 8.6 MILLION

NPV of costs (excluding costs to P&O)                            $AUD 0.9 MILLION

NPV of benefits                                                  $AUD 9.5 MILLION


9. Handicrafts opportunities
The handicraft sector in Vanuatu, essentially informal, is providing employment and income to a segment
of the population with typically low access to other means of income. The market stalls sellers are mostly
‘mothers’ who either just resell (mostly) imported or local products or add value by transforming them (e.g.
sewed garments). The key benefit here is a distributional impact with essential social flow-on effects, as
the modest income derived from these activities is typically allocated to family-oriented expenses, such as
household expenses, home improvements and children’s school fees.

However, there are a number of issues that, if appropriately addressed, can assist in increasing the benefits
to the sectors, including:

   •	 the high number of operators compared to the size of the market,
   •	 the high proportion of imported products (either minimally or not at all modified),
   •	 the relatively poor quality of the products and absence of differentiation, especially by comparison to
      other countries visited by the cruise ships,
   •	 the presentation of the products on the stalls,
   •	 the perception by passengers that local handicraft items present quarantine risks.
A New Zealand MFAT funded pilot program, called the ‘Tourism Ambassador Program’, is currently being
implemented to address some of these issues across the handicraft sector in Port Vila (mostly), as well as
in other sectors. Carnival Australia and New Zealand MFAT have also collaborated to develop a program,

                                                                                                             52
ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
AUGUST 2014 REPORT




                       the South Pacific Regional Handicraft Project, to address some of these barriers. This program has not yet
                       been implemented in Vanuatu. There is a need for all cruise companies to be involved in such an initiative.

                       The initiative, presented below, essentially builds on the ‘Ambassador program’ and seeks to complement
                       it with components addressing barriers on the ‘demand side’ (i.e. passengers’ perceptions and education).
                       Further scoping would be required to ensure that there is no overlap with other planned initiatives. Where
                       current initiatives address the issues identified adequately, this has been mentioned below. However, it is
                       likely that an iterative and adaptive process will need to be put in place to ensure that the momentum of
                       improvement is sustained.

                       This notional program of potential initiatives has been defined as a package of complementary actions,
                       either ‘passenger facing’ or ‘operator oriented’.

                                                                             LINKS WITH EXISTING INITIATIVES /
                        PASSENGER FACING ACTIONS
                                                                             PROJECTS

                        Undertaking a marketing research study amongst
                        passengers to determine price points, purchasing     N/A
                        appetite and barriers to inform the market offering.

                                                                             A tourist / commercial map of Port Vila centre with
                                                                             key businesses and points of interest is produced by
                        Creating easy to read information pamphlets with     Pandanus and given to the cruise ship passengers.
                        quarantine information for passengers ashore.        Quarantine information needs to be given to
                                                                             passengers to show the items that can be brought
                                                                             back to Australia.

                                                                             This is addressed by the South Pacific Regional
                        Promoting ‘authentic’ / Vanuatu made handicraft
                                                                             Handicraft Project, which is running in Tonga but
                        on-board the ships (TV, information sessions).
                                                                             has not yet received funding in Vanuatu.

                                                                             Partially addressed by the Pacific Horticultural
                        Providing better passenger information on            and Agricultural Market Access Project (PHAMA).
                        biosecurity on board the ships (going beyond the     Ongoing communication materials will need to be
                        display cabinets).                                   produced (integrated in videos mentioned at the
                                                                             precedent point).

                        Education of customs officers back in Australia to
                                                                             Addressed by the PHAMA project. However, scope
                        reduce risk of having local handicraft rejected at
                                                                             is likely to be insufficient in the long term.
                        customs.




53
                                       ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
                                                                                         AUGUST 2014 REPORT




HANDICRAFT OPERATOR ORIENTED                           LINKS WITH EXISTING INITIATIVES /
ACTIONS                                                PROJECTS

Manufacturing of quality handicraft: assistance
with the ordering / import of machinery to assist in   N/A
the production of better quality handicraft

Supply chain reliability and differentiation:
Identification of supply bottlenecks                   The Ambassador program is delivering this training
Identification of unique products throughout the       to a select group of sellers through the existing
country                                                pilot. There is potential for this to be replicated
                                                       and scaled up should the pilot programme be
Identification of aggregators or wholesalers and
                                                       continued.
assist in creating an efficient supply chain for
products in demand

Marketing training and assistance (building on the
passenger marketing research):
Trends
Product differentiators (range or details), see also   The Ambassador program is delivering this training
‘supply chain’                                         to a select group of sellers.
Point of sale presentation
Customer service skills (as per the Ambassador
program)

Based on the assumptions made, the net economic benefit over 5 years (period after which a reinvestment
is likely to be necessary) is:

                                                NPV

Net economic cost (NPV)                                      $AUD 0.7 MILLION

NPV of costs                                                 $AUD 0.4 MILLION

NPV of benefits                                              $AUD 1.1 MILLION


10. Home-basing a cruise ship in the Pacific
Destinations attracting large numbers of cruise tourists and with suitable airport infrastructure, such as the
Caribbean, typically have ships ‘home-based’ in one of their major regional ports. Passengers are flown to
the destination to board the ship and start their cruise.

This presents a range of benefits for all stakeholders, including:

   •	 minimizing the number of days spent sailing without calling at a port, making it more attractive for
      passengers,
   •	 making it easier for cruise companies to schedule their itineraries and segments, reducing some of
      their costs ( e.g. fuel costs) and allowing them to market different ‘products’ to different segments of
      the market,
   •	 reducing congestion in other home ports,
   •	 increasing the economic activity around cruise ship tourism at the ports of call, including airport
      activity and pre or post-cruise stays at the ‘turn-around’ ports, and stevedoring activities in the home
      port.
In a rapidly developing market such as the South Pacific, it therefore makes sense to consider the possibility
of developing such an option.

                                                                                                             54
ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
AUGUST 2014 REPORT




                       Presenting this example helps launch the discussion on potential benefits, and could demonstrate the
                       case for a more detailed feasibility study. While the description below is based on itinerary assumptions
                       developed by the cruise industry, it does not imply commitment from the cruise companies to pursue such
                       an option at this stage.

                       The basic elements of the option could be summarised as:

                          •	 Basing a ship requires good ‘airlift’ at the home port, as well as sufficient accommodation capacity.
                             In the region, this could be Noumea, New Caledonia or Lautoka (Fiji).
                          •	 An ‘open jaw’ itinerary would be devised that would increase the number of stops in Vanuatu, as it
                             would rely on ports with berthing facilities, of which Port Vila is one. The concept is that some people
                             could embark / disembark at these ports (partial passenger exchange). Other ports could include
                             Noumea, Nadi / Lautoka (Fiji), Nuku a’lofa (Tonga), and Apia (Samoa).
                          •	 Additional destinations in the itinerary would be visited, but no embarking / disembarking of new
                             passengers would be allowed. In Vanuatu, this could be Mystery Island, Wala, or Pentecost in terms
                             of existing destinations, and possibly the new destinations considered in the rest of this report (in
                             particular SW Bay in Malekula and Ureparapara). Outside of Vanuatu, this would include Vava’u /
                             Ha’apai (Tonga), and Savaii (Samoa).
                       Based on the assumptions made, the net economic benefit over 2 years is estimated at $AUD 6 million.




55
                                       ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
                                                                                           AUGUST 2014 REPORT




Appendix 1: Methodology

Passenger and Crew survey methodology
Approach
The main objective of the passenger and crew survey is to obtain data to estimate the direct economic
impact of cruise ships.

Similar surveys have been successfully undertaken in the past in the Caribbean (BREA) and in Australia
(commissioned by CLIA – Cruise Lines International Association), and were used as point of reference.

Important features of the survey are to identify:

   •	 how money is spent, i.e. which sectors benefit (tours, souvenirs, food), so that this information can be
      used in the indirect economic impact calculations
   •	 what barriers or limiting factors to spending exist, as this will inform task 3 of this assignment.
After discussing the practical organisation of the survey with the cruise operators, it was decided that the
most effective way of administering the surveys is by:

   •	 following the same protocol as the BREA survey administered in Australia and having the survey
      (passenger and crew) managed by the hotel operation staff on board the ship, then sent back to Net
      Balance by the port agent
   •	 using paper form surveys
   •	 distributing survey forms in all cabins at the targeted ports of call (one survey per cabin) - Practical
      constraints of having the survey administered by the hotel staff means that a random distribution of
      surveys would be very difficult to organise.
   •	 surveying only one port of call in Vanuatu per cruise.
The survey questions were adapted from the BREA survey and tested on a small sample of non-cruise
people and of cruise passengers to make sure that questions were understandable. The overall structure
and content remained quite close to the BREA survey, to ensure comparability.


Sampling
Key features and constraints
   •	 Three destinations, Port Vila, Luganville and Mystery Island were pre-selected out of 6 ports of call in
      Vanuatu.
   •	 Due to the time constraints of the study, the surveying period was restricted to March and April 2014.
      This does not capture the seasonality over a full year of cruises but includes some school holidays,
      which, from the cruise operators’ experience and previous studies, could have an influence on
      passenger spending patterns.
   •	 Ships have been classified in two groups: ‘contemporary’ and ‘premium’, depending on the brand.
      Despite these categories and the range of cabins within each category, cruise prices range along a
      wide continuum depending on many factors such as time of the year and time of booking (i.e. a same
      cabin can be sold at very different prices depending on when it is booked).
   •	 Is has been suggested that another relevant driver of passenger spend is the duration of the cruise;
      this factor is a given for each cruise and its relevance will be tested through the analysis.




                                                                                                               56
ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
AUGUST 2014 REPORT




                          •	 The need to preserve passenger confidentiality (and consistently to the BREA survey) led to the
                             removal of the request for surveyed passengers to put their cabin number on the survey forms. As a
                             consequence, no incentive could be offered to passenger (through a prize draw) to try and increase
                             the response rate. Additionally, it will not be possible to stratify responses by cabin type and to assess
                             any non-response bias by cabin type.


                       Sampling population
                       Based on the modified ship schedule and bearing in mind the decision to survey only one
                       port of call per cruise, the following segmentation was established:

                                                                       MYSTERY
                        TYPE                    LUGANVILLE                                PORT VILA               TOTAL
                                                                        ISLAND

                        Contemporary                   1                    5                   6                    12

                        Premium                        3                    4                   3                    10

                        Grand Total                    4                    9                   9                    22

                          •	 Given the limited sub-sample sizes, it was decided to sample all the 22 ships calling in these ports of
                             call over the two months considered.
                          •	 Only one ship stops in Luganville over the period in the ‘contemporary’ category. Expanding the dates
                             does not help so the analysis will have to be cognisant of the possible impact of this small sub-sample.
                             This will obviously limit ability to further segment the population and to differentiate between school
                             holidays and non-school holidays periods. Should a significant difference be found between the (only)
                             ‘contemporary’ and ‘premium’ ships’ passenger spend in Luganville, then further analysis options will
                             be investigated.
                       In the absence of incentive and based on the first ship surveyed, a 20%-30% response rate is expected for
                       passengers’ surveys, translating to about 300 surveys per ship (each ship having about 2000 passengers
                       on board in around 1000 cabins). Ability to detect differences between ships drops with the response rate,
                       hence the importance to try and maximise the number of surveys returned by passengers and crew. This
                       will allow better conclusions about impact of weather, school holidays and other potential key drivers. In
                       Luganville in particular, given the small number of ships calling at that location, this ability may be quite
                       limited.


                       Complementary information and analysis
                       Information to be obtained for each port of call
                       To be able to validly analyse the survey results, information from the cruise companies was obtained, for
                       each port of call surveyed:

                          •	 the port of origin and length of the cruise
                          •	 the number of passengers and crew on board (capacity and actual)
                          •	 the number of passengers and crew who went onshore on that day
                          •	 the purchase of on shore excursions on behalf of passengers




57
                                        ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
                                                                                             AUGUST 2014 REPORT




Analysis
The analysis of the first few ships visiting Vanuatu was carried out initially to test any issue in the survey itself
and any issue in the data processing. The surveys from subsequent ships were processed in large ‘batches’
for efficiency (both for scanning surveys and for the information to be obtained from the cruise companies).

SPSS was used to carry out statistical analysis. The analysis provided per group of passengers for each
destination and for each category of ship:

    •	 the average expenditure
    •	 the expenditure per type of goods and services purchased on shore (tours, food and beverages,
       souvenirs, etc.) both averaged across the population and across sub-populations of passengers
       having spent money for that category of good and services
    •	 a categorization of passengers spending profiles, if appropriate, depending on drivers such as time
       spent onshore, pre-purchases of tours, etc.
    •	 more qualitative data on the limitations and barriers to spending.
A similar analysis was carried out for crew members.

Assumptions
    •	 The unit of analysis for the passenger survey is the cabin or family unit rather than individual –
       although the economic analysis will generate analysis for individuals.
    •	 Each of the three ports are very different and will therefore be surveyed as separate components.
    •	 Apart from school holidays and weather each ship will be broadly representative of all ships visiting
       each port.

Implementation
As Net Balance did not control the distribution and collection of surveys, reliance was placed on the cruise
companies’ staff.

The direct spent on behalf of passengers (pre-booked tours) and the taxes and port fees paid by the cruise
operators were reported by the cruise companies themselves.


Economic impacts estimation
Direct economic impact
The direct economic impacts are estimated based on:

    •	 direct spend by passengers (obtained through the survey),
    •	 direct spend by crew members (obtained through the survey),
    •	 direct spend by cruise companies on tours on behalf of passengers,
    •	 other expenses by cruise companies.
This information was triangulated through the surveying of local businesses. The survey of local businesses
and operators will not only allow us to compare the information on the direct spend and the breakdown of
this expenditure by sector, it will also give us the possibility to collect information on the indirect impacts
and employment impacts (see below).




                                                                                                                  58
ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
AUGUST 2014 REPORT




                       The diagram below summarises the flows of information required to attain these estimates.

                       FIGURE 27 : DIRECT IMPACTS ANALYTICAL FRAMEWORK

                                                                  In-country survey of business
                                                                           operators
                          Passenger and crew survey
                         expenditure statistical analysis
                                                                 Estimated yearly passenger and
                                                                   crew expenditure by sector
                              Number if passenger
                              and crew per port of
                                  call per year
                                                                                                         Direct economic
                                                                                                         impact by sector
                           Port fees and other taxes
                           paid by cruise companies



                             Any other expense by
                              cruise companies




                       Indirect economic impact
                       Approach
                       Indirect economic impacts occur as businesses and individuals benefiting from the direct spend in turn
                       purchase goods and services, either to be able to deliver the goods and services forming the direct impact,
                       or as part of their more general activities.

                       This presents the following challenges:

                          •	 Without information on ‘intermediate consumption’ for each sector and appropriate ‘input-output’
                             matrices of the economy (VNSO has not published such data), the ‘multiplier’ effect of tourism
                             expenditure cannot be directly calculated.
                          •	 Calculating indirect impacts in a small, dependent economy such as Vanuatu raises the question of
                             leakage, as an increase in consumption could result in corresponding increases in imports and / or
                             other types of ‘leakages’ (for example if business owners reside outside of the country and extract
                             their profits).
                       To respond to these challenges, a straightforward method to source the necessary information was
                       established to estimate indirect impact from economic agents. This method relies on:

                          •	 Using all available economic information: by sector, in particular, production, employment and
                             imports.
                          •	 Sourcing intermediate consumption estimates for key goods and services directly from businesses
                             and informers in Vanuatu.
                          •	 Making informed assumptions and carrying out sensitivity analyses to add robustness to the analysis.




59
                                            ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
                                                                                          AUGUST 2014 REPORT




Specifically, this required the following steps:

   1.	Build a flow diagram by types of goods and services, including adequate assumptions
   2.	Conduct a materiality assessment to focus on key impacts
   3.	Analyse imports and leakages specific to each impacted sector
   4.	Ascertain the tax effect of increased income
   5.	Estimate resulting indirect impact
   6.	Conduct sensitivity analysis and provide a range of multipliers, as appropriate.
An analytical framework such as the example below will be used and refined by iterations:

FIGURE 28 : INDIRECT IMPACTS ANALYTICAL FRAMEWORK




                                                                        Estimate margin
                                                       Imported             retained               Margin
                                                                           in Vanuatu

                              Goods                                                             Imported int
                                                                                                consumption
                                                                           Estimate              value-add
                                                    Locally Produced     intermediary
                                                                         consumption
                                                                                              Local intermediary
                                                                                                consumption
     Direct
                                                                           Estimate            multiplier effect
     Spend                                           Locally Owned
                                                                         intermediary
                                                       Business
                                                                         consumption
                             Services

                                                                                                 See local
                                                      International      Assume profit
                                                                                                employment
                                                    business investor       leakage
                                                                                                  impact


                            Government
                           Taxes and Fees




                                                                                                               60
ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
AUGUST 2014 REPORT




                       This framework will be applied to the broad categories of expenditure identified, provided they are found to
                       be material.

                        As an example, tour operators fall within the ‘services’ categories. Assuming they are owned by locals, it
                        will be assumed that 100% of the money spent (by either the cruise companies or passengers directly)
                        benefits the local economy. While this is not captured in the diagram above, to avoid undue complexity, we
                        will then work with a representative sample of the tour operator industry in Vanuatu to estimate their own
                        expenditure structure including:

                           •	 Salaries
                           •	 Consumables (e.g. petrol)
                           •	 Purchase of services (e.g. cleaning)
                           •	 Investment amortization
                           •	 Profit retained by business owner
                        The purchase of consumables and services will allow estimates of the multiplier effect and the salary
                        expenditure will link to the employment estimates. Salaries and profits could also lead to induced effects,
                        however those are outside the scope of this assignment. Tax impacts will be estimated as part of this
                        exercise, as it should be considered as a transfer of benefit from one economic agent (private sector) to
                        the other (government).


                       Data collection
                       Desktop
                       Although limited, useful information is expected to be obtained from the Vanuatu Statistical Office and
                       government organisations.

                       Focus groups and interviews
                       During field visits in Vanuatu, meetings were organised with representatives of the tourism industry, in
                       particular tour operators, primarily to obtain information on the structure of their revenues and costs
                       related to cruise tourism. The information was necessarily estimated, as operators do not disclose precise
                       financial information. These discussions also sought to identify the supply chain impacts of the products
                       sold or services provided, in particular, salaries, imported goods purchased, consumables, indicative
                       margins and investment amortisation.

                       Additional in-country data collection
                       To complement information obtained from the sources above, wherever necessary, local operators will be
                       recruited to obtain information on ‘intermediate consumption’ and employment that can be linked to cruise
                       tourism. This will allow calculation of indirect impacts by applying the framework described in the ‘approach’
                       sub-section above.

                       Depending on the sophistication of the business operators on the ground, the questions put to them will
                       aim to estimate either the yearly income from cruise tourism (for businesses with good income tracking
                       such as tour operators) or the income from one typical visit (for small occasional street sellers).




61
                                      ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
                                                                                         AUGUST 2014 REPORT




Employment impacts
Tourism is likely the greatest provider of employment in Vanuatu (up to 50% according to some estimates).
Estimating employment impacts in such an economy can be fraught, as rural populations in particular
typically pursue a wide range of activities, including subsistence agriculture that are closely linked to their
culture and lifestyle, and may not seek full-time employment.

The same logic will be pursued as for indirect impacts to estimate the employment impact of cruise
tourism. When collecting information from each significant sector impacted by cruise tourism (see
above), information will be collected on employment (number of hours / number of people involved). This
will provide an estimate of the overall level of activity generated (number of hours) and of the number of
people benefitting, whether tourism is their main activity or not. Assuming the information is available from
government agencies, the average salary will be used by sector to triangulate this information.




                                                                                                             62
ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
AUGUST 2014 REPORT




                       Appendix 2: Direct impact analysis

                       Calculations of impact per call, per voyage and per
                       passenger-day
                       Various metrics were used through the report to calculate the standard impact of cruise ships on Vanuatu,
                       including:

                           •	 the impact per call per port
                           •	 the weighted average impact per call
                           •	 the impact per voyage (as ships call to one or more destination per cruise or voyage).
                       As information was obtained for RCI and Carnival groups on one hand and for the whole of the industry
                       on the other, estimates of expenditure were only collected for a sample of RCI and Carnival ships, so the
                       various study parameters had to be carefully managed.

                       An important distinction is the difference between the impact per passenger-day (which was initially
                       calculated) and the impact per passenger-voyage, which should logically be provided along the impact per
                       voyage:

                           •	 The impact per passenger-day is the overall impact divided by the number of passenger-days in
                              Vanuatu and is problematic given the difference in impact between ports of call.
                           •	 The impact per passenger-voyage can be estimated by dividing the impact per voyage by the average
                              number of passengers per ship. It thus maintains consistency in the calculation, but remains tied in
                              the mix of ports of call in the year of reference.
                       The table below shows how the impacts per voyage were calculated.

                       TABLE 19: IMPACT PER VOYAGE ($AUD)

                                                                                                             IMPACT PER
                                             DIRECT          NUMBER OF               IMPACT PER
                        PERIMETER                                                                            PASSENGER-
                                             EXPENDITURE     VOYAGES                 VOYAGE
                                                                                                             VOYAGE

                                                                                     Excludes Wala, Pentecost, Champagne beach
                        Survey                                                                    (underestimate)
                                                 $33M                  134
                        perimeter
                                                                                           $246,000                    $118

                        Whole of
                                                $34.6M               Unknown                  N/A
                        industry

                                                $34.5M                                   $257,500,000,
                        RCI + Carnival all                                                                    $124, rounded up to
                                                                       134               rounded up to
                        ports                                                                                         $125
                                                                                           $260,000




63
                                             ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
                                                                                                        AUGUST 2014 REPORT




These numbers can be compared to the impacts per port of call, as per the table below.

TABLE 20: IMPACT PER CALL OR PER PASSENGER-DAY ($AUD)


                                                                            DIRECT +
                      DIRECT                  DIRECT                                               DIRECT + INDIRECT
                                                                            INDIRECT
PORT                  EXPENDITURE             EXPENDITURE PER                                      EXPENDITURE PER
                                                                            EXPENDITURE
                      PER CALL                PASSENGER-DAY                                        PASSENGER-DAY
                                                                            PER CALL

Port Vila                   243,900                       117                    $372,000                      $179

Luganville                  133,600                        64                    $207,000                       $99

Mystery Island               43,100                        21                     $69,000                       $33

Weighted
                            164,000                        79                    $252,000                      $121
average



Survey analysis
Surveys collected and significance
Over the March to May 2014 period, passengers and crew surveys were conducted for 22 ships across the
three selected destinations. Only one destination per cruise itinerary was targeted, to avoid passengers
having to answer multiple survey questionnaires.27 Table 21 and Table 22 show the number of ships
surveyed and the number of surveys collected per port of call. On average, each survey reported passenger
spend for 2.2 people, representing 8,839 passengers.

TABLE 21: SURVEYED SHIPS PER PORT OF CALL

CATEGORY                       LUGANVILLE             MYSTERY ISLAND                 PORT VILA                    TOTAL

Contemporary                           2                          2                        10                         14

Premium                                3                         2 (*)                     3                          8

Total                                  5                          4                        13                         22
(*) a third ship was surveyed, but only crew surveys were returned.

TABLE 22: NUMBER OF SURVEYS COLLECTED PER PORT OF CALL

                                                                                     TOTAL
                                                         PASSENGER                                        PASSENGERS PER
PORT(S) OF CALL             STAFF SURVEYS                                         PASSENGERS
                                                          SURVEYS                                             SURVEY
                                                                                   SURVEYED

Port Vila                            649                        2,551                   5,715                       2.2

Luganville                           136                        809                     1,714                       2.1

Mystery Island                       141                        679                     1,410                       2.1

Total                                926                        4,050                   8,839                       2.2

It should be noted that a greater number of surveys have been collected, but had to be excluded due to
quality issues. Also, a number of surveys from staff who did not go onshore were excluded to reduce the
processing burden, as most of them would have been on duty and did not have the possibility to go onshore.

27	 Passengers however sometimes returned questionnaires for other port of calls than the one intended. Provided there was no
    ambiguity about the port of call and it was one of the three ports targeted, these surveys were used in the analysis.

                                                                                                                                64
ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
AUGUST 2014 REPORT




                       For this reason, staff response rate could not be calculated. However, it varied significantly depending on
                       the ship, which is likely a reflection on the instructions that may have been given to the staff.

                       The number of ships surveyed across the three destinations provides a reasonable sample across the
                       Premium and Contemporary categories of ships. All Carnival and Royal Caribbean ships cruising to Vanuatu
                       over the survey period were targeted and circumstances (such as aborted calls) meant that only two
                       surveys were conducted for Mystery Island and Luganville for Contemporary ships.

                       The passenger response rate for each ship varied significantly. The rate of useable responses is lower than
                       the response rate reported here, as some partially filled survey sheets were effectively unusable. Useable
                       response rate was between 5% and 37% depending on the destination, with an average of 21%.

                       Overall the survey sample obtained for each destination was sufficient, with a confidence interval of 1 at a
                       95% confidence level.

                       For crew members, the response rate varied even more depending on the ship (4% to 91%, average 29%).
                       Few responses were obtained in the Contemporary category in Luganville and Mystery Island, destinations
                       where staff are less likely to go onshore. The sample size (35 and 21 respectively) does not allow for
                       comparison with the Premium category. This is due to few crew member disembarking. Therefore, for crew
                       members the Premium and Contemporary categories have been merged for analysis.

                       Spend on behalf of passengers
                       Cruise companies offer passengers the possibility to book accredited onshore tours and activities in
                       advance (either when booking their cruise or on board the ship). This information was obtained from RCI
                       and Carnival directly, for the ships surveyed and for the whole of 2013, as this was a more complete source
                       than the passengers’ surveys28. This represents a significant spending on behalf of passengers with the tour
                       operators (and intermediaries) in Vanuatu, once the booking fee by the cruise company has been deducted.
                       This only relates to Port Vila and Luganville, as no tour booking is as yet available for Mystery Island.

                       Table 23 presents this spend on behalf of passengers for the whole of 2013 for the Carnival and RCI groups.
                       This was reported as part of the passenger spend impacts in the body of the report.

                       Table 23: Spend with tour operators on behalf of passengers (2013)

                                                                    TOTAL                                       AVERAGE PER
                                                                                          AVERAGE                                     AVERAGE PER
                                                                    RCI AND                                     PASSENGER
                                     NUMBER OF                                            TOUR SPEND                                  PASSENGER
                        PORT OF CALL                                CARNIVAL                                    GOING
                                     CALLS                                                PER SHIP                                    BOOKING A
                                                                    GROUPS                                      ASHORE
                                                                                          ($AUD)                                      TOUR ($AUD)
                                                                    ($AUD)                                      ($AUD)

                        Port Vila             114                   5.5 million           48,000                25.42                 51.89

                        Luganville            16                    0.5 million           29,000                13.76                 41.46



                       Direct spend by cruise companies
                       Cruise companies spend significant amounts on port fees and landing fees to communities and also
                       purchase services (such as port agent services) in country, as well as some procurement items.

                       Port fees or equivalent contributions
                       In Port Vila and Luganville, cruise companies are paying port fees to dock at the wharf. This is direct revenue
                       for the Port Authority (governmental authority). There are also payments made to community groups. In
                       Mystery Island, the most important portion of the sums paid out by the cruise companies are




                       28	 As this was also collected through passengers’ surveys, this expenditure was removed from the survey data to avoid double
                           counting.

65
                                      ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
                                                                                         AUGUST 2014 REPORT




the ‘landing’ fees paid directly to the community who owns the land. The sums gathered are administered
by a committee that employs a few people and invests the proceeds in community projects (see
indirect impact).

To encourage employment on board the ships, the government is discounting port fees for those ships that
have a minimum number of ni-Vanuatu employees on board when calling into a Vanuatu port (Luganville and
Port Vila). At this stage, only 3 P&O ships have benefitted from this measure.


Extrapolation of spend data to a whole year of operation
The yearly direct economic impact of cruise ships in Luganville, Mystery Island and Port Vila has been
estimated using the average spend by passengers for each port of call and extrapolating it to a whole
year. 2013 was chosen as the year of reference, as it was possible to obtain from the cruise companies the
number of passengers who actually went on-shore in each location for each port of call, and were therefore
in a position to spend money. This allowed for a more precise estimate than assuming that the same
proportion of passengers had gone ashore than was observed during in the sample of ships surveyed.

The direct expenditure was added to this direct economic spend by (or on behalf of) passengers.

Data collection
To be able to appropriately extrapolate the direct economic impact of the spend, the following parameters
are required:

   •	 number of people on board the ship;
   •	 number of passengers going onshore on the day of the survey;
   •	 number of crew members going onshore on the day of the survey;
   •	 mean spend for people who went onshore.
This information could not be obtained for all ships.

The spend on behalf of passengers (pre-booked onshore tours) has been excluded from the following
means calculated, as they are considered separately (better accuracy, as reported by cruise companies).

Confidence intervals
The statistical analysis (Kruskal-Wallis test) showed that the difference between the Contemporary and
Premium categories was statistically different for Port Vila and Luganville, but not for Mystery Island. It
should be noted that the sample of surveys for Mystery Island was smaller. Also the opportunities for
spending money at this location are more limited.

Table 24 presents the confidence intervals (2 standard error of means) around the mean estimates, which
will be used to analyse uncertainty. By way of simplification, however, most of this report refers to the
statistical means.




                                                                                                              66
ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
AUGUST 2014 REPORT




                       TABLE 24: DIRECT SPEND CONFIDENCE INTERVALS
                       (EXCLUDING PRE-BOOKED TOURS)

                        PORT OF                                           STD. ERROR   LOWER      UPPER
                                     SHIP CLASS      MEAN      N
                        CALL                                              OF MEAN      BOUND      BOUND

                                     Premium           28.35       923      1.21545       25.92     30.78

                        Luganville   Contemporary      35.20       768       1.35337      32.49     37.91

                                     Total             31.46       1691     0.90793

                                     Premium           64.36       2316     2.03048       60.30     68.42

                        Port Vila    Contemporary      75.17       3328      1.76629      71.64     78.70

                                     Total             70.73       5644     1.33553

                                     Premium           10.61       783       0.6041       9.41      11.82
                        Mystery
                                     Contemporary      12.36       568      0.59985       11.16     13.56
                        Island
                                     Total             11.35       1351      0.43198




67
                                               ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
                                                                                                              AUGUST 2014 REPORT




Appendix 3: Cost structures and
assumptions
This appendix includes the cost breakdown for each sector and where the money flows based on the each
cost category, i.e. international leakage, revenue flowing to the government due to taxes and import duties
and excise, and private local beneficiaries. These assumptions and cost structures have been applied to
Port Vila and Luganville cruise ship tourism spending.


Tour operators
Figure below outlines the cost breakdown for activity based tour operators and the end beneficiaries of
cruise ship tourism spending. Figure outlines the same analysis for tour operators whose main business is
coordinating transfers from the ports29.

FIGURE 29: INDIRECT ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS FOR ACTIVITY BASED TOUR
OPERATORS




FIGURE 30: INDIRECT ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS FOR TOUR
OPERATORS - TRANSFER




29	 Note that the indirect expenditure flows have been merged for tour operators activities and transfers in the rest of the report.


                                                                                                                                       68
ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
AUGUST 2014 REPORT




                       The key sources for assumptions for figures above are outlined in the Table 25 below.

                       TABLE 25: SOURCES FOR TOUR OPERATORS ASSUMPTIONS

                        COMPONENT              SOURCE

                                               The cost structure is based on information collected through the Net Balance
                                               interviews with tour operators while in country and via email.
                                               As a comparison the MCA study found:

                        Expenses               •	   staff costs accounted for approximately 27.2%
                                               •	   profit 17.7% of gross revenue
                                               •	   a larger proportion of intermediate consumption is imported (49%)
                                               •	   fuel costs 25% of revenue (TRIP Consultants, 2008).

                                               VAT has been applied to staff costs and profit, as the VAT paid for all other
                        VAT                    intermediate consumption is refunded to the business operator. All businesses have
                                               been assumed to be VAT registered.

                                               It is assumed that 100% of fuel was imported. Removing the import duties on that
                        Fuel imports9
                                               fuel, international leakage totals 82.2%.

                                               Import duties are estimated to be 17.8%.This has been calculated using information
                                               from Republic of Vanuatu Harmonised customers import/export duty tariff
                                               system.10 The fuel import and excise duties are based on duties for Distillated fuel,
                                               which attracts an import duty of 26 vatu/l and excise of 5 vatu/l. These figures were
                        Fuel import duties     divided into the fuel prices.
                                               Fuel prices will vary depending on the international market. Observed June 2014
                                               prices were used, averaging diesel and unleaded fuel pump prices, .i.e. 175 Vatu /
                                               litre (all taxes included) (personal communication with Sara King, IFC).

                                               According to the interviews of tour operators completed by Net Balance,
                                               approximately 80% of the businesses are owned by expatriates. It is assumed
                                               that expatriate-owned businesses send 50% of their profit offshore. Given the
                        Profit leakage         confidential nature of this information, this assumption cannot be substantiated.
                                               As profit is after VAT, approximately 35% of profit from tour operators is sent
                                               offshore.

                                               Employment has been calculated using the total proportion of cruise ship
                                               expenditure flowing to wages. To capture the potential for part-time employment
                        Employment
                                               to account for a large proportion of the workforce, a range has been calculated
                                               based on the assumption of 33% of FTE monthly wage.




69
                                     ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
                                                                                        AUGUST 2014 REPORT




Land transportation
Land transportation includes taxis and bus services that meet cruise ships. This does not include transfers,
which are included in the tour operators sector.

FIGURE 31: INDIRECT ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS FOR LAND TRANSPORTATION




The key sources for assumptions from Figure are outlined in the table below.

TABLE 26: SOURCES FOR LAND TRANSPORTATION SECTOR ASSUMPTIONS


COMPONENT                 SOURCE

Cost structure            Information gathered during completed in-country survey.

                          Most vehicles are purchased through loans and therefore this component largely
                          captures vehicle financing costs. All vehicles are imported, hence a significant
Loan repayment            proportion of the financing costs effectively represents an import leakage.
                          As interest costs are high in Vanuatu, it has been assumed that 15% would be
                          retained in-country and 85% would correspond to the asset payment and would
                          therefore flow to international beneficiaries.

                          These costs where assumed to include services provided locally. While a portion
Vehicle maintenance
                          of these costs would go to imported spare parts, this leakage was not considered
costs
                          as material.

                          It has been considered that very few of the operators would pay VAT, either
                          because they do not reach the 4 million Vatu threshold or because they fail to
                          monitor the crossing of this threshold. VAT has therefore been calculated on the
VAT                       expenditure components.
                          Therefore it is assumed that the drivers/owners are not reimbursed the VAT they
                          pay on their intermediate consumption.

                          Land transportation is a ‘reserved activity’ for ni-Vanuatu people hence it has
Profit leakage
                          been considered that profit leakage would be negligible.

                          Employment has been calculated using the total proportion of cruise ship
                          expenditure flowing to profit of owners. Then minimum FTE wage has been
                          assumed to be the average salary of owners in the sector, to calculate number of
Employment                drivers and employers generated by spending by cruise ship tourists. To capture
                          the potential for part-time employment to account for a large proportion of the
                          workforce, a range has been calculated based on the assumption of 33% of FTE
                          monthly wage.

                                                                                                             70
ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
AUGUST 2014 REPORT




                       Duty free
                       Duty free shops represent a large proportion of cruise ship tourism expenditure. The cost structure and
                       analysis of indirect economic beneficiaries is outlined below.

                       FIGURE 32: INDIRECT ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS FOR DUTY FREE RETAIL SHOPS




                       The key sources for assumptions for Figure 13 are outlined in the table below.



                       TABLE 27: SOURCES FOR DUTY FREE RETAIL ASSUMPTIONS

                        COMPONENT              SOURCE

                                               Based on information collected through Net Balance’s business survey and
                        Cost structure
                                               interviews.

                                               While the goods sold are tax free, the following taxes or on-costs have been
                        VAT and other taxes
                                               considered: VNPF contributions on salaries, tax rent and VAT on utilities.

                                               It is assumed that the majority of duty free shop owners rent their shop premises.
                        Rent
                                               Rent is assumed to wholly remain with private beneficiaries in Vanuatu.

                                               Although the question of profit ‘leakage’ was too sensitive to bring up during
                        Profit leakage         interview, most of the businesses are owned by expatriates. Therefore it is assumed
                                               that these businesses send 50% of their profit offshore.

                                               Employment has been calculated using the total proportion of cruise ship
                                               expenditure flowing to wages. To capture the potential for part-time employment
                        Employment
                                               to account for a large proportion of the workforce, a range has been calculated
                                               based on the assumption of 33% of FTE monthly wage.



                       Restaurants and café sector
                       The diagram below outlines, the breakdown of costs for each group of businesses, the percentage of
                       imports for each expense category, the relevant government taxes and contributions that apply to the
                       expenses (i.e. VNPF for staff costs).




71
                                     ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
                                                                                        AUGUST 2014 REPORT




FIGURE 33: INDIRECT ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS FOR RESTAURANT AND CAFES




The key sources for assumptions for Figure 14 are outlined in the table below.

TABLE 28: SOURCES FOR RESTAURANTS AND CAFES ASSUMPTIONS

COMPONENT                 SOURCE

                          The cost structure is based on information collected through the Net Balance
Cost structure
                          interviews with tour operators while in country and via email.

Cost of product (food     It is assumed that 60% of food and beverages is imported (AgriSurvey 2014).
and non-alcoholic         Import duties were assumed to be 15%, a conservative assumption based on
beverages)                the lowest rate of import duties for food products. 11

                         VAT has been applied to staff costs and profit, as the VAT paid for all other
Government taxes
                         intermediate consumption is refunded to the business operator. There is also
(excluding import duties
                         a rent tax that has also be calculated and attributed to government benefit
and excise)
                         from cruise tourism.

                          Assumes approximately 80% of the restaurants and cafes are owned by
                          expatriates. Therefore it is assumed that these businesses send 50% of their
Profit leakage            profit offshore. As profit is after VAT, approximately 35% of profit from tour
                          operators is sent offshore. Given the confidential nature of this information,
                          this assumption cannot be substantiated.

                          Employment has been calculated using the total proportion of cruise
                          ship expenditure flowing to wages. To capture the potential for part-time
Employment
                          employment to account for a large proportion of the workforce, a range has
                          been calculated based on the assumption of 33% of FTE monthly wage.




                                                                                                           72
ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
AUGUST 2014 REPORT




                       Local craft and souvenirs
                       Figure 15 below outlines the breakdown of costs for each group of businesses, the percentage of imports
                       for each expense category, the relevant government taxes that apply to the expenses (i.e. VNPF for staff
                       costs)30.

                       FIGURE 34: INDIRECT ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS FOR LOCAL CRAFT AND
                       SOUVENIRS




                       The assumptions for the above cost structure and distribution of indirect expenditure arising due
                       to spending by cruise tourists are outlined below in Table 29.

                       TABLE 29: SOURCES FOR LOCAL CRAFT AND SOUVENIRS ASSUMPTIONS

                        COMPONENT                         SOURCE

                                                          The cost structure is based on information collected through the Net Balance
                        Expenses                          workshops and the Port Vila main wharf Mama’s market survey report (Vanuatu
                                                          Tourism, 2014).

                                                          The split of imported and domestic products is sourced from information from the
                                                          Port Vila main wharf market survey and Net Balance workshops. There is a higher
                                                          proportion of local products at the Port Vila market and these often attract higher
                        Imports                           prices.
                                                          Import duties were assumed to be 10% based on the general level of import
                                                          duties on various products sold at the markets, including the importation of raw
                                                          materials to make shirts.12

                                                          VAT has been applied to all costs as it is assumed that handicraft sellers do earn
                        Government taxes                  over 4 million vatu per annum required to become a VAT paying enterprise.
                        (excluding import                 Therefore they cannot claim back the VAT on their intermediate consumption.
                        duties and excise)                There is also a rent tax that has also be calculated and attributed to government
                                                          benefit from cruise tourism.

                        Profit leakage                    No profit leakage has been assumed.

                                                          The average salary for market holders is estimated using a Vanwods research
                                                          report from 2007.

                        Employment                        Employment has been calculated using the total proportion of cruise ship
                                                          expenditure flowing to profit of owners. To capture the potential for part-time
                                                          employment to account for a large proportion of the workforce, a range has been
                                                          calculated based on the assumption of 33% of FTE monthly wage.


                       30	 Note that the cost structure is slightly different for Mystery Island, leading to slightly different overall results.
73
                                     ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
                                                                                          AUGUST 2014 REPORT




Retail
The expenditure structure has been assumed to be the same as the duty free shops. However, VAT has
been modelled differently.

FIGURE 35: INDIRECT ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS FOR RETAIL SECTOR




The key sources for assumptions made for Figure 16 are outlined in the table below.

TABLE 30: SOURCES FOR RETAIL SECTOR ASSUMPTIONS

COMPONENT               SOURCE

                        VAT has been applied to staff costs and profit, as the VAT paid for all other
VAT and other taxes
                        intermediate consumption is refunded to the business operator.

                        Shop ownership varies a lot across the various businesses. Most shops are not
                        owned by Ni-Vanuatu people; however, most are owned by people who have been
Profit leakage
                        part of the community for a long time. A profit ‘leakage’ of 50% has been applied,
                        although this cannot be backed by data.

                        It is assumed that 50% of retail premises are rented and the other 50% are
                        mortgaged. Of the 50% that are mortgaged, it is assumed that 85% of mortgage
Rent or loan
                        repayment is sent offshore to repay the capital borrowed (i.e. overall 42.5% of the
repayments
                        rent/loan is assumed to leak out of the Vanuatu economy). For the 50% rented, the
                        12.5% rent tax has been applied.

                        The average salary estimate is based on results from the in-country surveys. To
                        capture the potential for part-time employment to account for a large proportion of
Employment
                        the workforce, a range has been calculated based on the assumption of 33% of FTE
                        monthly wage.

Imports – cost of       It is assumed that 95% of the products purchased for selling in retail stores is
product                 imported.

                        Import duties have been assumed to be 15%. This an underestimate of many of the
Import duties –
                        items that may be purchased in retail shops by cruise tourists. Import duties for
 cost of product
                        watches are 30% and jewellery are 25%, shirts 12%.




                                                                                                              74
ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
AUGUST 2014 REPORT




                       Services
                       Services encompasses a wide range of businesses including spas, massage, and hairdressing, along with
                       telecommunications. Figure 17 outlines the cost structure and beneficiary flows for each key stakeholder
                       group.

                       FIGURE 36: INDIRECT ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS FOR SERVICE SECTOR




                       The key sources for assumptions for Figure 17 are outlined in the table below.

                       TABLE 31: SOURCES FOR SERVICES SECTOR ASSUMPTIONS

                        COMPONENT                SOURCE

                                                 Net Balance conducted in-country interviews and surveys.

                        Cost structure           The MCA survey found that other service businesses spent approximately 50.1%
                                                 on intermediate consumption compared with 65% estimated from Net Balance
                                                 data collection.

                                                 Insurance products are assumed to be 100% imported, with no import duties
                        Imports - insurance
                                                 applied.

                                                 VAT has been applied to staff costs and profit, as the VAT paid for all other
                        VAT
                                                 intermediate consumption is refunded to the business operator.

                                                 Business ownership varies across this category. Some businesses are owned by
                                                 expatriates. It is assumed that 80% of services are owned by expatriates and they
                        Profit leakage
                                                 send 50% of profit offshore. This cannot be backed by data due to the confidential
                                                 nature of such information.

                                                 50% of other costs purchases are assumed to be imported. This is based on
                        Imports – other costs
                                                 survey responses gathered by Net Balance.

                                                 Import duties of 10% have been conservatively assumed given that import duties
                        Import duties – other
                                                 of items such as essential oils, shampoos, and soap attract import duties of 25%
                        costs
                                                 per kilogram and any sort of chemicals attract 10% per kilogram.

                                                 The average salary estimate is based on results from the in-country surveys. To
                                                 capture the potential for part-time employment to account for a large proportion
                        Employment
                                                 of the workforce, a range has been calculated based on the assumption of 33% of
                                                 FTE monthly wage.




75
                                    ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
                                                                                       AUGUST 2014 REPORT




Mystery Island
The following assumptions have been defined for Mystery Island, where economic activity is more informal
than in Port Vila and Luganville.

Assumptions

COMPONENT                               SOURCE

                                        Consistently with what is observed in Port Vila and Luganville, it
                                        was considered that 90% of the handicraft was imported.
Cost of goods                           The percentage of food and beverage imported was also aligned
                                        to the average from the Port Vila survey: 62% imported and 38%
                                        local.

                                        It was assumed that all of the activity was part of the informal
                                        economy, that none was attracting VAT, nor that any insurance
                                        costs were incurred. It was also assumed that no VNPF
VAT and other taxes                     contribution was paid on salaries paid out to people employed on a
                                        casual basis.
                                        VAT however applies on imported and purchased goods.




                                                                                                             76
ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
AUGUST 2014 REPORT




                       Appendix 4: Assumptions for Cost
                       Benefit Analysis

                       1. Opening Tanna as a destination
                       Additional assumptions
                           •	 Due to its attractiveness, the destination could become comparable to Mystery Island. A potential of
                              50 calls per year has been assumed, with a ramping up of 12 calls in the first year to 25 by the third year
                              and 50 calls thereafter.
                           •	 Due to the difficulties outlined, the upfront investment required would be unlikely to start paying off
                              for at least two years.
                           •	 The benefits only start accruing in year 3, considering the planning and exploration work to be done.
                           •	 Net Present Value of the investment is calculated over 10 years, with a 7% discount rate.

                       Costs

                        TYPE OF COST                               VALUATION SUB-OPTION 1              VALUATION SUB-OPTION 2

                        Preliminary weather / sea conditions
                                                                          $150,000 times 2             $150,000 times 2
                        monitoring (2 locations)

                        Hydrography survey for this location                  $125,000                 $125,000

                        Destination impact study                              $50,000                  $50,000

                                                                    $1,000,000 (by reference to a
                                                                 strong jetty, able to handle cyclonic
                        Landing facilities plus beach shelters                                         $1,000,000 + $20,000
                                                                    weather conditions) + $20,000
                        / huts                                           (560,000 vatu / hut)          5% maintenance per year

                                                                     5% maintenance per year




77
                                          ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
                                                                                          AUGUST 2014 REPORT




TYPE OF COST                                 VALUATION SUB-OPTION 1            VALUATION SUB-OPTION 2

                                                                                Routine            preventative
                                                                                maintenance on a road in
                                                                                ‘maintainable’ condition (work
                                                                                that is done continuously
                                                                                year in year out by community
                                                                                contracts and island based
                                           Assumes 5km of road rehabilitation
                                                                                contractors) – 400,000 to
                                           (on the east coast)
                                                                                600,000 vatu per kilometre per
                                           Road Rehabilitation/upgrading – 15 year.
                                           to 20 million vatu per kilometre
                                                                                It was assumed that slightly
                                           (depending on the starting
Roads rehabilitation / creation                                                 increased maintenance of the
                                           condition). Averaged at 17.5 million
                                                                                roads currently maintained
                                           vatu.
                                                                                under the VTSSP program
                                           Source: Philip Warren, VTSSPS,       would be required.
                                           pers. Comm.
                                                                                Source: Philip Warren, VTSSP,
                                                                                pers. Comm.
                                                                               Net Balance assumption: 50%
                                                                               additional maintenance cost on
                                                                               the 50km of roads maintained
                                                                               under the VTSSP program (see
                                                                               additional details in Appendix)

                                                                              60 vehicles required, assuming
                                           N/A – using existing 4WD fleet to
                                                                              12     seaters,     investment
Buses to transport 700 people              transport limited number of people
                                                                              potentially scaled up as time
                                           to the volcano
                                                                              goes by.


Benefits

TYPE OF BENEFIT                            VALUATION SUB-OPTION 1               VALUATION SUB-OPTION 2

                                                                                Similar impact per passenger
                                           Similar impact per passenger
                                                                                as Mystery Island (minimal
                                           as Mystery Island (minimal tour
12 calls in the first year in operation                                         tour organisation in the first
                                           organisation in the first year)
(assumed to be year 3)                                                          year)
                                           Also includes landing fees
                                                                                Also includes landing fees
                                           (equivalent to Mystery Island)
                                                                                (equivalent to Mystery Island)

                                           Similar impact per passenger as      Similar impact per passenger
                                           Mystery Island.                      as Mystery Island, but with
18 calls in the second year
                                                                                additional tour expenditure
                                                                                (similar to Luganville).

                                                                                Similar impact per passenger
                                           Similar impact per passenger as      as Mystery Island, but with
25 calls in the third year
                                           Mystery Island.                      additional tour expenditure
                                                                                (similar to Luganville).

                                                                                Similar impact per passenger
                                           Similar impact per passenger as      as Mystery Island, but with
50 calls thereafter
                                           Mystery Island.                      additional tour expenditure
                                                                                (similar to Luganville).




                                                                                                                 78
ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
AUGUST 2014 REPORT




                        TYPE OF BENEFIT                           VALUATION SUB-OPTION 1                VALUATION SUB-OPTION 2

                                                                                                        This could not be estimated in
                        Roads and wharf infrastructure
                                                                                                        $ value, but would be valuable
                        benefits for the overall community
                                                                                                        for the development of
                        (including other tourists)
                                                                                                        tourism on Tanna.



                       2. Opening SW Bay Malekula as a destination
                       Additional assumptions
                           •	 The destination could attract 12 calls in the first year, then 25 calls in the third year (assuming some
                              boutique ships will stop there too)
                           •	 The Net Present Value of the investment is calculated over 10 years, with a 7% discount rate
                           •	 Benefits would only eventuate in year 3, once the destination has been developed

                       Costs

                        TYPE OF COST                                             VALUATION

                        Preliminary weather monitoring (1 location)              $150,000

                        Hydrography survey for this location                     $125,000

                        Destination impact study                                 $50,000

                                                                                 Option 1: $600,000 (lower cost than in Tanna, as
                                                                                 assumed to be less exposed to weather events) +
                                                                                 $20,000 (huts – estimates) and 5% for subsequent
                        Landing facilities (assuming none exist)                 maintenance (yearly)
                                                                                 Option 2: $1,000,000 (as for Tanna) + same onshore
                                                                                 set up


                       Benefits

                        TYPE OF BENEFIT                                          VALUATION

                        12 calls in the first year in operation (assumed to be   Similar impact per passenger as Mystery Island
                        year 3)                                                  (minimal tours available), plus landing fees

                        18 calls in the second year                              Similar impact per passenger as Mystery Island

                                                                                 Similar impact per passenger as Mystery Island,
                        25 calls in the third year and thereafter, including 5
                                                                                 including half the number of passengers for boutique
                        smaller, boutique operators
                                                                                 tours



                       3. Opening Ureparapara (Banks Islands) as a destination
                       Additional assumptions
                           •	 The destination could attract 10 calls a year, and remain one of the more boutique destinations.
                           •	 The Net Present Value of the investment is calculated over 10 years, with a 7% discount rate




79
                                       ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
                                                                                         AUGUST 2014 REPORT




Costs

TYPE OF COST                                                  VALUATION

Preliminary weather monitoring (1 location)
                                                              $150,000
May not be necessary, as the anchorage is sheltered

                                                              $100,000 (cost assumed to be slightly lower as
Hydrography survey for this location
                                                              some information has already been collected)

Destination impact study                                      $50,000

                                                              $600,000 + $20,000 (lower cost than in Tanna,
Landing facilities                                            as lower number of calls may not justify
                                                              stronger jetty), 5% maintenance per year


Benefits

TYPE OF BENEFIT                                         VALUATION

                                                        Similar impact per passenger as Mystery Island
10 calls from the first year of operation
                                                        (assuming same type of activities can be organised)



4. Mystery Island: inner and outer anchorage mapping
Costs

TYPE OF COST                                            VALUATION

                                                        $125,000 (assuming done in conjunction with some
Hydrography survey for this location
                                                        other locations)


Benefits

TYPE OF BENEFIT                                         VALUATION

5 call cancellations avoided (in 2013 at least 7 calls
had to be cancelled, primarily due to high winds). With
                                                        Per call impact for Mystery Island
better mapping, it is expected that some of these
cancellations would not be required.



5. Luganville: wharf repair / improvement
Additional assumptions
   •	 Hydrography survey for the Luganville harbour is committed and in train, and is not included in the
      costing.
   •	 Cruise ship frequency will decrease if the wharf is deemed unsafe.




                                                                                                              80
ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
AUGUST 2014 REPORT




                       Costs

                        TYPE OF COST                                                 VALUATION

                                                                                     $18M (USD17M, as per costing for the Exim Bank
                                                                                     project, ‘old wharf repair’ item on the detailed
                        Wharf repair (option 1)
                                                                                     costing list, SCG document, obtained from Terry
                                                                                     Ngwele)


                       Benefits

                        TYPE OF BENEFIT                                              VALUATION

                        Avoided ship frequency decrease. Estimated to be 5
                        ships less in the first year and up to 25 ships less (i.e.
                        no visit) in year 5 if the wharf is not repaired. This is    Per call direct economic impact
                        only based on anecdotal evidence, as a lot of factors
                        influence ship call frequency

                        Benefits to trade                                            These were not costed



                       6. Employment for ni-Vanuatu people on board P&O ships
                       Additional assumptions
                           •	 The initiative has been costed at a high level for an annual intake of 150 trainees, assuming entry level
                              training.
                           •	 P&O would increase the intake of ni-Vanuatu staff beyond 40 per ship, if better training and induction
                              led to higher levels of interest and engagement by the recruits. The new recruits would be working
                              on 5 different ships, triggering a government reduction in port fees for these ships, providing 130
                              additional job opportunities (in addition to the current 120 jobs).
                           •	 Additional training has been assumed to be available for P&O ni-Vanuatu staff, over several years,
                              from certificate I (100 trainees) to certificate III (60 trainees) in hospitality, to assist with their
                              progression.
                           •	 The benefits / costs are assumed to occur over 3 years, plus one year to take into account the benefit
                              of the promotion of people having completed a level III certificate, which is regarded as an appropriate
                              timeframe for people to progress through the training.

                       Costs

                        TYPE OF COST                                                 VALUATION

                                                                                     $12,000 for a one week induction for 20 people. This
                                                                                     cost is likely to decrease with economies of scale,
                                                                                     hence a $80,000 cost has been assumed for 150
                                                                                     recruits (assuming that 130 trainees will not get into
                        Training costs – induction                                   employment at the end of the training).
                                                                                     Yearly costs of $20,000 have been assumed for initial
                                                                                     training in subsequent years.
                                                                                     Source: TVET




81
                                       ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
                                                                                              AUGUST 2014 REPORT




TYPE OF COST                                            VALUATION

                                                        Course costs depending on the level
                                                        SIT40313 Certificate IV in Hospitality, 20 weeks
                                                        $11,000 per week, $220,000 overall for 20 students
                                                        SIT30713 Certificate III in Hospitality: 15 weeks
                                                        $12,000 per week, $180,000 overall for 20 students
                                                        SIT20213 Certificate II in Hospitality, 12 weeks,
                                                        $12,000 per week, $144,000 overall for 20 students
Training costs – hospitality certificates
                                                        SIT10213 Certificate I in Hospitality	 : 4 weeks,
                                                        $11,000 per week, $44,000 overall for 20 students
                                                        It has been assumed that the number of students
                                                        seeking further education would be:
                                                        - 100 for Certificate I (in year 1)
                                                        - 80 for Certificate II (in year 2)
                                                        - 60 for Certificate II (in year 3)

                                                        Equivalent to Cert IV: assume 20 people trained per
Training costs – trainers
                                                        year

Program management costs, including placement
                                                        15% management cost
and management

Cost to government                                      Estimated at $500,000 per annum


Benefits

TYPE OF BENEFIT                                         VALUATION

Salaries for 130 new recruits, over 3 years. Note that
the salary of the current 120 employees has not been
counted in the BCA as it is considered part of the     $800 x 12 = yearly salary at entry level (excluding
baseline.                                              participation in the bonus pool) per recruit

This value also captures reduced cost to P&O

                                                        Follows the Certificate training levels:
Promotions and salary increase for those                Cert. I: +$400 x 12 per trainee
progressing through the ranks (assumes 100%
success rate)                                           Cert. II:+$400 x 12 per trainee
                                                        Cert. III: +$400 x 12 per trainee


Career long benefit of training, translating into better Although anecdotal evidence points that these
job opportunities                                        benefits are real, this has not been valued, in the
                                                         absence of vertical studies following trainees over
Benefits to local tourism businesses from having         the long term
access to better trained staff




                                                                                                               82
ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
AUGUST 2014 REPORT




                       7. TVET facilitated business and financial training for micro-
                           entrepreneurs working with cruise tourists or wanting to get
                           involved in cruise
                       Additional assumptions
                           •	 The training has been costed for 20 people, on the understanding that this can be scaled up
                              depending on the demand.
                           •	 The training has been assumed to be a two weeks training course, in groups of 10 people.
                           •	 Training costs vary depending on the location, content, starting level of trainees and service
                              providers. Actual costs would need to be ascertained by training professionals.
                           •	 TVET evaluation of the outcomes of the program will not be available before the end of 2014, hence
                              the assumptions around additional employment generated are hypothetical at this stage.

                       Costs

                        TYPE OF COST                                           VALUATION

                                                                               Depending on the needs and the training provider,
                                                                               training costs between $100 and $600 a day for the
                                                                               trainer.
                        Training cost for 20 people
                                                                               10 days x 2 groups x $350/day = $7000
                                                                               Administration costs have been assumed to be 20%.


                       Benefits

                        TYPE OF BENEFIT                                        VALUATION

                                                                               Assume 5 people create their activity, creating
                        Activity creation leading to employment and profit
                                                                               employment for 1 person, at minimum salary for the
                        generation
                                                                               first year, then doubling in year 2

                                                                               Assume 5 people are able to develop their margins
                        Business development for existing businesses,
                                                                               and increase their activity, employing 1 more person
                        leading to employment and profit generation
                                                                               at minimum salary (over 2 years)



                       8. Increasing local purchasing by cruise companies
                       Additional assumptions
                       Due to commercial confidentiality of the current data and margins, the following data mostly relies on
                       assumptions made based on information publicly available. There is no commitment from either the
                       suppliers or the cruise companies to the prices or costs indicated.




83
                                        ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
                                                                                            AUGUST 2014 REPORT




Costs

TYPE OF COST                                                VALUATION

Most costs would be mostly born by the cruise               This has not been valued, consistently with the rest
companies (marketing, etc.)                                 of the BCA.

                                                            $1,500 per machine, 2 new ships, assumed not to
Coffee grinders for new ships
                                                            require replacement over 5 years

Water                                                       No new investment required

                                                            Production can be ramped up by 1,000,000 bottle a
                                                            year without additional investment.
Beer
                                                            Difference in margins for the cruise companies
                                                            assumed to be borne by the cruise company.

                                                            It has been assumed that the production could be
Beauty products
                                                            ramped up at no cost to satisfy demand.

                                                            Professionalising the industry would require
                                                            significant effort, including resolving land tenure
                                                            issues. Also a sizeable investment to ensure business
Fruit and vegetable supply chain                            competency around e.g. quality and security of
                                                            volume supply. Project management of up to $1M is
                                                            likely to be required over several years (4 years) to
                                                            work on such a project.


Benefits

TYPE OF BENEFIT                                             VALUATION

Coffee - Provision of 5t of coffee per year over all
P&O ships (1 t per ship, approximately half of the
                                                            Price: assuming $20/kg coffee
coffee shops’ consumption), starting with existing 3
ships (year 1) and 2 new ships in year 2

Water - 1.4 million of bottles used on board the 3
P&O ships, assumed to be 75cl (25.5 oz.) bottles, i.e.
1.05 million litres. It is believed that 14,000l of water
                                                            Price: assuming $0.5/litre water (see note below:
are currently supplied to P&O (P&O to check).
                                                            assumed to be higher price than American wholesale
Assume 105,000 litres could be provided (10% of
                                                            price, as doesn’t require transport, etc.).
consumption) for 3 ships in year 1, then an additional
70,000 litres in year 2 to the two additional P&O
ships.

Beer - Tusker and Numbawan are the two local beers
that could be sold on board the ships to passengers         Assumed to be sold at the same retail price as in
Consumption on board each ship is 1.8million bottles        Vanuatu (about $5 a bottle), which would leave
a year. If 10% was local beer, this would amount to         a reasonable margin to the cruise company if
180,000 bottles per ship per year.                          purchased at wholesale price of $2/bottle (see note
Assume 3 ships in year 1, then two additional P&O           below)
ship in year 2.

Beauty products - Assume a capacity to sell 20 items
                                                       $20 retail price per item - see reference below ($10
per P&O ship cruising to Vanuatu (3 ships currently, 5
                                                       assumed wholesale price)
in year 2, assumes 25 voyages a year each)




                                                                                                                   84
ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
AUGUST 2014 REPORT




                        TYPE OF BENEFIT                                        VALUATION

                                                                           As margins vary significantly depending on
                                                                           seasonality and the type of fruit and vegetable,
                        Fruits and vegetables - Important volume of fruit
                                                                           it is not possible to assess at this high level what
                        and vegetable consumed on board (1,200t and 1,700t
                                                                           proportion of supply of fruit and vegetable would
                        respectively on 3 P&O ships, which will soon be 5
                                                                           be required, but assuming a $1 per kg across the
                        ships).
                                                                           board, $0.5M per year would translate into 500t
                        To justify the investment in developing the supply
                                                                           which seems relatively modest by comparison to the
                        chain, a turnover with cruise companies of about
                                                                           overall procurement of fruit and vegetables. It has
                        $0.5M per year would be required.
                                                                           been assumed that this would ramp up over the 4
                                                                           years of the investment.

                        Coffee - Provision of 5t of coffee per year over all
                        P&O ships (1 t per ship, approximately half of the
                                                                               Price: assuming $20/kg coffee
                        coffee shops’ consumption), starting with existing 3
                        ships (year 1) and 2 new ships in year 2



                       9. Handicrafts opportunities
                       Additional assumptions
                           •	 The sector comprises about 400 market stall holders in Port Vila alone and over 100 in Luganville.
                              The impact throughout the country is probably double, when accounting for artisans producing
                              some of the handicraft. The latest census shows that 800 women said handicrafts were their primary
                              occupation and another 688 said their occupation was a market seller
                           •	 90% of products sold at the wharf are currently imported, with an objective of offering 50% of local
                              products for the participants in the Ambassador program.
                           •	 The impact of better quality products and increased local content is meant to lead to an increase in
                              volume of handicraft sold and a higher value-add, benefiting both market stall holders and handicraft
                              manufacturers.
                           •	 The benefits have been deemed to ramp up progressively over 5 years. A NPV has been calculated
                              over 5 years, using a 7% discount rate.

                       Costs

                        TYPE OF COST                                           VALUATION

                        Marketing passenger research (in Australia)            $40,000, Net Balance assumption / costing

                        Pamphlets with easy to use quarantine explanations     $15,000 for 200,000 copies, as per printing quotation
                        to help marketing of local handicraft                  received

                                                                               Government of Vanuatu responsibility: $10,000
                        Import of machinery assistance
                                                                               assumed cost

                                                                               The South Pacific Regional Handicraft Project costed
                                                                               similar workshops: one workshops costs approx.
                                                                               $4,000. So assuming 3 workshops per year to
                        Marketing training for the handicraft operators
                                                                               increase its coverage would be at a cost of $12,000
                                                                               per year for 3 years, plus 25% of this cost in the next
                                                                               two years.




85
                                       ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
                                                                                          AUGUST 2014 REPORT




TYPE OF COST                                            VALUATION

                                                        Extrapolation of the Ambassador program to the
Supply chain reliability and differentiation            whole of sector
                                                        Ambassador program: 1,5M Vatu times 5
                                                        Follow-up: 50% cost for 2 years, then 25% over two
                                                        more years

Produce education material for the ship information
                                                        $30,000, based on information received from Adela
systems (production cost only, content to be
                                                        Aru, Ambassador program
sourced from the PHAMA project)

                                                        Content to be sourced from the PHAMA project, cost
Biosecurity education for passengers
                                                        of production assumed included

                                                       PHAMA program costs $37,000. Net Balance
Biosecurity education of customs officer – part of the
                                                       assumptions that these costs will occur again as
PHAMA Project
                                                       follow up will be required.

Project management cost                                 15% of program cost.


Benefits

TYPE OF BENEFIT                                         VALUATION




Increased value add and / or increase volume of         Assumed increase in sales for handicraft and
merchandised sold                                       souvenirs ramps up over 3 years by 5% a year (up to
                                                        15%) as more people are trained in the sectors.
Anecdotal evidence from the Tonga pilot program
showed an increase of 20% in sales ($1150 to $1400)     Average spend by passengers going ashore from the
per month.                                              survey was $7.5 for Port Vila, $3.8 for Luganville and
                                                        $2.3 for Mystery Island. Combined with the number
                                                        of visits, this translates into $2.1M a year. This was
                                                        the basis for calculation of benefits.




10. Home-basing a cruise ship in the Pacific
Additional assumptions
Additional assumptions have been made in assessing the option (discussed with cruise companies, and
based on experience in other destinations):

   •	 The marketing potential for such an itinerary would be tested through a progressive ramp-up,
      starting with a 3 months deployment in the first year, then 6 months in the second year, and so on. It
      would take some time to develop into a full year deployment of a ship in the Pacific on this basis. The
      following assumptions have therefore been made:
   •	 First year: 6 stops in Vila over a 3 months period and 6 in a remote location (such as Mystery Island), in
      addition to other stops outside of Vanuatu
   •	 Second year and subsequent years: 12 stops in Port Vila over a 6 months period and 12 in a remote
      location.
   •	 All stops are considered as additional to the current schedule, in the context of an increase in ships
      relocated to the region and expanding market; there is nevertheless likely to be some transfer of
      bookings from the current offering to the new offering, and this is taken into account.

                                                                                                               86
ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
AUGUST 2014 REPORT




                           •	 Ships for this type of activity would be mid-size, i.e. 1300-1500 passengers, with 200 passengers in
                              and out at each ‘passenger exchange’ destination (i.e. Port Vila). This could be increased to up to 400,
                              if the local infrastructure could support this. However, for the purpose of this analysis, 200 has been
                              retained as a conservative number achievable in Port Vila.
                           •	 An average of 3 days stay either before or after the trip for each passenger, in medium to top of
                              the range accommodation on Efate. Assessed on current provision and planned construction,
                              accommodation, transfer and tour operators on Efate could accommodate the increased volume of
                              activity.
                           •	 Fly in / out from Australia or New Zealand: there will be no restriction to flying from other destinations,
                              however, for the purpose of assessing benefits to local airlines, flights have been considered as
                              originating from these two destinations.
                           •	 No upgrade of the Port Vila International airport has been assumed to be required at this stage, with
                              reliance on commercial flights only (no charter) from existing companies or potential new routes.
                              Additional investment may prove necessary, depending on the role Vanuatu expected to play (major
                              hub or secondary port).
                           •	 No flying to other islands (although this is likely to apply for some of the tourists) during the additional
                              stay, although destinations such as the Tanna volcano could benefit, as well as some short stay
                              destinations (e.g. bungalows on Malekula).
                           •	 While it is possible that the occupancy rate for the ship would be reduced overall by the arrangement,
                              this has not been considered or incorporated as part of this exercise.

                       Costs
                       Assumed to be none required in country, although the increased demand could lead to an adjustment of
                       the offering in activities and potentially accommodation, both of which may require investments.

                       For the purposes of this exercise, the cruise companies’ costs in deploying new ships to the region have not
                       been considered as part of the analysis.

                       Benefits

                        TYPE OF BENEFIT                                          VALUATION

                        6 additional calls at Port Vila in year 1                Average spend per passenger for 1200 passengers
                        12 additional calls at Port Vila in subsequent years     (1400 – 2000)

                        6 additional call at Mystery Island / Banks / etc. in
                        Year 1                                                   Average spend per passenger for 1400 passengers
                        12 additional calls at in subsequent years

                                                                                 200 x 6 x $500 x 3 / 2.2
                        200 ‘passenger exchanges’ x 3 nights’
                                                                                 $500 is the assumed spend for a party of 2.2 (average
                        accommodation and daily expenditure, 6 times in
                                                                                 number of travelling ‘party’) per day, all inclusive
                        year 1 and 12 times subsequently
                                                                                 200 x 6 x $500 x 3 / 2.2

                                                                                 Assuming 50% revenue to Air Vanuatu, 50% to
                        200 fly-in and 200 fly-out, 6 times in year 1 and 12     another company
                        times subsequently
                                                                                 $300 x 200 x 2 x 50%

                        400 airport transfers, 6 times a year in year 1 and 12
                                                                                 Assuming group rates, $50 x 400 x 6
                        times subsequently




87
                                                                            ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
                                                                                                                                             AUGUST 2014 REPORT




Appendix 5: Long list of initiatives
to enhance cruise ship economic
impacts from consultation with
stakeholders
                                                                                                  IMPLEMENTATION
                                    RATIONALE /        EXPECTED   KEY             ONGOING                                                          LOCATIONS
THEME            IDEA                                                                             TIMEFRAME /        INVOLVEMENT/ FINANCING
                                    ORIGIN             IMPACT     BENEFICIARIES   INITIATIVE                                                       CONCERNED
                                                                                                  DEPENDENCIES


                                                                                                                     NZ MFAT is funding
                                                                                                                     the Secretariat of the
                                                                                                                     Pacific Community’s
                                                                                                                     Applied Geoscience and
                                                                                                                     Technology Division
                                                                                                                     (SOPAC) to convert
                                                                                                                     the existing maps into        The NZMFAT
                 Hydrography                                                                                         electronic versions. They     funding is covering
                 survey(s) – to                                                                                      are also funding essential    Luganville,
                 undertake the                                                                                       survey work that has not      Champagne Bay
                 hydrographical                                                                   In train - 2014-   been done to date. There      on Espiritu Santo,
                 surveys in                                                                       2017 according     remains a funding gap for     and the islands of
                 Vanuatu, also      Necessary                                                     to the VISIP       the rest of the electronic    Wala, Malekula, and
                 supported in       to meet                       Inter-island                                       surveying. NZ is also         Homo Bay (Pangi),
                 this project       international                 shipping                        Must have to       investing $5 million in       Pentecost in the first
Infrastructure                                         Volume                     Partly funded
                 by a surveyor      safety rules /                and Cruise                      ensure ships       a five-year programme         phase. The second
                 from the UK        private sector                industry                        continue           - the Pacific Regional        phase is Port Vila;
                 Hydrography        workshop                                                      coming or can      Navigation Initiative         however, there is no
                 office, which                                                                    access new         – by Land information         funding currently
                 is the Principal                                                                 destinations       New Zealand and the           available for this.
                 Charting                                                                                            Secretariat for the Pacific   The rest of Vanuatu
                 Authority for                                                                                       Community to carry out        water also needs
                 Vanuatu.                                                                                            hydrographic survey           to be surveyed
                                                                                                                     and charting work in the      electronically.
                                                                                                                     region that will work to
                                                                                                                     create partnerships to
                                                                                                                     address the financing
                                                                                                                     gaps in the region.




                                    Ability to
                 New                accommodate                                   Partly funded
                 international      bigger ships                                  and design
                 multi-purpose      in better                                     and costing
                                                                  International
                 wharf and          conditions                                    completed and Five year
                                                                  Cargo and
A) Efate         container yard     and also         Volume                       calls for pre- project (2015 -     JICA                          Port Vila
                                                                  Cruise
                 at the Lapetasi    accommodate                                   qualifications 2020)
                                                                  industry
                 Wharf (Int Cargo   international                                 for technical
                 and Cruise         cargo ships at                                and financial
                 Ships)             the same time as                              bids
                                    cruise ships




                                    This project                  Domestic
                                    will relocate                 Cargo and
                 South Pari         the domestic                  Cruise                          Five year
                 Wharf              cargo wharf to                industry                        project (mid
                                                       Volume                     Yes                                ADB and NZ MFAT               Port Vila
                 (Domestic          a new location                (indirectly,                    2015 - mid
                 Wharf)             to allow for the              through                         2020)
                                    Lapetasi Wharf                better
                                    development                   organisation)




                                                                                                                                                                        88
ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
AUGUST 2014 REPORT




                                                                                                       IMPLEMENTATION
                                RATIONALE /        EXPECTED           KEY              ONGOING                                                          LOCATIONS
THEME       IDEA                                                                                       TIMEFRAME /        INVOLVEMENT/ FINANCING
                                ORIGIN             IMPACT             BENEFICIARIES    INITIATIVE                                                       CONCERNED
                                                                                                       DEPENDENCIES



                                                                                                       Call for tenders
                                                                                                       for project in
                                Improve tidiness
                                                                      Upgraded                         Oct, 2014. 5
                                and cleanliness
                                                   Value (assuming    wharf road,                      year project.
                                (sewerage,
                                                   an increase in     as well as                       The second
            Port Vila Urban     roads, drainage)                                                                                                        Port Vila
                                                   foot traffic in    town centre                      phase of the
            Development         and well as road                                       Yes                                ADB, DFAT                     All location for
                                                   the town centre,   businesses                       project is
            Project             safety with                                                                                                             infrastructure
                                                   more access to     and traders                      considering
                                street lighting
                                                   shops)             - 22 km of                       a similar
                                and pedestrian
                                                                      roads in total                   development
                                signs etc
                                                                                                       in Luganville in
                                                                                                       2017.


            Beautification
            of International
            Wharf and Vila
            town centre
            and sea-front,
            improve access
            for people with     Improve tourists                      Int Lapetasi
                                                   Value (assuming
            disabilities,       experience of                         Wharf and
                                                   an increase in                                                         Government, Port Vila
            traffic, etc.       the town centre/                      wharf road,                      2016 (VSTAP)
                                                   foot traffic in                                                        Municipal Council, NZ
            Includes            private sector                        as well as       Yes             Five year                                    Port Vila
                                                   the town centre,                                                       MFAT (portion of required
            maintenance         workshop +                            town centre                      project
                                                   more access to                                                         funding)
            and cleanliness     tour operator                         businesses
                                                   shops)
            (market, etc)       interviews                            and traders

            Provide
            toilets and
            other critical
            infrastructure in
            all ports of call




                                                                                                                          China EXIM bank
                                                   Value
                                                                                                                          discussing financing
                                Ability to         (Luganville town
                                                                      Luganville                                          with government - Govt
                                accommodate        foot traffic,
            Luganville wharf                                          town             Under           2015 according     has signed an MOU with
B) Santo                        bigger ships       redistribution                                                                                  Luganville
            upgrade                                                   businesses       consideration   to the VSTAP       Shanghai Construction
                                in better          of current
                                                                      and traders                                         Company, but the project
                                conditions         Champagne
                                                                                                                          is under evaluation and
                                                   Beach traffic)
                                                                                                                          has not been approved.




                                                                                                                          DFAT, UN women have
                                                                                                                          launched a “Markets
            Luganville          Australia-                                                                                for Change” project
                                                                      Luganville
            wharf-based         Carnival                                                                                  that aims to increase
                                                   Value              traders and      No                                                                Luganville
            covered market      Partnership for                                                                           economic opportunity
                                                                      artisans
            for traders         Vanuatu                                                                                   for women market
                                                                                                                          vendors in Vanuatu,
                                                                                                                          including in Luganville



                                                                                                                          Government, Luganville
                                Improve tourists   Value (assuming    Luganville
            Beautification                                                                                                municipality, donors
                                experience of      an increase in     town             Under           2017 (ADB
            of town centre                                                                                                TBD, ADB is considering       Luganville
                                the town centre/   foot traffic in    businesses       consideration   second phase)
            Luganville                                                                                                    this and has included it in
                                interviews         town)              and traders
                                                                                                                          country strategy




89
                                                                                   ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
                                                                                                                                                  AUGUST 2014 REPORT




                                                                                                          IMPLEMENTATION
                                 RATIONALE /          EXPECTED            KEY             ONGOING                                                      LOCATIONS
THEME        IDEA                                                                                         TIMEFRAME /      INVOLVEMENT/ FINANCING
                                 ORIGIN               IMPACT              BENEFICIARIES   INITIATIVE                                                   CONCERNED
                                                                                                          DEPENDENCIES



                                 More
                                 comfortable
                                 access to
                                 more distant
                                 attractions
                                 and allow                                Santo tour
                                                                                                                           EXIM bank has provided
                                 diversification                          operators       Under           No time frame
             Santo Roads                              Value                                                                financing estimate to Van   Santo West
                                 of offering and                          and local       consideration   yet
                                                                                                                           Govt.
                                 better quality                           communities
                                 transport /
                                 private sector
                                 workshop
                                 / business
                                 interviews



                                 More
                                 comfortable
                                                                                                                           Government has
                                 access to
                                                                                                                           approved concessional
                                 more distant
                                                                                                                           financing with China
                                 attractions
             Roads                                                                                                         EXIM to carry out the
                                 and allow
             improvement                                                  Cruise          Yes,                             road upgrade. China
C) Outer                         diversification      Value                                               No time frame                                Coast Road Tanna,
             / sealing Tanna                                              lines, new      government                       Civil Engineering
Islands                          of offering and      (redistribution)                                    yet                                          Malekula North
             and Malekula                                                 destinations    approved                         Construction has the
                                 better quality
             North                                                                                                         contract for Tanna and
                                 transport /
                                                                                                                           China Railway 5 Company
                                 private sector
                                                                                                                           has the contract for
                                 workshop
                                                                                                                           Malekula North
                                 / business
                                 interviews



                                 More
                                 comfortable
                                 access to
                                 more distant
                                 attractions
                                                                                                                           EXIM bank has provided
             Roads               and allow
                                                                          Cruise                                           a financing estimate. An
             improvement /       diversification      Value                               Under           No time frame
                                                                          lines, new                                       MOU has been signed         Malekula South
             sealing Malekula    of offering and      (redistribution)                    consideration   yet
                                                                          destinations                                     with China Railway 1
             South               better quality
                                                                                                                           Company.
                                 transport /
                                 private sector
                                 workshop
                                 / business
                                 interviews


             New destination
             road and port
                                                      Value
             infrastructure.
                                 Australia-           (redistribution),
             SW Bay in                                                    Cruise
                                 Carnival             potentially                                                          Cruise lines, government,
             Malekula; Tanna                                              lines, new      No                                                          
                                 Partnership for      small volume                                                         donors
             (dependent on                                                destinations
                                 Vanuatu              attracted by
             safe anchorage
                                                      new sites
             sites) and Banks
             (Ureparapara)



                                 Discussion
                                                                          Cruise
                                 with CAU and
             Cruise ship for                                              lines, new                      Feasibility study
                                 DFAT. Potential      Volume and
             the Pacific (fly-                                            destinations                    required 2014;    Cruise lines, government, TBC. Vanuatu, Fiji,
D) Pacific                       to significantly     value, including                 No
             cruise package                                               (tourism                        implementation donors                       Tonga, Samoa
                                 increase value of    supply chains
             ex Australia)                                                revenue,                        from 2016?
                                 cruise for Pacific
                                                                          employment)
                                 islands




                                                                                                                                                                            90
ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
AUGUST 2014 REPORT




                                                                                                        IMPLEMENTATION
                                   RATIONALE /        EXPECTED          KEY             ONGOING                                                       LOCATIONS
THEME          IDEA                                                                                     TIMEFRAME /       INVOLVEMENT/ FINANCING
                                   ORIGIN             IMPACT            BENEFICIARIES   INITIATIVE                                                    CONCERNED
                                                                                                        DEPENDENCIES




                                                                                                        Land Transport
               Governance and                                           Taxi drivers,
                                   Help solve wharf   Value, tourists                                   Amendment,
               policing of land                                         shops and
                                   transport issue    stay in town                                      Road Act and
               transport (wharf                                         attractions     Yes                               Government, LTA             Port Vila
                                   / private sector   longer, explore                                   the Traffic Act
               taxi association,                                        catering to
                                   workshop           more                                              scheduled for
               tariffs)                                                 cruise
                                                                                                        August


               Shuttles / water
               taxis into town,
                                   Enhance tourist
               to separate
                                   experience,
               passengers
                                   allow easy
               wanting longer                                                                                             Government, LTA,
Transport                          access to town  Value                Local
               distance                                                                 No                                traders, Private / public   Port Vila
                                   centre/ private redistribution       businesses
               transport from                                                                                             donors
                                   sector workshop
               those only
                                   + tour operator
               wanting to go
                                   interviews
               to town at the
               wharf


               Continue taxi
               driver education    Help solve wharf                                                     Pilot program
               on a large          transport issue,                     Taxi drivers,                   - Ambassador      Government, LTA,
                                                    Value                               Yes                                                           Port Vila
               scale (City         enhance tourists                     cruise lines                    Program - in      traders, NZ MFAT
               Ambassador          experience                                                           2014
               program)


               Tour operators
               certification /
               address barriers    Increase
               to offering         access for tour
               services            operators to the
               to cruise           cruise tourist
               companies           market and
                                                                                                                                                      All locations,
               and improve         professionalism/ Value               Tour                                              Cruise companies,
                                                                                        No                                                            particularly Port Vila
               industry            private sector   redistribution      operators                                         operators
                                                                                                                                                      and Luganville
               capacity to         workshop +
               participate /       public sector
               build capacity      workshop +
               (financial and      tour operator
               management          interviews
               literacy, access
               to finance)

               Increase bus                                             Tour
               capacity in                                              operators,
               Luganville                                               local
               to transport        Private Sector     Value             businesses      No                                Operators                   Luganville
Tour
               passengers                                               (receiving
organisation
               to alternative                                           tours,
               destinations                                             tourists)

                                                                        Tour
                                                                        operators,
               Mystery Island                                           local           Scoping is
               nature and eco      Private Sector     Value             businesses      being carried                                                  Mystery Island
               tours                                                    (receiving      out
                                                                        tours,
                                                                        tourists)

               Tour
               organisation:
               finish in town      Increase impact
               to encourage        on retail in town
                                                                        Town centre
               patronage           centre/ private                                                                        Cruise companies,           Port Vila, potentially
                                                     Value              businesses      No               
               of the shops,       sector workshop                                                                        operators, businesses       Luganville
                                                                        and traders
               create hubs         / business
               of activities,      interviews
               organise more
               combined tours




91
                                       ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
                                                                                           AUGUST 2014 REPORT




Appendix 6: Tanna maps

Roads rehabilitated and maintained as part of the VTSSP
program
The following information has been kindly provided by Philip Warren, from the VTSSP in Vanuatu.

VTSSP program
The Vanuatu Transport Sector Support Program (VTSSP) has been working on improving the state of rural
roads in Vanuatu for nearly a decade over several phases of work. The program aims to increase institutional
and technical capacity within the government as well as providing funding and technical assistance. As
much as possible, maintenance works are allocated to the community or local contractors to increase the
level of self-dependence and ensure that the work benefits the local economy.

Funding up to $5M / year is allocated to civil works for roads, in the whole country, thus matching the funds
allocated by the Vanuatu government.

The objective is to put in place a Transport Maintenance Fund that would allow government and donors,
including from the private sector (such as cruise companies), to contribute to a unique fund dedicated to
the periodic and routine maintenance of roads. The administration of the fund would be set up to ensure
that optimal local benefit is achieved by contracting locally.

VTSSP program work and costs
The VTSSP has been looking after the roads in the north of the island (see map below).

As indicated on the maps, the smaller ‘feeder’ roads are not part of the program and can be in poor
condition. Similarly, the track across the ash plains to the volcano is not maintained as part of the program
and, depending on the weather and other circumstances, can be impracticable. This may create difficulties
in accessing points of interest / activities shown in the map of activities. For example the village of Yokel, of
high cultural interest, is not on the main roads that are being maintained and rehabilitated.

VSSTP advised that the possible increased traffic from a larger number of vehicles on the road to move
tourists could lead to slightly increased frequency of routine maintenance. Dust control and road safety
issues may arise in villages and populated areas as the traffic increases, which may require specific
management.

None of the roads on Tanna are sealed, but they are deemed in reasonable condition, as the traffic is
generally not heavy. The main issue for roads condition is drainage, as water accumulating on roads causes
them to deteriorate rapidly. This creates a need for more frequent heavy grading.

A typical maintenance regime requires:

   •	 Yearly preventative maintenance of roads costing 400,000 to 600,000 Vatu per km per year, through
      maintenance contracts
   •	 Road reprofiling (heavy grading) every 7 to 10 years at a cost of around 10M Vatu per km.
Full road rehabilitation costs 15 to 20M Vatu per km. 




                                                                                                               92
ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
AUGUST 2014 REPORT




                       FIGURE 37: TANNA ROADS REHABILITATED AS PART OF THE VTSSP PROGRAM




                       Source: VSSTP




93
                                       ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
                                                                                        AUGUST 2014 REPORT




Access to Tanna attractions and activities
The map below has been based on information obtained from different local and web-based sources
(thanks to the White Grass Ocean Resort for providing their activity compendium).

FIGURE 38: MAP OF TOURIST ACTIVITIES ON TANNA




Attractions and activities on Tanna

West Side
   •	 Snorkel at Blue Hole 1
   •	 See the wild horses of Whiteplains
   •	 Trek to Lenuanatuaiu Waterfall (trip advisor)
   •	 Visit the Kustom village of Yukel, where you can see people living in a traditional Kustom village,
      watching their custom dancing, walk to a local waterfall, and purchase local handicrafts. Tafutuna
      Cultural Experience
   •	 Lowinio Man Nature Speaking Tour – learn about Vanuatu/Tanna Culture. Full day tour.
   •	 Visit a John Frum village – a living example of a cargo cult.

East Side
   •	 Look down into an active volcano at Mt Yasur
   •	 Snorkel in the Blue Hole #2 outside Whitegrass resort
   •	 Louniel Surf Beach and Waterfall Safari (currently organised by Whitegrass)
   •	 Visit a Tom Frum village – a living example of a cargo cult.




                                                                                                            94
ASSESSMENT OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF CRUISE SHIPS TO VANUATU
AUGUST 2014 REPORT




                           Net Balance Management Group Pty Ltd (Net Balance) has prepared this report in accordance with the
                           usual care and thoroughness of the consulting profession. The Report is based on generally accepted
                           practices and standards at the time it was prepared. No other warranty, expressed or implied, is made as
                           to the professional advice included in this report. It is prepared in accordance with the scope of work and
                           for the purpose outlined in the project brief. The methodology adopted and sources of information used
                           by Net Balance are outlined in this report.
                           Please note that all results have been reported as recorded. Any percentages that do not add up to
                           exactly one hundred percent are the result of rounding errors.
                           This report was prepared in June 2014 and is based on the conditions encountered and information
                           reviewed at the time of preparation. Net Balance disclaims responsibility for any changes that may have
                           occurred after this time.
                           This report should be read in full. No responsibility is accepted for use of any part of this report in any other
                           context or for any other purpose or by third parties. This report does not purport to give legal advice.
                           Legal advice can only be given by qualified legal practitioners.




95
