          Report No.102796-ZW

             Assessment of the
                Zimbabwe
    Public Finance Management system
      for investment lending projects


                May 2015




A
          Currency unit = United States Dollar (As of February 11, 2015)

          Financial Year or Fiscal Year (FY): January 1 to December 31

Acronyms and Abbreviations
AcG               Accountant General
AcGD              Accountant General’s Department
ACL               Audit Common Language
AFTFM             Africa Technical Financial Management
AFDB              African Development Bank
AG                Auditor General
CAATs             Computer Assisted Auditing Techniques/Tools
CIA               Chief Internal Auditor
CIFA              Country Integrated Fiduciary Assessment
CO                Controlling Officer
CRF               Consolidated Revenue Fund
DFID              Department for International Development (UK)
DMFAS             Debt Management and Financial Analysis System
FMR               Financial Monitoring Report
FRA               Fiduciary Risk Assessment
GGODR             Governance Global-Practice Office of the Director
GoZ               Government of the Republic of Zimbabwe
HRMIS             Human Resource Management Information System
ICT               Information Communication Technology
IDEA              Interactive Data Extraction and Analysis
IFMIS             Integrated Financial Management Information System
IMF               International Monetary Fund
ISN               Interim Strategic Note
INTOSAI           International Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions
IPSAS             International Public Sector Accounting Standards
LOA               Loans Department
MDA               ministries, Departments and Agencies (of government)
MOFED             Ministry of Finance and Economic Development
NDF               National Development Fund
OAG               Office of the Auditor General
PAC               Public Accounts Committee (of Parliament)
PAD               Project Appraisal Documents
PAYE              Pay As You Earn (Employment Tax)
PDO               Project Development Objective
PFM               Public Financial Management
PFMA              Public Financial Management Act
PMG               Pay Master General
RBZ               Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe

                                                                             1|Page
SAP        Systems, Applications and Products in Data Processing
TSA        Treasury Single Account
UCS        Use of Country Systems
UNDP       United Nations Development Program
USAID      United States Agency for International Development
WBG        World Bank Group
ZIMFUND    Zimbabwe Multi-Donor Trust Fund managed by AFDB
ZIMREF     Zimbabwe Re-Construction Fund managed by World Bank




             Vice President:        Makhtar Diop
           Country Director:        Guang Zhe Chen
           Country Manager:         Camille Nuamah
          Task Team Leader:         Daniel Yaw Domelevo




                                                              2|Page
Table of Contents
Acronyms and Abbreviations ................................................................................................................ 1
Executive Summary ............................................................................................................................... 2
Summary of findings and proposed measures ....................................................................................... 4
Introduction .......................................................................................................................................... 11
Objective of the assessment ................................................................................................................. 11
Rationale for Using Country FM Systems ........................................................................................... 12
Scope and Methodology ...................................................................................................................... 12
Overview of The Country and Public Financial Management ............................................................ 14
Country and Economic Background .................................................................................................... 14
Overview of Public Financial Management in the Country ................................................................ 16
Fiduciary Risk Assessment in Using Country FM Systems ................................................................ 16
Planning and Budgeting ....................................................................................................................... 17
Accounting and Reporting ................................................................................................................... 22
Treasury management and Funds Flow ............................................................................................... 25
Internal Controls and Audit ................................................................................................................. 31
External Audit ...................................................................................................................................... 34
Payroll and Other factors affecting fiduciary risks .............................................................................. 37
Way Forward ....................................................................................................................................... 39
Annex 4: Risk Concepts....................................................................................................................... 46
Executive Summary
1. This study was undertaken under the leadership of the Ministry of Finance and Economic
Development (MOFED) to assess fiduciary risks in using country financial management (FM)
systems1 in full, or in part, for implementing Donor and Bank-financed investment projects in
Zimbabwe and to identify risk mitigation measures required for such use. Fiduciary risk is the risk
that Bank funds (or donor funds) will not be used for their intended purposes or that they will
be used without due attention to economy and efficiency. In projects using country FM systems,
Bank funds are potentially commingled with the country’s own funds; therefore, a fiduciary risk
assessment also needs to consider broader country PFM risks that could affect the fiduciary risk.
This assessment uses a risk-based approach consistent with the interim guidance note issued by the
FM Sector Board in 2009, entitled “Assessment of Fiduciary risks in the Use of Country FM
Systems in Bank-Financed Investment Projects?; and supplemented by the Framework Methodology
for Channeling Investment Lending Projects through Country Financial Management Systems
(attached as Annex 3 to this report) and the approach used for regular FM assessments. The risk-
based approach provides a ranking of the fiduciary risks to be managed as High, Substantial,
Moderate, or Low.2 The decision to use country systems for a specific project then rests with the
project's task team, guided by the country management team, after taking into account this fiduciary
risk assessment and other factors such as the nature and complexity of the project and an assessment
of implementing entities.

2. The team first undertook a desk review of reports and publications relating to public financial
management in Zimbabwe, then held interviews with government officials during the field visit to
carry out a detailed assessment of the financial management arrangements covering budgeting,
accounting, internal control, funds flow, financial reporting, and auditing. The findings were
discussed by the assessment team with key government officials and Development Partners.

3. Zimbabwe has made progress in strengthening its public financial management systems (using
the 2012 CIFA report as an analytical base); however, some challenges remain. Some areas needing
focused attention include: improving discipline in budget management; managing expenditure
arrears; strengthening payroll controls; strengthening internal and external audits; and improving the
demand side of accountability and transparency.

4. An enabling legal framework and the mechanisms to fight corruption are in place. However,
corruption remains an area of concern in Zimbabwe. Enforcement of legislation is a major challenge
in the fight against corruption. In view of the generalized challenge of compliance with rules and
regulations, which cuts across public and private sector entities, experience has shown that even ring-
fenced arrangements are not immune to problems related to poor compliance allied with fraud and
corruption. To mitigate this risk, it is recommended that even when the projects are on budget, they
should still continue to maintain their separate bank accounts, outside of the consolidated fund. The
projects’ funds should not go through the normal budget release process of the MoF. The respective
ministry/project authorities should have control over their project funds for entering commitments,

1 1
    Country FM systems means a country’s national budget systems, accounting and reporting systems, internal control and internal audit systems,
treasury and funds flow systems, and audit by its supreme audit institution. This study does not cover systems used by local governments or state-
owned enterprises nor public procurement aspects.
2
   Residual Risk – is the combination of the inherent and control risks in the country’s PFM system as mitigated by combination of government’s
efforts in PFM reforms, the proposed mitigation measures and Bank supervision effort. In line with the FM Sector Board’s FM Practices Manual, FM
risk is rated as Low (L), Modest (M), Substantial (S) or High (H).
and approving invoices and payments. There should be intensive project monitoring and supervision
and the implementation support provided by FM and Procurement Staff of the Bank should also be
intensified.

5. The assessment shows that there are several weaknesses in the country’s financial management
(FM) system. If the mitigation measures recommended in this report are implemented, the FM
system could be used for development-partner-investment project-financing and it would improve
fiduciary risk management for all funds. On the specific components of the PFM system,
recommendations on the appropriateness of country systems for donor-financed projects are as
follows:
     The review team recommends the use of the Office of the Auditor General to audit donor
        projects as the beginning point.
     The use of the budgeting system can continue at the current level where expenses related to
        donor projects (carried out themselves or through non-governmental agencies) are
        incorporated into the national budget and are also disclosed in the financial reports.
     With an improvement in the internal controls (especially the security, reliability and integrity
        of the IFMIS), the budget execution, accounting and reporting, treasury and cash
        management systems of Government could be used for projects.
     The Internal Audit function is in a nascent stage and, as such, it can provide little protection
        and security in terms of its internal oversight mechanism in its present form.

6. The Government and donors are encouraged to implement the mitigation measures stated in the
report in order to further reduce the risk of using the country’s financial management system and
enhance the reliability of the systems; there could thus be significant savings and cost-effectiveness
in moving from donor systems and ring-fenced implementation arrangements to a focus on
improving the capacity of ministries and central government systems. The merits and demerits of
using country systems and the use of implementing agencies are summarized below.

Table 1. The Current FM Arrangements and Use of Country Systems compared

                          Current situation (Outside national systems)             Proposal (national procedures)
                          Advantages                                               Advantages
                              -   Budget tracking by donors                            -   Completeness and consistency of the
                              -   Availability of data facilitated by quarterly            national budget with the integration of a
                                  budget monitoring                                        project financed with external resources
   Budget




                          Disadvantages/risks                                      Disadvantages/risks
                              -   Incomplete budget execution.                         -   Delays in the availability of budget
                              -   Negative impact on public financial                      information
                                  management performance                               -   Cumbersome procedures if a mid-term
                              -   Risk of inconsistency between the national               adjustment is required.
                                  budget and the budgets of externally funded          -   Possible use of project funds for other
                                  projects                                                 activities

                          Advantages                                               Advantages
                             -   Efficient banking services                            -   Optimal cash flow management,
   Treasury/ Cash flows




                             -   Traceability of resources                                 substantial savings
                                                                                       -   Uniform procedures for internal control
                                                                                           over cash flows (bank reconciliations, etc.)
                          Disadvantages/risks                                      Disadvantages/risks
                              -   Lack of government control over these cash           -   Delays in payment processes (Treasury
                                  accounts.                                                department services)
                              -   Sub-optimal cash flow management (surplus
                                  cash remains held in commercial banks)
                              -   Multiplicity of designated accounts, increased

                                                                                                                           3|Page
                                 control risks
                          Advantages                                                Advantages
                             -   Preparation of project financial statements           -   Complete and comprehensive national
                                 within the set deadlines                                  accounting data
                                                                                       -   Reliable audit trail
         Accounting




                          Disadvantages/risks                                       Disadvantages/risks
                              -   Manipulation of accounting data                       -   Possible delays in availability of financial
                              -   Poor quality of accounting data                           statements

                          Advantages                                                Advantages
                                                                                        -   A more secure internal control system with
                                                                                            better segregation of duties
Internal control/




                          Disadvantages/risks                                       Disadvantages/risks
                              -   Weak internal control and internal audit              -   Internal audit units may not cover all
     Audit




                                  system                                                    operations usually due to non-availability
                              -   Accumulation of incompatible functions                    of funds
                              -   Non-compliance with public finance                    -   Inadequate skills within government
                                  management rules                                          inspectorate staff
                          Advantages                                                Advantages
                              -   Compliance with deadlines for submitting              -   Enhanced degree of independence
                                  audit reports                                         -   Broad audit scope (financial statements,
         External audit




                                                                                            quality of management, performance)
                          Disadvantages/risks                                       Disadvantages/risks
                              -   Limited degree of independence (recruitment           -   Lack of recourse if the Office of the
                                  by project management units)                              Auditor General fails to meet deadlines-
                              -   Poor quality external audit reports with little           this can be managed using joint audits or
                                  added value                                               delegation of the audit to audit firms
                                                                                            supervised by the Office of the Auditor
                                                                                            General



     Summary of findings and proposed measures
7. The assessment focused on reviewing the following elements of UCS: Planning and budgeting;
accounting and reporting; treasury management and funds flow; internal controls and internal audit;
external audit and staffing. The risk ranking and proposed mitigating measures for each element are
summarized in the following paragraphs.

8. Planning and Budgeting

Currently, donors do not use country systems for budgeting. The risk rating for the current systems
used by donors for their projects is substantial. Development assistance in Zimbabwe is largely
outside the Government budget, and the methodology varies from donor to donor. Some donors
undertake the implementation using their own systems while others use non-governmental agencies.
The merit in this approach is that donors can monitor the disbursement rate of their individual
contributions. The greatest disadvantage of the current system is that it hinders transparency and
accountability because, in most cases, no one knows the total resource envelope available to a
ministry, department or agency. This can allow for double-dipping or gaps in financing. Not all the
funds go to the intended beneficiaries because the NGOs or the intermediaries used to implement
projects do not have sufficient oversight over the projects; and, in other cases, their fees and
reimbursable expenses take a material percentage of the funds away from the intended beneficiaries.



                                                                                                                             4|Page
9. There is substantial risk that donor funds may not be used for their intended purposes if donor-
financed projects are moved onto the national budget for appropriation; i.e., if the funds are
deposited into the National Development Funds earmarked for use through the treasury system. In
the past, information about donor-funded projects was not disclosed in the national budget but the
2015 budget estimates show some donor-funded projects at the ministry levels. This information
captured in the national budget is for disclosure purposes only and not included in the Appropriation
Act. The budget preparation process is reasonably participatory, starting with call letters and
consultations with sector ministries and other key stakeholders-- including Parliament and the public.
The national budget is usually submitted to Parliament and approved before the beginning of the
fiscal year. The budget estimate for 2015 was approved on December 20, 2014,3 and, in addition to
the appropriated Consolidated Revenue Fund, it captures the revenues and expenditures of ministries,
Departments and other spending Agencies’ (MDA) internally generated funds (called statutory
funds), as well as some donor funded projects. It is estimated that the donor projects information
captured in the budget is less than sixty percent. The team noted the improved relationship between
the Government and donor nations as a result of which donors are willing to provide information
about development assistance and also channel their support through multi-donor trust funds (such as
ZIMFUND and ZIMREF). In some cases, donors are ready to provide direct aid to the
Government.4 The MDA need to identify all projects to be funded using their statutory funds and
those of donors and ensure that budget estimates for such projects are included in the budget at the
level of the individual project and in a timely manner. The MOFED should intensify its donor
coordination efforts to ensure that information on planned and actual project support from
Developing Partners is collected and disclosed in the budget. Overall, if the mitigating measures are
implemented there would be moderate risk that donor-funded projects are not correctly and
completely reflected in the budget.

Accounting and reporting

10      The risk-rating for the current accounting and reporting system used by donor projects is
moderate. Current accounting and reporting systems used vary from project to project and are
designed to respond to the information and reporting needs of the donors. The merits of this
approach are that the reporting is generally done on time; and the standards are acceptable to the
donors-- in some cases, it is the donors’ internal accounting and reporting systems. The
disadvantage is that the accounting standards, the chart of accounts, the accounting policies and
classifications may differ from that of the Government-- to the extent that one simply cannot
consolidate or reconcile the two. In some cases, the accounting and reporting systems are internal to
the donor and no information is available to the Government. Also, there is a risk that the accounting
systems used are not secure (from an IT point of view).

11. The overall risk of using a country’s financial management system for accounting and reporting
for donor projects is substantial. The existing legal framework stipulates reporting requirements for
the Government. The existing integrated financial management information system (IFMIS) uses
SAP –EC 6 Enhancement Package 7 for budget execution, accounting and reporting. The IFMIS is
capable of tracking budgets and expenditures online and producing monthly, quarterly and annual
financial statements. To enhance reliability of the IFMIS system, there was an independent security
audit of the IFMIS in 2012 by SAP South Africa and an IT audit by the Office of the Auditor
General (OAG) in 2013. There is the need to continuously validate the robustness of the system
controls. Therefore, it is recommended that the OAG should repeat its audit of the system on an

3
    http://www.herald.co.zw/parly-approves-budget/
4
     http://reliefweb.int/report/zimbabwe/eu-resumes-direct-aid-zimbabwe

                                                                                           5|Page
annual basis. It is also recommended that the independent security audit should be done every two
years.

12. The use of the IFMIS is prone to delays because it is not available at the district level and
spending units have to commute to Provincial offices to process expenditures through IFMIS in order
to spend their budget appropriations. In addition, information relating to projects and activities
funded from statutory funds and donor funds are not captured in the system. The Grants
Management Module of the IFMIS has been activated and should be used by all MDA to track
statutory and donor funds. The government and UNDP have agreed to pilot three grants (of the
Global Fund) by using this module to track the disbursements into Government accounts and
associated expenditures. The Chart of Accounts has been revised to allow the grant management
module to facilitate budgeting, accounting and reporting on projects funded by donor and statutory
funds. The revised Chart of Accounts will enable preparation of customized reports for donors,
including the interim unaudited financial reports required by the Bank. As the Government prepares
to install the Business Intelligence Module of the SAP on the IFMIS, the generation of reports to
meet the needs of Development Partners will become even easier and interim unaudited financial
statements should be generated in a more timely manner. In other words, the ministries will be able
to report on donor-funded projects on a quarterly basis and statutory funds on a bi-annual basis as
required by the PFMA. In addition to installing the Business Intelligence Module and the Grant
Management Module, the IFMIS needs to be rolled out to the districts in order to facilitate timely
capturing and reporting of expenditures. Overall, the residual risk that financial information may not
be accurate, timely and reliable will be moderate once the implementation of the grant management
module in the IFMIS is completed and rolled out to all the ministries and districts.

Treasury management and funds flow

13 The risk rating for the current systems used for treasury and funds flow by donor projects is
moderate. Currently, almost all development assistance happens outside the treasury and funds flow
system of the Government. Projects open their own accounts in commercial banks into which
disbursements are made in order to finance the activities of the various projects. In some cases,
donors simply buy goods and consulting services on behalf of Government. The merits are that
funds are usually available on time and may be used for the intended purposes-- except for the large
percentage that usually goes to intermediaries. The disadvantage is that such funds (especially when
held by the donor) get re-allocated when the priorities of the donor change. In several cases,
amounts promised by donors are not disbursed—for reasons unrelated to the project. Also,
Government cash balances do not benefit from these funds, which generates additional costs for the
Government.

14.     This risk of using the treasury management and funds-flow system of Government for
management of donor projects is rated moderate. The PFMA has no specific provisions to prevent
the Government from rationing the transfer of funds to a donor project. If project funds are
commingled with Government funds using the National Development Fund (NDF)5, it seems likely
that this risk could materialize. Furthermore, the Government requires that the Bank Accounts for
ministries and other spending agencies be kept at the Reserve Bank; hence, balances on project
accounts funded from statutory funds and donor-support may be swept into the Pay Master General
Account at the end of the fiscal year.6 Section 31 of the PFMA provides that all appropriations

5. The NDF is being set up as an account into which all donor funds will be deposited before a transfer is made into the proje cts’ accounts
except in situations where the project does not maintain a separate account.
5. Section 31 of the PFMA provides that every appropriation by Parliament of public money for the service of a financial year shall lapse
and cease to have any effect at the close of that year, and the unexpended balance of any moneys withdrawn from the Consolidated
Revenue Fund shall be repaid to the Consolidated Revenue Fund.

                                                                                                                             6|Page
elapse at the end of the financial year-- but this provision is specific to appropriated funds from the
Consolidated Revenue Funds and should not impact unutilized project funds at the end of a particular
fiscal year. Notwithstanding, the PFMA does not have any provisions which make it an offence to
violate this rule. The Minister of Finance needs to clarify in the Regulations (1) the rules for
virement as required by Section 78(n) of the PFMA; (2) state clearly that the ‘lapsing’ rule in Section
31 does not apply to donor and statutory funds; and, (3) indicate existing sanctions provided for in
Zimbabwean laws that would apply should donor funds be diverted from their intended purpose.
There should be automatic roll-over, to the following fiscal year, of the balances of donor and
statutory funds that have already been earmarked to finance specific project activities. It is
recommended that donor funds should be protected in designated accounts outside the NDF to be
held in commercial banks independent of Government. With improved controlled environment, these
funds may then flow through the NDF. If the proposed mitigating measures are implemented,
residual risk is expected to remain moderate.

Internal Control and Internal Audit

15. The risk rating for the internal control and auditing currently used by donor projects is
moderate. The size of the team available to manage donor projects is usually small and the
segregation of duties gets compromised in order to cut down on cost. It is usual to find one or two
staff handling all the financial issues of a project, and transactions that should naturally be handled
by different persons get handled by one individual. Many projects do not have internal audit staff to
provide independent assurance that the project’s risk management, governance and internal control
processes are operating effectively. The normal solution is to outsource the internal audit to
accounting firms, which can lead to issues of independence and quality.

16. The risk that the internal audit system of Government is unable to provide assurances on the
financial administration and compliance with the procedures for donor projects is substantial.
Internal audit function across the Government remains weak, and the ability of internal audit
function to assess, with reasonable credibility, the cost-effectiveness of any projects undertaken by
the ministry is limited. In its present structure, depth and coverage, it provides very limited assurance
on the Government’s internal oversight mechanism to Donor agencies. To mitigate the risk, it is
recommended that there should be an immediate capacity-building effort in regularity audits,
performance audits, risk-based audits and systems audits.7 It is also recommended that changes be
made in the legal framework to: (i) ensure independence and professionalism in internal auditing; (ii)
establish a Central Unit or Agency with the mandate to oversee internal auditing in the public sector,
provide guidance, quality assurance, and follow-ups on audit findings; and, (iii) establish the
reporting relationship between the Internal Audit, the Controlling Officers and the Central Unit. If
the recommended mitigating measures are implemented, the residual risk that internal audit may not
provide assurance of robustness and compliance with internal controls would be moderate.

External Audit

17. The risk of the arrangements currently used for external auditing of donor projects is rated
moderate. For donor projects that use implementing agents, the external auditing is done by private
accounting firms. The merits in using these firms are that the reports are produced on a timely basis
and are usually of reasonable quality-- the firms coming with experience and lessons learnt from
many other projects they audit. The disadvantage of utilizing private accounting firms is that their
scope is limited to the specific project and they may not be able to expand their scope to cover other

7 The GoZ may have to prioritize and fund this capacity building effort- the pipeline Public Financial Management Enhancement Project provides a
good opportunity to address the capacity gap in internal audit.

                                                                                                                                    7|Page
institutional settings and related projects that may help them get a broader perspective of the risk
environment within which the project operates. Unlike the Auditor General, who has access at all
times to the documents, accounting systems and financial management arrangements of the project,
the private firms are not able to follow up on audit findings until the audit of another year is due.
They are also not fully conversant with Government rules and regulations, and do not typically
include a compliance paragraph in their audit opinions on financial statements.

18. The risk of the OAG not effectively playing an independent external oversight role for donor
projects is moderate. The OAG has the key competencies to audit appropriated and statutory funds,
as well as donor-funded projects. The Constitution, the Audit Office Act and Public Finance
Management Act provide the regulatory framework and auditing requirements for Government
entities and elucidate the role of the OAG. The team was informed that INTOSAI auditing standards
are applied by the OAG. However, reviewed reports confirm that some of the requirements in the
standards are not incorporated in the report; thus, the level of compliance with these standards needs
to improve. Audited financial statements are required to be submitted to the legislature within six
months after the end of each fiscal year, but this deadline has not been met. Audited financial
statements for the year ended 2013, for example, were presented three months after the deadline.
Though the AG’s office witnessed several improvements in the recent past, it still faces multiple
structural, financial and operational challenges. To mitigate the risk: (i) regulations for the Audit
Office Act should be made operational; and, (ii) the Bank should agree the audit terms of reference
for Bank projects (including target dates for submission of audited financial statements to the Bank)
with the Government and the AG during project negotiations. In addition, the AG’s Office needs
additional-capacity building reforms8 that would enhance its level of compliance with INTOSAI
standards. Residual risk is expected to remain moderate.

19. Staffing. It is clear that there is an insufficient number of competent public finance management
practitioners in the country, leading to substantial inherent risk. Comparing the approved
establishment list to numbers at post, there is a huge gap. For instance, while the Office of the AG
has an authorized establishment strength of 334, only 257 are at post; Internal Audit has authorized
positions for 450, but only 320 are at post. This gap was created as a result of the “brain-drain? that
happened during and after the economic crises. Expenditures for salaries or personal emoluments is
such that recruiting staff with specialized skills will be a challenge-- not just because of the numbers
but because of the level of pay needed to retain them. In the long-term, there would be a need for
public service reforms with initiatives to attract and retain suitably qualified practitioners-- and to
empower existing personnel. A comprehensive capacity-development strategy should aim at
developing a professional PFM cadre (planners, budget officers, accountants, auditors, statisticians,
monitoring and evaluation officers).9 In the interim, it will be necessary for the AG, in particular, to
partner with private sector auditing firms who can share some of the audit responsibilities. There
will be a need to re-skill and retrain the audit staff to supervise audits performed by private firms and
to collate the reports. The private-sector audit firms will also need exposure to public-sector
accounting and financial management and public-sector auditing. These mitigating measures would
help to bring the residual risk owing to staffing issues to moderate.

20. The legal framework in Zimbabwe. The risk that the legal framework may not protect project
funds is substantial. The legal framework for public financial management needs to be enhanced
because:
         a. To date, the regulations for the Public Finance Management Act (2009) (PFMA) have
             not been finalized (these are necessary to facilitate effective implementation of the
8
    Same as 5 above
9 Most of these capacity gaps can be addressed by the pipeline PFM Enhancement Project

                                                                                              8|Page
            PFMA). The PFMA authorizes the Minister of Finance to make regulations to cover
            specific issues and provide details on how to comply with provisions of the Act.
            Sections 78 and 88 of the PFMA provide a list of issues that must be clarified by the
            Minister in regulations. Unfortunately, the PFMA has been in force for the past five
            years and the regulations are still in draft and do not cover all the issues listed therein.
         b. The PFMA does not have provisions or rules on virements -- the procedure to be
            followed and approvals needed before funds approved for one activity, entity or project
            can be used for another-- Section 78(n) provides that the procedure for virement should
            be included in the regulations;
         c. The PFMA needs to be amended for consistency with the Constitution; e.g., Section 28
            of the PFMA should reflect Section 305 of the Constitution which allows the national
            budget to be submitted to Parliament earlier than the first of December. Late
            submission of the budget to Parliament and late appropriation may delay project
            implementation.
         d. The regulations for the Audit Office Act 2009 need to be finalized (they are still in draft
            mode).

It is expected that the residual risk after amending the PFMA to address the concerns above would be
moderate.

21. Recommended implementation steps are as follows:

       a. Discuss findings with the country management team. It is important to share the
          assessment report with the country management team and discuss the findings; this
          approach helps in reaching consensus on next steps and in getting the country systems
          agenda on the radar screen of the country management team.

       b. Incorporate the findings of the assessment report in the ISN. The next ISN should
          consider the use of country FM systems as one of the key goals of Bank support to the
          country; this provides strong incentives to the Government and a clear message to task
          teams.

       c. Reach agreement with the authorities on cross-cutting issues and proposed mitigating
          measures. The country team should reach agreement with Government authorities on
          such cross-cutting issues as modalities for ensuring a timely and credible flow of funds
          for project-implementation and for timely approval of Bank-financed projects--including,
          general formats of periodic and annual financial reports to be generated using the
          Government accounting system, and other matters outlined in the table above. Such issues
          need to be tackled on a portfolio-wide basis rather than project-by-project.

       d. Focus Bank/donor support to the Government’s PFM reform program. It would be
          important for the team to review how the PFM reform program also supports the use-of-
          country-system agenda.

       e. Carry out supplementary FM assessments for pipeline investment projects. Despite
          apparent uniformity in structure and systems, ministries and departments might vary in
          their actual practices and capacities. For each project, therefore, it would be important to
          supplement the results of the assessment of central institutions and systems with an
          assessment of implementing ministries/institutions. Task teams may seek inputs from
          INT’s Preventive Services Unit in designing specific corruption-risk mitigation measures.


                                                                                             9|Page
       f. Ongoing monitoring of country fiduciary risks. As PFM diagnostics are updated (for
          example, when a repeat PEFA assessment is carried out), it will be good practice to
          update the fiduciary risk assessment report.




22. Supervision of Projects Using Country FM Systems. Use of country PFM systems would result
in streamlined supervision activities, focusing on sector-specific performance and issues. In
addition, it is expected that the current weaknesses in internal controls (including internal audit) and
external audit arrangements will require focused capacity-development support to reduce risk levels,
over time, to a more acceptable standard. The Bank’s implementation review and enhanced project-
implementation support will continue until such time as sufficient confidence is built into the
Government’s mechanism for monitoring and supervision of projects-- together with improved
independence and professionalism in audit oversights.




                                                                                            10 | P a g e
INTRODUCTION
Background

23.     The Bank’s Operational Policy (OP) 10.00, Investment Project Financing (paragraph 6 on
Financial Management), provides clear direction for the use of country systems by stating that, where
feasible, the Bank will use existing financial management (FM) arrangements that are an integral
part of the borrower’s institutions. The current strategy to use country systems is consistent with that
policy, and, indeed, integral to a number of policy initiatives that have been adopted within the Bank
and at the global level over the last few years; e.g., the Paris Declaration and the Accra Action
Agenda. The Bank’s Governance and Anti-Corruption (GAC) Strategy also states that the World
Bank Group (WBG) will strive to strengthen, rather than bypass, country systems.10 It is recognized
that better national institutions are a more effective and long-term solution to governance and
corruption challenges and to mitigating fiduciary risks for all public money-- including that provided
by the Bank. Although the Bank has made some progress in the use of country FM systems for
implementing Bank-supported projects, there is a need to accelerate and deepen efforts in this regard.

24. This work assumes additional significance in view of the targets specified in the Paris
Declaration to which the Bank is a signatory. As of 2010, the Paris Declaration aimed at a two-thirds
reduction in the percentage of aid to the public sector that does not use partner countries’ public
financial management (PFM) systems. The Accra Agenda for Action, adopted by donors and partner
countries in 2008, reiterates the importance of using country systems and exhorts donors to
accelerate and deepen that use and to explicitly state the reasons when not using the country system.
Given the considerable attention to reform and development of Public Financial Management (PFM)
systems in recent years, the Bank believes that the objective of encouraging use of country PFM
systems can now be successfully pursued. This study is to assess the feasibility of using country FM
systems for implementing Donor and Bank-financed projects in Zimbabwe.

Objective of the assessment
25. The objectives of this study are to: (a) assess fiduciary risks in using country FM systems in
full, or in part, for implementing Bank-financed investment projects in Zimbabwe; (b) identify any
risk mitigation measures required for such use; (c) agree how the Bank can assist the Government to
strengthen the aspects of the system which need improvement before they can be used; and, discuss
relevant implementation issues with the Government, and the Country and Sector teams, including
transition measures if any. Development Partners will also be better informed to take concrete
actions to meet the commitments made in the Accra Agenda for Action (AAA), especially: “We will
strengthen and use developing country systems to the maximum extent possible.? It is hoped that
this report will help the Government of Zimbabwe (GoZ) to harmonize donor practices similar to
that achieved by Vietnam-- as indicated in the report on ‘Harmonizing Donor Practices for Effective
Aid Delivery’, OECD (2003).




10
   “Country systems can be defined as a country’s normal institutional arrangements and processes for financial management?; s ee Making Greater Use
of Country Financial Management Systems: An Approach Note, Financial Management Sector Board, May 20, 2004. In practical terms country FM
systems means country’s national budget systems, accounting and reporting systems, internal cont rol and internal audit systems, treasury and funds
flow systems, and supreme audit institution.

                                                                                                                                   11 | P a g e
Rationale for Using Country FM Systems
26. There are several important reasons why the Bank should use country FM systems to implement
Donor and World Bank- financed projects:

 Scale up development impact. Capacity-building efforts within a Project Implementing Unit
   (PIU) often do not strengthen the ministry where the PIU is located, and using PIUs can also
   reduce the sustainability of results. Development assistance can have a broader impact, well
   beyond the activities it funds directly, if its work more systematically strengthens the country’s
   systems and practices themselves, and results in improved systems that can be used for all
   government expenditures.
 Increase country ownership. Client ownership is higher when projects use the systems already in
   place in the country. Using country systems also aligns the incentives of recipients and the
   Donors to strengthen these systems and closes the gap between policy and actual practice, thus
   helping to ensure sustainable development impact.
 Build capacity. The use of a country-system approach focuses attention on whether that system
  follows broadly accepted “good practices? and whether the country has the capacity to
  successfully implement and sustain implementation of such practices. Thus, it brings capacity-
  building to the forefront of the interactions among borrowers, the Bank, and other Development
  Partners who support the use of country systems, with immediate benefits at the project level. It
  can also form the basis of larger-scale programs to enhance the borrower’s institutional capacity
  over the longer term.
 Facilitate harmonization. Using country FM systems is one of the most appropriate ways to
  achieve harmonization among different donors.
 Increase cost-effectiveness. Using the country’s FM systems reduces transaction costs to the
   country—for example, the costs involved in creating new structures, often staffed with highly
   paid consultants.

Scope and Methodology
27.    The Bank team conducted a field visit from January 25 to February 7, 2015 to establish a
dialogue with stakeholders after carrying out a desk review of existing PFM systems in Zimbabwe.
During the field mission, interviews were conducted with officials from the MOFED11 , the Public
Service Commission, Salary Services Bureau, the Auditor-General, Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe,
Public Accounts Committee, Ministry of Health and Child Care, Ministry of Agriculture,
Mechanization and Irrigation Development, Ministry of Information Communication Technology,
Postal and Courier Services, the Acting Clerk of Parliament, the Chairpersons of the public accounts
committee and the Budget and finance committee, and all major international donors. Relevant
examples from other regions of the Bank were considered as part of the desk review. In addition, the
assessment drew on available sector work in the area of public financial management (PFM) in
Zimbabwe, particularly the Country Integrated Fiduciary Assessment in 2012; but, more importantly,
the team also considered new developments in PFM systems since 2012.



11
 the Accountant General Department; National Budget; Fiscal Policy, Advisory Services & Investment Facilitation,
Debt Management, Revenue, International Cooperation, Financial & Capital Markets; and Internal Audit

                                                                                                       12 | P a g e
28. This assessment uses a risk-based approach, consistent with Use of Country FM Systems
methodology and the approach used for regular FM assessments in the Africa region. The risk-based
approach does not provide a “go/no go? answer to the question of whether country FM systems can
be used; rather, it provides a ranking of the fiduciary risks to be managed as High, Substantial,
Moderate, or Low. The decision on using country systems in a specific lending project then rests
with the task team, guided by the country management team, after taking into account this fiduciary
risk-assessment and other factors-- such as the nature and complexity of the project and an
assessment of the implementing entities.

29.     This assessment focuses on the fiduciary risks in using Zimbabwe’s central government
institutions and systems, such as the Integrated Financial Management Information System (IFMIS),
the central treasury system and the central government accounting system, in Bank-financed projects.
It is, however, important to note that, despite apparent uniformity in structure and systems, there is
wide variation in actual practices and capacities across various ministries and departments. It will
therefore be important to supplement the results of this assessment with the fiduciary assessments of
implementing ministries and departments when considering a specific project.

30. This review does not cover systems used by local governments or state-owned enterprises
(Parastatals). However, the methodology and approach used in this review could be replicated at the
local government level. This review focuses on FM issues and excludes procurement-related issues.

Acknowledgments

31. The Practice Manager, Patricia Mc Kenzie (GGODR) and the Zimbabwe Country Management
Unit have authorized this study to assess the feasibility of more complete use of country FM systems
for implementing projects in Zimbabwe. It has been reviewed by Renaud Seligmann, Practice
Manager, (GGODR).

32. The team, comprising Daniel Yaw Domelevo (Senior Financial Management Specialist,
GGODR), Khuram Farooq (Senior Financial Management Specialist, GGODR), Srinivas Gurazada
(Senior Financial Management Specialist, GGODR), Trust Chamukuwa Chimaliro (Financial
Management Specialist, GGODR) MacDonald Nyazvigo (Senior Finance Assistance) and Rosa
Dube (Financial Management Specialist, GGODR), gratefully acknowledges the extensive
cooperation and assistance of officials of the Government of Zimbabwe (GoZ) and contributions
from colleagues in the Zimbabwe Country Team.




                                                                                          13 | P a g e
Overview of the Country and Public Financial Management
Country and Economic Background
     33.    Zimbabwe is a landlocked country sharing borders with South Africa, Mozambique,
     Botswana and Zambia. It is a low income country with a GDP of US$12.80 billion, Gross
     National Income per capita of US$820 and a population of 14.15 million (2013 estimates). The
     country has, over the past five years, emerged from nearly a decade of economic decline. Between
     1999 and 2008, the economy contracted by an estimated 45 percent and experienced
     hyperinflation due to disruptions caused by the land reform program and flawed macroeconomic
     policies. The country’s economy rebounded in 2009 as GDP grew by 25.2 percent between 2009
     and 2011 (a constant annual growth rate of 7.8 percent). GDP growth slowed down to 4.6 percent
     in 2012, 2.9 percent in 2013 and is forecast to reach 2.0 percent for 2014.12 The country remains
     vulnerable to shocks and adverse weather conditions. The 2013 poverty report, covering the
     period 2011-2012, revealed that 72.3 percent of Zimbabweans are poor.13 The report further
     reveals rural areas are poorer-- with 84.3percent of rural dwellers considered poor; 62.6percent of
     rural households considered poor; and 16.2percent of them living in extreme poverty. The social
     sector (especially health and education) is constrained by declining public financing, the
     introduction of informal fees and levies, an acute shortage of relevant personnel and logistics.

     34. In March 2013, Zimbabwe adopted a new Constitution. This was followed by general
     elections held on 31 July, 2013, which saw the re-election of the incumbent President, Robert
     Mugabe-- whose party, ZANU-PF also won a Parliamentary majority. The GoZ has prepared a
     five -year recovery program, the Zimbabwe Agenda for Sustainable Socio-Economic
     Transformation (Zim-Asset),14 which focuses on four strategic clusters: (i) Food Security and
     Nutrition; (ii) Social Services and Poverty Eradication; (iii) Infrastructure and Utilities; and, (iv)
     Value Addition and Beneficiation. In June 2013, Zimbabwe signed an IMF Staff-Monitored
     Program. This followed the lifting of IMF Board Technical Assistance (TA) restrictions in
     October 2012. Further, the first SMP was successfully concluded in late 2014 and a new fifteen-
     month SMP approved by IMF management in October 2014.

     35. Zimbabwe exhibits both the characteristics of a middle income country and those of a fragile
     state. The country is not a typical “fragile?. The country has high levels of backbone
     infrastructure and human capacity on the one hand, but it has lost institutional capacity, especially
     in core government functions to deliver services to citizens; reduced capacity in the private
     sector, and limited capacity to resolve political and economic challenges also cloud the country’s
     future. Owing to the degradation of its institutions, the country has difficulty managing political,
     economic, and external stresses that reignite political conflict and economic vulnerability. The
     World Bank and development partners have been supporting analytical work in public and private
     sectors of the economy while also providing technical assistance in the public sector. This
     provides a foundation for direct engagement with the public and private sectors as Zimbabwe

12
   http://data.worldbank.org/country/zimbabwe
13
    Zimbabwe National Statistics Agency (ZimStat)
14
   See paragraph 17 for the link between the ZIM ASSET and the project

                                                                                                   14 | P a g e
  continues to move toward re-engagement.

36. Prior to the onset of economic decline, the GoZ was in the process of strengthening the building
blocks of the PFM system, largely through the implementation of IFMIS in 1999. The IFMIS supports
the basic financial management functions for the Consolidated Revenue Fund (CRF). It runs on a
central database against a standard chart of accounts, with centralized oversight and control by the
Accountant General (AcG) and decentralized data input by line ministries. IFMIS brought about a fair
level of systemic budget control, accounting and reporting. It enabled the production of budget reports
in real time-- allowing timely dissemination of budget reports to all line ministries, and timely annual
financial statements. Commitments and payments were measured against budgets captured in the IFMIS.
The Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe (RBZ) provided banking services to Government and the bank accounts
were controlled by the Accountant General’s Department (AcG). This was a traditional system of a
main Exchequer Account, main Paymaster-general (PMG) Account and sub accounts for line ministries
which were managed on a Single Treasury Account basis. Bank reconciliations were done manually,
mainly for technical reasons at the RBZ. Procurements above a certain threshold were administered
through the State Procurement Board, since the enactment of the Procurement Act of 1999, which was
later supported by the Procurement Regulations in 2002. Payroll control was centrally handled by the
Salary Service Bureau. Data on domestic and external debt was recorded on the Debt Management and
Financial Analysis System which is not integrated with IFMIS.

37. Due to major political crises, the economic melt-down and the resultant hyperinflationary
environment during the years leading to 2009, the PFM system became dysfunctional. IFMIS was
replaced by manual authorization, payment, accounting and reporting procedures. In 2009, the first
National Budget Statement was presented in three currencies: USD, South African Rand (ZAR) and
Zimbabwe Dollar (ZWD). In January 2009, centralized measures to limit budget payments to actual
government revenues were implemented and quasi-fiscal operations of the RBZ were suspended.
During the early part of 2009, owing to limited revenue inflows, Government payments were principally
limited to its wage bills.

38. Owing to the relative economic stability that the GoZ had achieved in 2009, it focused on
reforming its public financial management systems again. The management of the PFM system is
mainly concentrated within MOFED-- with the exception of public procurement management which is
vested in the State Procurement Board. Within MOFED, the Permanent Secretary has overall
responsibility for public financial management (PFM) while the Principal Director has responsibility for
budget planning and execution and the AcG is responsible for the IFMIS, treasury duties, internal
controls, and production of timely and appropriate management and financial accounts. Within the
MDA, the Controlling Officers have overall responsibility for effective PFM and are assisted by the
Finance Directors.




                                                                                            15 | P a g e
Overview of Public Financial Management in the Country
39. The legal framework that governs management and control of public finances in Zimbabwe mainly
consists of the Constitution, the Public Finance Management Act 2009, the Audit Office Act 2009, the
Public Procurement Act 2001, and regulations issued by the Minister of Finance. The main legal
framework within which Public Financial Management (PFM) is exercised is the Public Finance
Management Act, 2009 (PFMA). The PFMA specifies the responsibilities of the Minister of MoFED
together with the powers he or she may delegate to senior officials. The Act also defines the
responsibilities of the Secretary and Paymaster-General (PS), the Accountant-General and Accounting
officers. The appointment and roles of Accountant-General, Internal Auditor and Audit Committees are
also set out in the Act. MOFED has the main responsibility for PFM.

40. Section 80 of the PFMA provides that the Public Service Commission may assist the Treasury in
carrying out its duties by appointing an officer of the Public Service as an internal auditor to any
ministry or any reporting unit of a ministry. The Internal Audit has no central unit or body that oversees
its functions across ministries. The internal audit is currently operational in all central government
entities but has not benefited from any significant capacity-building in the recent past. Training is
required in order to shift focus from pre-audit to a risk-based approach and systems audit. Adoption of
international auditing standards and methodologies are necessary to ensure improvement in internal
auditing. Internal audit reports do not follow a fixed plan and once completed they are distributed to the
audited entity, Auditor-General, Principal Secretary and audit committee. Generally, there are notable
weaknesses in follow-up on Unit recommendations by management and controlling officers.

41. The Constitution, Audit Office Act, and the PFMA define the responsibilities of the AG. The AG is
appointed by the President and approved by Parliament with the mandate to audit and report on accounts
and records of Government ministries, Parastatals and other statutory bodies-- including local
authorities. The AG undertakes financial and performance audits. The office budget is under MOFED
and its employees were part of civil service (recruited by Public Service commission) until the
operational applicability of the Audit Office Act, separating the AG and the staff from the public
service. In addition, the fact that the AG reports to Parliament through Ministers15 impacts on office
independence (in reference to the rules of INTOSAI – LIMA declaration).

Fiduciary Risk Assessment in Using Country FM Systems
       The Bank’s Operational Policy (OP), set out in OP 10.0 for Investment Project Financing,16
provides that the Borrower or Implementing Entity maintains-- or causes to be maintained-- financial
management arrangements that are acceptable to the Bank and that, as part of the overall arrangements
in place for implementing the project, provides reasonable assurance that the proceeds of the Bank Loan,
the proceeds of the Bank-guaranteed debt or Bank-guaranteed payments are used for the purposes for
which they are granted. Fiduciary risk-assessment, for the purpose of this report, covers five aspects of
the country FM system: (a) Budgeting, (b) Accounting and Financial Reporting, (c) Treasury
Management and Funds Flow, (d) Internal Controls and Internal Audit, and (e) Audit and Oversight

15
   The audit report on the consolidated financial statements goes through the Minister of Finance and that of ministries and agencies go through the Minister
responsible.
16
   Financial Management paragraph 6 of OP 10.00

                                                                                                                                            16 | P a g e
43. Fiduciary risks refer to risks that project funds will not be used for the intended purposes and will
not be used economically and efficiently. In the context of the use of country systems for implementing
Bank-supported projects, fiduciary risks need to be analyzed from the larger prism of use of budget
funds: funds are fungible, and Bank-provided funds are commingled with budget funds.

44. Consistent with definitions of FM arrangements and guidelines contained in the Bank’s Financial
Management Manual, operations of these elements in Zimbabwe’s PFM system are assessed in detail
below from a control risk17 perspective. Conclusions are drawn as to whether particular elements of the
PFM system can satisfactorily be used for projects if areas that have been recommended for
improvement are fully addressed so as to reduce the risks to a tolerable level acceptable to the Bank.

Planning and Budgeting
45. The risks associated with the use of a country’s national budget system are: (a) inadequate
appropriation of funds for the project; i.e., that the risks of annual budget appropriation are less than the
estimated annual project cost included in the project implementation plan; (b) delay in budget approval
and release-- the annual budget should be approved on time so that project procurement can be initiated
and implementation carried out in a timely manner; (c) diversion of project budget funds to other
activities; i.e., the risk that the amount appropriated to the project would be reallocated to other
projects/activities during the course of the year; and, (d) rigidity in budget classification leading to
difficulty in collating and monitoring project expenditures; i.e., budget classification system limitations
in enabling tracking of individual project expenditures. The current system used by donors has been
compared to the government system in the paragraphs that follow.

The current planning and budgeting system used by donors

46. The rating for the current systems used by donors is substantial. Development assistance in
Zimbabwe is largely outside the Government budget and the methodology varies from donor to donor.
Some donors use trust funds such as the Analytical Multi-Donor Trust Fund and the Zimbabwe
Reconstruction Fund (administered by the World Bank), the Zimbabwe Fund (administered by the
African Development Bank), and the Global Fund (administered by UNDP). The planning and
budgeting systems for these trust funds depend on the project. Some of the projects are Bank-executed
and others are recipient-executed. In most cases, the project amounts are disclosed in the budget
statement of the country-- but not in the appropriations or the budget estimates. Other development
assistance is provided directly by the donors-- either using a Non-Governmental Organization (NGO) or
using their internal procurement processes to procure the goods or services needed and delivering them
to the facilities where they are needed. The merit in the current systems is that donors are sure that their
funds are used for intended purposes. The greatest disadvantage of the current system is that it hinders
transparency and accountability because, in most cases, no one knows the total resource envelope
available to a ministry, department or agency. For instance, a donor may simply deliver a vehicle to a
ministry, a quantity of medical supplies to a hospital, textbooks to a school, or computers to a ministry
without disclosing the amounts delivered. Furthermore, the current system creates room for duplicating

17
  Control Risk – is the risk that the country’s financial management system is inadequate to ensure project funds are used economically and efficiently and
for the purpose intended Risk ratings: High, Substantial, Modest, or Low

                                                                                                                                           17 | P a g e
the efforts of the Government and other donors and, at the same time, leaves gaps. A huge percentage of
the funds do not go to the intended beneficiaries. This is because the NGO or the intermediaries being
used do not have sufficient oversight of the project or the fees; additionally, reimbursable expenses take
a huge percentage of the funds away from intended beneficiaries.

The planning and budgeting system used by government

 47. In the budget statement for 2014,18 the Minister of Finance reiterated the call to development
partners to channel development assistance through the budget in order to ensure effective planning,
monitoring and evaluation of utilization of public funds. However, it is necessary to evaluate fiduciary
risks associated with the full inclusion of projects in the budget planning and appropriation processes.
For example, what are the risks of annual budget appropriations being less than the estimated annual
project cost? Is the annual budget approved on time so that project procurement could be initiated and
implementation carried out in a timely manner? What are the chances that the approved project budget
appropriation would be reallocated to other projects/activities in the course of the year? Does the budget
classification system enable tracking of individual project expenditures?

Appropriation for the projects in the annual budget

48.      The risk that insufficient appropriation may be made for projects in the annual budget is
substantial. The budget process is clearly set out annually in the budget-call circulars. Budget ceilings
are determined by MOFED in accordance with policy and cognizant of resource-envelope constraints.
In order to implement the principles of prioritized results-based budgeting, the concept of a Pre-Budget
Strategy Paper was introduced in 2011. It provides ingredients for stakeholders to meaningfully input
into Budget formulation, procurement management and supportive measures. The Pre-Budget Strategy
Paper seeks to facilitate informed debate on key fiscal and other macro-economic policy issues. It also
assists in building national consensus over some of the priorities that should be addressed through the
Budget. After the Pre-Budget Strategy Paper, budget ceilings are usually communicated to line
ministries. Line ministries are responsible for the preparation of their budgets within the ceilings when
they submit their budget proposals to MOFED.

49.    During the period of CIFA, the budget did not serve as an effective instrument for ensuring
aggregate and allocative efficiency. With respect to risks for aggregate fiscal discipline, PIs 1 through 4
show low ratings. However, the actions taken to prevent spending exceeding receipts put an end to
unsustainably large fiscal deficits, which declined from 18.6 percent of GDP in 2000 to 3.2 percent in
2008. The 2011 Mid-Year Fiscal Policy Review (page 54 of the report) shows Central Government
revenues of 16.6 percent-- exceeding expenditures of 16.3 percent. The CIFA report indicates that the
budget has not served as an effective instrument for directing expenditures and allocating resources.
The situation has not changed very much over the years owing to a lack of fiscal space-- salary and
wage bills mobilizing nearly 80 percent of revenues. It is expected that residual risk would be moderate
should there be a significant increase in fiscal space.




18
     paragraph 627,

                                                                                               18 | P a g e
Budget transparency and comprehensiveness

50. The risk of not being transparent and comprehensive in the use of the budgeting system of the
country is substantial. The budget development process needs to improve effective allocations of
resources to priority functions and it needs to provide currently absent feedback on results achieved.
The budget classification is not fully consistent with GFS and COFOG standards. The results-based
budget, when fully implemented, will be supported by reporting performance results achieved, as well as
financial data. The roles of the Portfolio Committees of Parliament in scrutinizing the budget need to be
enhanced. Parliament should be expected to play a key role in the strategic allocation of budget
resources, especially in the current situation where the fiscal space is so confined. Zimbabwe is heavily
reliant on the performance of its Public Enterprises but there is insufficient transparency and
accountability from these State Owned Enterprises (SOE). Related fiscal risks should be monitored
more closely, which requires regular reporting.

51. PIs 11 and 12 show that there is the basis for a sound budget framework based on the multi-year
budget framework and the results-based budgeting system, which provides for monitoring and
evaluation of activities. This sound budget development process needs to be fully implemented and
followed through in the budget execution phase to assure that service delivery goals are met-- including
full implementation of the results-based budget-reporting processes.

52. Concerning risks for the revenue side of budget execution, the country has in place a good
framework for tax administration. There is, however, scope for improved systems to enhance revenue
management and improve revenue estimating in order to increase control over fiscal discipline. The key
challenge facing the Government is that of tax arrears. There is a relatively low rating performance in
some aspects of the payroll, procurement, and internal controls (including internal audits) and these need
to be improved so that service delivery intentions can be achieved.

53. The GoZ has issued a medium-term national development framework, the Zimbabwe Accelerated
Sustainable Social Economic Transformation (ZIM-ASSET October 2013- December 2018) that clearly
states medium-term policy objectives. The framework was developed within a macro-fiscal perspective
which outlines the priority areas of Government. At present, fiscal forecasts of revenue and expenditure
aggregates are prepared for three-year horizons, following the budget year, based on GFS standards.
MOFED publishes the fiscal forecasts and includes them in the budget documentation submitted to
Parliament. Residual risk is expected to be low if the fiscal reporting becomes fully compliant with GFS
classification.

Timely approval of the annual budget

54. The risk that the incorporation of the projects in the annual budget will lead to delays in the
projects’ implementation is moderate. According to the PFMA,19 the budget cannot be presented before
the House of Assembly before December 1, and not later than January 31. However, Section 305 of the
Constitution provides that this transmission should occur no later than January 31, with no limit on how
early it could be sent. Therefore, the PFMA needs to be amended to bring it in sync with the
Constitution. Budgets are usually submitted on time to Parliament20 and they are approved before the

19
     Section 28(1)
20
     2014 budget was presented on December 19, 2013 and that of 2015 was presented on November 27, 2014

                                                                                                          19 | P a g e
commencement of the financial year. On a positive note, recently there has been far greater scrutiny of
the budget than previously. Project implementation and related procurement activities may be delayed
when budgets are not approved on time by Parliament. Section 26 of the PFMA provides that should the
budget not be authorized in time, the President may authorize--in advance of the main Appropriation
Act for that year-- issuance from the Consolidated Revenue Fund of such money as may be necessary to
carry on the services of the Government. There is, therefore, a moderate risk that large-value
procurement could be delayed and may need to be compressed to fit into the remaining nine months of
the fiscal year. The GoZ currently holds an overwhelming majority in Parliament and the 2015 budget
has been passed on time. This is likely to be the case up to at least 2018 when the term of the current
Administration comes to an end. The perceived risk that delays in approving the budget may forestall
projects should therefore be moderate-- in recognition of the timely approval of the budget by the
Legislature in the years starting from 2011 to 2014. The residual risk after the mitigation measures are
effectuated is expected to be low.

Diversion of approved budget allocations

55. The risk of diversion of project funds is assessed as substantial. Comparing the composition of
aggregate expenditures out-turn to the original approved budget is an essential measure of budget
credibility. Large deviations would suggest significant distortions to the original policy objectives
captured in original budget estimates. The legal framework provides neither virement rules nor how re-
allocating budget resources could be done after approval. In other jurisdictions around the world, the
PFMA provides various levels of authority, as well as the limits within which virements can be
conducted. Use of funds meant for a particular activity for another purpose without complying with the
virement rules amounts to misapplication of funds. Such misapplication is a breach of financial
discipline-- or a misconduct for which disciplinary measures are typically defined in the PFMA. The
review concluded that the current Zimbabwean legal framework does not provide the assurance that
monies appropriated will be used for the intended purposes. That is because that framework does not
have provisions or rules on virements; hence, there is no procedure to be followed and no approvals
needed before funds approved for one activity, entity or project can be used for another. Section 78(n)
of the PFMA provides that the procedure for virement should be defined in regulations; but, to date, the
regulations are still in draft. Should the regulations be operationalized, they would not provide sufficient
assurance that funds will be used for the intended purposes because the regulations can be easily
changed by the Minister. In the event that funds are used for unintended purposes-- either because such
activities were not budgeted or the budget was inadequate, all that is required of the Minister of Finance
under section 307 (1) of the Constitution is that he or she introduce a bill to the National Assembly
seeking condonation of the unauthorized expenditure within 60 days after the unauthorized expenditure
has been made.

56. The PFMA should provide a limit to unauthorized expenditures and also the circumstances under
which such expenditures can be incurred. Without having a system in place to link the sources of funds
to activities, it is difficult to know whether funds have been used for the intended activities. To attend to
this, the Government intends to track donor funds through the use of a Grants Management Module.
The Government and UNDP have agreed to process three grants of the Global Fund through this module
in order to track the disbursements into Government accounts-- with associated expenditures. For in-
year budget amendments, there are clear rules in the Constitution (Section 305) and these are supported
by budget controls in the IFMIS. However, the cash-planning-system still needs improvements and it is

                                                                                                20 | P a g e
recommended that the Treasury or the AcG set up a cash-planning unit which will help the cash-
planning committee to perform better. It is expected that the residual risk will be moderate after
virement rules are enacted to disallow arbitrary reallocation of funds.

Adequacy of the budget classification system

57. The risk that the budget classification may not adequately cater to projects is substantial. The
budget classification is presented on a cash basis employing functional, sub-functional, program, sub-
program, economic and administrative classifications. The budget classification (as identified in the
budget documents and macro-fiscal tables) identifies only 4 main functions; however, the structure
could be mapped to a standard table consistent with the Classification of the Functions of Government
(COFOG) . The macro-fiscal tables and the chart of accounts are consistent with the budget structure
and hence the exercise of expenditure controls within that budget classification. The budget formulation
process includes top-down and bottom-up reconciliation at the administrative budget-head level, but not
within the functional and sub-functional classifications.

58. Segments in the IFMIS Chart of Accounts are depicted in Table 2 below. (Provision is made for
tracking of donor-funded transactions, with the feasible intent to channel, manage and report donor
funding through the Government’s own bank account configuration and financial management system.)

Table 2. Chart of Accounts format

       Box 3 – Chart of Accounts
       Segment 1                                      Segment 2 Segment3 Segment 4
       Responsibility                                 Performance Analysis Accounts
       Accountability                                 Related
                                                      Budget
       Sector Vote / Account Type Cost Prog / Donor / Objective/ District GFS        Item /
              Head /              Center Sub Project Target /              Classifi- Sub
              Dept.                      Prog          Activity            cation Item
       X      xxx    X              Xxx   Xxxx Xxxxx Xxxxxx            Xx         Xx       xxxx

59. Key fiduciary risks in the area of budgeting: the risks of inadequate budget appropriation for the
project, of delays in the annual budget-approval process, and of diversion of budget appropriations to
other activities—are, overall, assessed to be substantial. These risks stem from weaknesses in the legal
framework and processes. The degree of Government ownership for the project and importance of the
project in the sector strategy is critical in the appropriation process. Where strong linkages between the
project and the sector strategy ensure the Government’s strong commitment to the project objectives,
there is less likelihood that the project will receive inadequate appropriation in the annual budget. To
minimize some of the risks associated with the budgeting process, the team recommends amendments to
the PFMA to ensure that the project is part of the approved sectoral strategy and that virement rules are
clear. Roll-over of project funds could be used as a measure to ensure continuous project
implementation; and this needs to be further discussed with the GoZ. The residual risk after
implementing the mitigation measures is expected to be low.


                                                                                              21 | P a g e
Conclusion

60. The risk with the current system for planning and budgeting for projects is substantial and it is
substantial for UCS as discussed above. The current practice relies on Implementing Entities (IE). The
fees and reimbursable expenses for the IE in Zimbabwe are very high.21 Payments to IE are not illegal,
but they proportionately reduce the financing available for project activities. Since these amounts are
not reflected in the Ministry’s or Department’s Budget, there is lack of transparency in the total
resources available to a Ministry or Department. It is expected that, after implementing the mitigation
measures, the planning and budgeting system of Government could be used for donor projects since the
risk level would then be moderate.

Accounting and Reporting
61. The key fiduciary risks in the area of accounting and reporting are delays in recording transactions
in the accounting system, inability of the accounting system to prepare Interim Financial Reports (IFR)
in a format acceptable to the Bank within 45 days, or to produce annual Financial Statements using the
International Public Sector Accounting Standards in a format acceptable to the Bank. The current
system used by donors for accounting and reporting on their projects have been compared to the
Government system in the paragraphs that follow.

The current Accounting and Reporting system used by Donors

62. The risk-rating for the current accounting and reporting system used by donor projects is moderate.
The current accounting and reporting systems used for development assistance vary from donor to donor
and from project to project. The systems are designed to respond to the information and reporting needs
of the donors. The merits in using these systems are that the reporting is done on time and the standards
are acceptable to the donor. In some cases, it is the donor’s internal accounting and reporting system
that is used. The disadvantage is that the information or data from such accounting and reporting
systems are not compatible with that of Government, and, hence, cannot be consolidated. In other
words, the accounting standards, the chart of accounts, the accounting policies and classifications may
differ to the extent that they simply cannot be consolidated. In some cases, the accounting and reporting
systems are internal to the donor and no information is available to the Government.

The Accounting and Reporting system of the Government

63. Currently, recording and accounting for statutory funds and donor-funded projects are done outside
the IFMIS-enabled controls. Staff in the districts have to travel weekly, or twice a week, to process
payments against their budget releases; these expenditures could have been incurred much earlier. The
assessment concludes that this risk is substantial; even though the IFMIS is capable of producing the
IFRs and other ad hoc reports, the data may not be complete or reliable. The reporting requirement for
the AcG and the Controlling officers for funds appropriated from the Consolidated Revenue funds are
met. Section 35(12) of the PFMA requires the AcG within 3 months after the end of the financial year
to prepare and submit financial statements to Auditor-General for audit. Section 35(12) requires the

21
     The fees and reimbursable expenses range between twenty and forty percent

                                                                                             22 | P a g e
audited financial statements together with the reports of the Auditor-General to be presented to
Parliament not later than 30th June each year. The financial statements and reports do not include the
internally generated funds (statutory funds) of the ministries and donor funds for projects. The
assessment noted that work was far advanced towards capturing of the budget and spending of statutory
and donor funds on the IFMIS-- which is based on SAP. The system has been implemented in all line
ministries and 10 provincial areas. The system is underpinned by a centralized payment system, using
the Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe, to support the operation of the Consolidated Fund from which the
Budget is annually appropriated. This enables the preparation of financial statements for MDA as well
as the consolidated financial statements.

Delay in accounting for the transactions

64. The risk of delays in financial reporting for projects using the accounting system for Government is
substantial. The transactions of ministries at national and provincial levels operate on IFMIS and are
recorded on a timely basis, which indicates that the accounting records are reliable and up-to- date. The
transaction processing layer of the system is in place with a reasonable set of fiscal controls. All
payments out-of-appropriation funds undergo budget/warrant checks before a payment is authorized and
no payment is done outside the system. The system therefore provides a good source of controls and
also accurate as well as up-to-date information on Government finances. However, statutory and donor
funds do not use IFMIS and therefore are not subjected to the same controls that are embedded in
IFMIS. IFMIS does not extend to districts, and, consequently, districts are required to travel to their
respective provinces with documents in order to access the system. This is likely to result in delays in
processing transactions and negatively affect the comprehensiveness of financial reporting, especially
the monthly and quarterly reports. The relevant PEFA indicator on timeliness and regularity of account
reconciliations was last rated C. While the supporting dimension on timeliness of bank reconciliation
has been rated B, the dimension on regularity of reconciliation and clearance of suspense
accounts/advances was rated D owing to long outstanding backlog. There has been substantial
improvement in regularity and timeliness of bank reconciliation as well as advances/suspense accounts
and as such risk of delays in recording transactions due reconciliation back log is not substantial. There
is still substantial risk of delays in recording transactions from districts due to absence of IFMIS in those
areas. Additionally, non-capturing of statutory funds and donor funds makes reporting incomplete.
Capturing revenues and expenditures of statutory and donor funds and extending the IFMIS to the
districts will reduce residual risk to moderate.

Reliable and timely financial statements

65. The risk of project financial statements not being timely and reliable is substantial. If decision
makers do not have access to reliable and timely financial information for monitoring performance, the
fiduciary risk in the use of funds increases. IFMIS has contributed to issuance of monthly, quarterly and
annual reports on a timely basis. The CIFA 2012 report rated the indicator P1–25 on quality and
timeliness of annual financial statements a “D?, with dimension (i) for completeness of the financial
statements and dimension (ii) for timeliness of submission of the annual statements; for external audits
both rated “D?. However, substantial progress has been made on timeliness of financial reporting,
evidenced by submission of the 2013 report much earlier than in previous years. There is need to further
improve timeliness so that the audited accounts are submitted to Parliament not later than June 30-- in
accordance with the statute. While timeliness has improved, completeness may still be a problem given

                                                                                                23 | P a g e
the processing of statutory and donor funds outside IFMIS. It is recommended that the Government
include all funds in IFMIS and extend IFMIS to districts in order to improve on completeness and
timeliness of financial statements. In extending IFMIS to the Districts, it is recommended that one or
two points-of-presence (or data entry centers) are created per district, instead of extending the system to
individual district offices of ministries. It is expected that, if IFMIS is rolled out to all the Districts and
the Grant Management module is fully operational, residual risk would reduce to moderate.

Acceptable accounting standards for the preparation of financial statements

66. The risk that project financial statements may not be in compliance with internationally accepted
accounting standards is substantial. The GoZ applies the cash basis of accounting, recognizing
transactions as and when paid. This is done without applying an internationally recognized accounting
standard to prepare its financial statements-- such as the International Public Sector Accounting
Standards (IPSAS) Cash Standard. However, standard format templates are applied consistently (over
time). The Government intends to migrate to the IPSAS Cash Standard. IMF is working with
Government towards adoption of IPSAS cash-basis as a step towards full accrual accounting.
Recommendations have been made for a legal and institutional framework for implementation of the
standard. The timeframe for implementation has not yet been determined. To enhance reporting on
projects, the Bank should agree at the project preparation stage on the format of financial reports with
the Government and the Bank should request the establishment of project assets registers. In addition,
the Government is encouraged to accelerate implementation of IPSAS (starting as planned with cash
basis before moving to accrual). Government should initiate a process to start recording liabilities in
IFMIS. To strengthen accountability at the ministerial level, there is a need to enforce the provisions of
Section 32 of the PFMA-- which requires ministries to prepare annual financial statements that should
be audited. The residual risk is expected to be moderate after migrating to cash-based IPSAS.

Ability to track project-related transactions in the accounting system

67. The risk of not being able to track project-related transactions in the accounting system is
substantial. Weak accounting systems may make it difficult to track resource transfers to, and
expenditures of, actual service providers, increasing the probability that funds may not be used for the
intended purposes. The IFMIS configuration, user setup, chart of accounts and audit trails provide the
ability to control access, and to record and track project related transactions. IFMIS functionality has
the capability to incorporate additional codes that could meet donor resources’ information-processing
and reporting requirements. The Government intends setting up a National Development Fund into
which all donor funds will be paid before they are transferred into the designated account of the
respective projects. IFMIS has got a project module called the Grant Management Module. Three
grants of Global funds are being piloted in 2015 using this module. After the pilot program has been
assessed, the Government is planning to deploy this module to the line ministries to cater to detailed
information-processing for projects to satisfy diverse reporting requirements by both Government and
donors. The module will track receipts and uses of funds and report in accordance with donor and
government requirements. There should be special, or designated, accounts for each project. The
designated account should be configured in according to IFMIS for easy traceability of funds. The
residual risk of not tracking project transactions is moderate.

Integrity and reliability of data stored in the IFMIS system

                                                                                                  24 | P a g e
68. The risk of project data lacking integrity and reliability is substantial. The SAP-EC 6 Enhancement
Package Ehrd 7 software, functioning as the Government IFMIS, has all of the appropriate security
features. A security audit of the system was performed on the IFMIS in 2012 and it is time for a repeat
audit to assure that the system remains intact and is being used appropriately. Most organizations
implementing highly integrated systems undergo systems audits by systems security professionals to
continuously validate the robustness of the system controls. This is because automated financial
management systems are not only vulnerable to cyber-attacks, but can be manipulated if the system
controls are not robust; therefore the AG is encouraged to regularly repeat the security audit carried out
in 2013.

69. The existing control environment is encouraging, as password controls are reportedly strict and
adhered to; a firewall has been established and further strengthening of the firewall has been planned;
user roles and access controls are centrally monitored and managed as per rules; and master data
creation like vendor creation is centralized as per good practices. However, there are no interfaces with
the payroll system, revenue systems, nor debt management systems, and the budget is not integrated
with the budget execution in IFMIS-- the Government planning to implement the budget module for the
financial year 2016. It is recommended that: (i) both internal and external audit units are provided with
IT-specialized skills in order for them to perform security audits on IFMIS; (ii) IFMIS should be used in
accounting for all Government funds, including those from donors; (iii) IFMIS should be extended to
districts to enable timely and complete reporting from districts; (iv) the Government should move
quickly towards compliance with recognized accounting standards (cash-basis IPSAS and, later,
accrual-basis IPSAS); (v) the Government provide for virement in the PFMA; (vi) that Government
initiate a process to integrate the different systems that logically relate to accounting in IFMIS; (vii) that
Government migrate the payroll into the SAP-based HRMIS module for better integration with
establishment registers, controls and efficiency; and, (viii) the Budget Consolidation Module of the
IFMIS should be used for the Fiscal Year 2016 budget compilation. Residual risk is expected to be
moderate after robust system-audit arrangements are implemented.

Conclusion

70. The existing accounting and reporting system for donor projects is rated as moderate. Overall risk
of using IFMIS for accounting and reporting in respect to donor-funded projects has been assessed as
substantial. The existing system therefore provides a better assurance to donors, but the risk associated
with the Government systems would reduce to moderate and the accounting and reporting system of
Government could be used for donor projects if the recommended mitigation measures are successfully
applied.

Treasury management and Funds Flow
71. Treasury management and funds flow ensures that funds are available in a timely manner to
facilitate the implementation of a project. The current system used by donors for managing funds flow
for projects financed by them has been compared to the Government system in the paragraphs that
follow.

The current treasury management and funds flow used by donors

                                                                                                 25 | P a g e
72. The risk rating for the current system used by donors for treasury and funds flow is moderate.
Currently, almost all development assistance happens out of the treasury and funds flow system of the
Government. In other words, projects open their own accounts into which disbursements are made in
order to finance the activities of the project; or, donors simply pay for goods and services from their own
accounts. The merits are that funds are available on time and may be used for the intended purposes
(except for the huge percentages that usually go to the intermediaries). The disadvantage is that such
funds (especially when held by the donor) get re-allocated when the priorities of the donor changes. In
several cases, amounts promised by donors are not disbursed for other reasons not related to a project.
This includes changes in leadership at the donor’s headquarters, or at the local country office or at
political levels in the donor’s country or the recipient’s country.

The Country’s treasury management and funds flow

73. Despite controls within IFMIS to ensure cash and budget compliance for operational expenditures,
about eighty nine percent22 of the budget is executed outside IFMIS. The system is used for operational
expenditures of the Consolidated Revenue Fund which constitutes about 11percent of the total budget.
The following summary of the composition of the Budget FY2015 will clarify the issue:

                                   Table 3. Breakdown of 2015 Budget

                                 Expenditure Category                     Budget 2015             percent

                                 Employment Costs                                     3320 80.7

                                 Capital Expenditures                                  341 8.3
                                 Operations and maintenance                            454                11
                                 Total                                                4115 100

74.    A small increase in the wage bill has a negative impact on non-wage current expenditures, and
hence adversely affects the reliability of releases to line ministries. The ministries, therefore, are left to
finance operational expenditures largely from the statutory funds (retained earnings). A detailed
assessment is given below.

75. The Public Finance Act mandates that the Secretary and Paymaster General, responsible for the
Treasury, manage the Consolidated Revenue Fund. The Act also authorizes the Treasury operationalize
this fund through the establishment of banking accounts, called “Consolidated Revenue Funds
Accounts?, and one or more of its sub-accounts, including separate sub-accounts for the investment of
surplus funds. These accounts have been maintained at the Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe (RBZ). They
were transferred to the Commercial Bank of Zimbabwe in 2009 and back to RBZ in 2014. To ensure
that ministries spend within the cash available in these bank accounts, MOFED issues budget releases.
This is an authority to spend, followed by cash releases, which move funds from the main account to the
ministry account. The ministries incur expenditures against these budget releases, and approve payments
against the cash releases. Key risks discussed in this section pertain to consolidation of cash balances in
a single treasury account, extent of cash forecasting at the line ministries, the reliability of budget and
22
     The 89percent includes employment costs, donor projects and statutory fund expenditures none of which runs on the IFMIS

                                                                                                                               26 | P a g e
cash ceilings given to the ministries, and in-year changes to the budget of the ministries through
virements/re-allocations.




Consolidation of cash balances in the treasury single account (TSA)

76. Overall risk that consolidation of cash balances in the TSA may not include balances on project
accounts is moderate. The Government has two main accounts in the RBZ: the Exchequer Account or
Consolidated Revenue Fund (CRF) Account and Paymaster General (PMG) Account for revenues and
payments respectively. The sector ministries have sub-exchequer and sub-PMG accounts linked to the
main accounts at RBZ.23 These are zero-balance accounts. For ministry receipts—the non-retained
portion--, the cash in the sub-exchequer accounts of the ministry is swept back into the main exchequer
account electronically at the end of every day to remit the statutory funds. The consolidation of cash
balances in the main account is adequate. For the retained portion, ministries have commercial bank
accounts where the received funds are deposited. The Treasury has issued instructions recently to all the
ministries to move these accounts into the RBZ. This arrangement is valid for only two cities-- Harare
and Bulawayo, where RBZ has its branches. For the remaining districts, the commercial banks will
continue to hold bank accounts for the statutory funds. For payments, funds are transferred from the
main PMG account into the sub-PMG accounts of the ministries only when it is required to make final
payment to the vendors. The sub-PMG accounts are used for the operational/recurrent expenditures
only against the appropriations. The ministries have separate bank accounts for statutory funds and
donor-funded projects. These accounts are not linked accounts of the TSA and are maintained usually in
commercial banks. All Government payments are sent through the PayNet interface between the Globus
Core Banking Solution and IFMIS. The review team was informed that manual instructions and checks
are not permissible in this arrangement. In the event of system failure, which is rather rare, the Treasury
can issue written instructions to make certain payments. The team was also informed that the IT
security of this interface is adequate, as it has encryption, fire-wall and other necessary controls. E&Y
have carried out an evaluation of this interface as part of the external audit work for the RBZ, but the
report is not finalized yet.

77. Treasury has a service-level agreement with the RBZ. This is a basic agreement that defines the
service charges that the Government has to pay for using the banking system. The RBZ does not charge
or give interest to the Government as this issue is not prominent enough due to several cash constraints.
The RBZ raises Treasury Bills for short-term borrowing on the instructions of the Treasury. But the
scope of this operation is very limited. The currency of Government’s financial management,
accounting and fiscal reporting is the US dollar. All other currencies are acceptable, though, for
invoicing purpose. These are converted to the dollar rate of the day at the time of payment.

78. National Development Fund (NDF): The Government has created a National Development Fund
to channel donor money through a central fund, separate from the Government funds to avoid co-
mingling the two. The Treasury, at the time of the assessment, was yet to open the NDF accounts at the
RBZ. The residual value of the use of the Treasury system remains moderate.


23
     RBZ holds about fifty-eight bank accounts for ministries, Departments and Agencies

                                                                                               27 | P a g e
Cash Forecasts by the line ministries

79. The risk-rating that project-cash-forecasts may not be timely and reliable is moderate. The process
is well entrenched in the ministries. MOFED requires all line ministries to submit cash forecasts by
months for the following financial year immediately after budget approval. The line ministries, in
addition, are required to submit monthly cash forecasts/release requests, to reflect the adjustments in the
annual cash forecasts submitted at the start of the fiscal year. Before the 2015 Budget, these requests
only included planned current expenditures and commitments to be met from the appropriated funds.
The information on current expenditures to be met from the statutory funds and other sources was not
included. However, this practice has improved since FY2015 owing to the improved format of the Blue
Book. The Blue Book now includes information provided by MDA and donors, respectively, on
expenditures to be met from statutory funds and donor sources, respectively, in addition to the
appropriations. Therefore, the monthly release request from the ministries, following the Blue Book
format, now includes information on expenditures planned to be met from the appropriations, statutory
funds and other sources. Despite improved formats and contents of release requests, the reliability of
releases from MOFED has material weaknesses, as explained in the next paragraph. The residual value
of risk for this area is expected to be low.

Reliability of budget and cash ceilings

 80. The reliability of budget disbursements to projects is a substantial risk. The Government operates
on cash-based budgeting-- the estimates of expenditures being largely within the revenue forecasts. For
example, for the FY2015, 96percent of the expenditures are planned to be met from the projected
expenditures of $4.1 billion, against the projected revenue of $4.0 billion. This shortfall has resulted in
cash rationing during budget execution. The ZIMRA weekly informs the Budget Department of
MOFED on the cash collections. The Treasury, informed by the Cash Management Committee’s report,
issues budget releases to the line ministries after prioritizing non-discretionary expenditures like wages
and important programs/projects. These releases are done on a very ad-hoc basis, typically weekly or
so, against the requirement to release budget on a monthly basis. This is largely because of the very
limited space available for better cash planning of an overly bloated wage bill. The situation is
worsened by limited ability of the Government to raise short-term borrowing. Consequently, the line
ministries do not get releases as and when required. This has a knock-on effect that partially contributes
towards the build-up of arrears, especially for the ministries like Health that deliver essential services.
The ministries either meet their expenditure needs from the statutory funds or issue purchase orders to
the suppliers--for example, for the supply of essential medicines, by-passing IFMIS which enforces
commitment control. Vendor invoices associated with these purchase orders, after the supply of goods,
cannot be approved and paid, owing to non-availability of cash, leading to the build-up of arrears. A
significant portion of the arrears, though, are attributed to non-payment of utility bills, as a result of
over-consumption, under-budgeting and disputed billing.

81. On the recommendations of the Cash Committee, the AGD makes the budget releases in IFMIS.
These releases are issued at the spending-unit-cum-commitment item level. This release is the basis of
the commitment control, exercised at the time of purchase requisition. The spending units process their
commitments and payments in IFMIS on-line against these budget releases for the appropriated funds
only. The spending units of the government process their payments using IFMIS. The district level
spending units are not connected to IFMIS and therefore, process their expenditures in the system by

                                                                                               28 | P a g e
travelling to the nearest on-line location, typically ministry office in the provincial HQ, as explained
above. Around two thousand spending units of the twenty-six ministries are using the system at three
locations where the system has been rolled-out. Most of the rolled-out sites are located in buildings that
house multiple spending units. The accounting and procurement officers of these spending units and
departments are able to access the system and operationalize the transaction processing. The residual
risk is expected to be moderate.

Cash releases to projects

82. The risk that cash releases will not be on time to facilitate implementation of projects is substantial.
The Director Budget of the respective departments approves the final invoices and associated payments
in the system. Thereafter, the ministry head office conducts a payment run-- a batch processing of all
approved payments. This program calculates the total amount of approved payments to be paid out.
After the payment run, the AcGD is able to get the consolidated cash requirements of the line ministries
in IFMIS. Again, these requirements are prioritized against the available cash in the banks. The AcGD
then transfers the cash from the main PMG (Paymaster General) Account to the sub-PMG bank accounts
of the ministries. Upon receipt of the funds in their bank accounts, the ministries approve the final
payments to be made from these bank accounts to the vendor bank accounts directly. This is achieved
through interface of IFMIS with the Banking system through PayNet, through which detailed payment
instructions are sent to the RBZ for online transfer of funds to vendor bank accounts. There are no
treasuries to manage bank accounts at the districts to facilitate payments on behalf of MDAs delivering
services at the district level. These spending units depend upon the sector headquarters to process their
payments as explained above. Without district treasuries all payment runs are done at the national level.
Residual risk is expected to be moderate.

In-year changes to the budget

83. The risk that changes may be made to amounts allocated to projects is substantial. MOFED is
authorized to do the re-allocation or virements. Instructions are issued at the time of the budget-call
circular that no ministry is allowed to do virements. The virement rules are not spelled out in the draft
financial instructions. The re-allocations are done largely to accommodate priority expenditures like
wages. Owing to the large impact of wage increases, the budget changes drastically for operations and
maintenance. The following budget execution report for Budget FY2014, up to October, highlights the
point:

           Table 4. Budget Execution Report for January to October 2014

Exp. Category      Original   % of total    Target Exp    Actual Exp:    % of target:   %Overspend/Underspent
                   Budget      budget        Jan-Oct       Jan-Oct        Jan-Oct             Jan-Oct
Employment          2998        72.77          2351          2505.4         106.57              -6.57
Costs
Operations           615        14.93         502.9          324.1          64.45               35.55
Interest             15          0.36           15            38            253.33             -153.33
Capital              492        11.94         401.3          261.7          65.21               34.79
Expenditures
Total               4120                      3270.2         3129.2



                                                                                                 29 | P a g e
84. It is normal to make adjustments to the budget or effect budget transfers during the implementation
period. It is recommended that the procedure and the various levels of approval should be spelt out in
the PFMA. The key challenge to the treasury and cash-management system of the Government is the
lack of fiscal space. This can be ameliorated by increasing the revenue base of the economy but that
change cannot be immediate. What can be done immediately is to control expenditures—especially,
employment costs. If the GoZ takes advantage of the improved relationship with donors, there may be
an opportunity to put more money into the economy. The AFDB and the Global Fund have taken the
lead and the Zimbabwe Reconstruction Fund (ZIMREF) is in the pipeline. Though these monies may
not be rendered as budget support, they would free up resources that would have otherwise been
appropriated from the Consolidated Revenue Fund.

85. The donor-funded projects and statutory funds (the retained part) are not using IFMIS. This is
because, after reviving IFMIS 2009/10, time was needed to roll-out the system to the ministries in
Harare and later to the ten provinces. The appropriations from the Consolidated Revenue Fund have
been administered using IFMIS. The remitted part of the statutory funds has been recorded in IFMIS
using the sales and distribution (S&D)’ module of IFMIS. Using the S&D module was a consequence
of the grant-management module not existing on IFMIS. It has now been installed and the Ministry of
Health is planning to pilot their donor-funded projects using the Grants Management Module-- effective
March 2015.24 The review team was taken through: (1) the configuration of the grant management
module; (2) the process for capturing data; and, (3) the various levels of report generation. The module
allows capturing and tracking of expenditures at different levels, starting from the source or fund type,
the project, component, sub-component and activity level. Below the activity level, individual items of
expenditure can be shown or reported if there is a need to show them as annexes. The residual value is
expected to reduce to moderate after putting in place the virement rules.

Conclusion

86. Risk associated with current treasury management and funds flow arrangement for projects is
moderate, but that of the country system is substantial. There are very few mitigation measures
possible, as the key challenge facing the treasury and cash management system is inadequate fiscal
space. Improving internal controls and controlling the employment costs would help create some fiscal
space and reduce the risk of using country systems to moderate. Until that is achieved there is risk that
fund releases will not be made in time or the funds will be diverted. Therefore, we recommend that even
when the projects are shown on budget, they should still continue to hold their separate bank accounts,
outside the consolidated fund and National Development Fund (NDF). The respective ministry/project
authorities should have control over their project funds for entering commitments, and approving
invoices and payments. The donor disbursements into the bank accounts should be considered as the
release- the authority to spend. The IFMIS system should be configured to support this process. These
will mitigate the risk of co-mingling of donor funds with the NDF, until reasonable assurance has been
obtained that the operations of the NDF are stabilized and concerns of the donors have been addressed.
At the moderate level, the country’s treasury and cash management system could be used for donor
projects.


24
  . The scope of the pilot will be Global Fund from the UNDP for 3 grants only: Malaria, TB and administration grants to be dispersed into the bank
accounts controlled by the Ministry.

                                                                                                                                          30 | P a g e
Internal Controls and Audit
87. Internal controls are measures (such as reviews, checks and balances, methods and procedures)
instituted by an organization to: (1) conduct its business in an orderly and efficient manner; (2)
safeguard its assets and resources; (3) deter and detect errors, fraud, and theft; (4) ensure accuracy and
completeness of its accounting data; (5) produce reliable and timely financial and management
information; and, (6) ensure adherence to its policies and plans. The role of internal audit is to provide
independent assurance that an organization's risk management, governance and internal control
processes are operating effectively. The internal controls and audit currently used by projects funded by
donors are compared with those of the Government in the following paragraphs.


Internal control and audit used by donor projects

88. Risk rating for the internal control and auditing used by donor projects is moderate. A key
ingredient of ensuring checks and balances is to ensure there is division of labor in the management of
the project. The size of the team available to manage donor projects is usually small and the governance
system tends to be compromised in order to cut down on costs. It is usual to find one or two staffs
handling all the financial issues of a project; as well, transactions that should, naturally, be handled by
different persons get handled by one individual. Many of the projects do not have internal audit units or
staff to provide independent assurance that the project’s risk management, governance and internal
control processes are operating effectively. For projects being implemented through implementing
agents without internal audit units, the normal solution is to outsource the internal audit. Accounting
firms provide this assurance to management using international standards.

The internal controls and audit system of Government

89. The risk that the internal control system is unable to prevent or detect serious irregularities, misuse,
and inefficient use of public funds is high. An Internal Audit system is automatically triggered to
provide oversight in case of donor-funded projects that use other-country systems such as budgeting,
accounting and reporting, cash flow and procurement. It is therefore critical to have a strong Internal
Audit in terms of its independence, competence, quality control and ability to provide assurance to the
Government and donors through its audit products. The ability of internal audit within government to
assess with reasonable credibility, the cost-effectiveness of any project is limited. In its present
structure, depth and coverage, the internal audit provides very limited assurance on the internal oversight
to donors.

90. The AG’s report (FY ended 31 December, 2013) flags serious Governance challenges and weak
control systems in ministries which lead to unsupported payments, losses and fraudulent activities.
Record- keeping in a number of ministries is poor, and ministries and funds were not able to provide
assets-registers, cash books and ledgers for audit-- possibly because they are not maintained. Some
ministries did not reconcile differences between the Sub-Paymaster General Accounts and the PFM
System and, as such, the accuracy of the Appropriation Accounts of such ministries was not reliable.
Several ministries had unauthorized expenditures—derived from diverting money from Fund Accounts
to meet Appropriation Accounts. There were cases of flouting formal and informal tender procedures,
payments before supply of goods, and the purchase of overpriced goods and services.

                                                                                                31 | P a g e
91. The internal control systems in Government have substantial scope for improvements. The audit
opinion issued by the AG in 2014 is an indicator of the weak internal controls and prevalence of
irregularities. Ninety-four percent of ministries (thirty-one out of thirty-three) had material audit
findings, sixty-seven percent (twenty-two out of thirty-three) ministries were issued qualified audit
opinions on their Appropriation Accounts, and one ministry was issued a disclaimer of opinion. Even
out of the ten ministries that were given unqualified opinion, 8 of them had other material issues
reported. The risk is expected to be moderate after strengthening internal controls and internal audit.

Institutional arrangements for Internal Auditing

92. The institutional arrangement for internal audit is assessed as high risk. Section 80 of the PFM Act
identifies the role of internal auditor as one who will assist Treasury in carrying out its duties. However,
internal audit across the Government operates in silos in the ministries. There is no central agency
(Internal Audit Department or Head of Internal Audit) reporting to senior level functionaries in
MOFED. Internal audit units report to Permanent Secretaries of the concerned ministries and have
minimal linkages with the Ministry of Finance. The current system has the following limitations: (i)
internal audit’s independence is very limited, since the entire reporting mechanism is internal in each
line ministry; (ii) the Chief Internal Auditor (CIA) is a relatively junior-ranking official (Deputy
Director level), which is inappropriate considering the internal oversight expected to be exercised over
units headed by several senior officials-- including Directors and Principal Directors; (iii) the absence of
learning across sectors, sharing experiences and developing a common solution to cross-cutting issues;
(iv) the risk of development of vested interests owing to permanent location in the same ministry; and,
(v) the limited role of the Ministry of Finance to exercise financial oversight over ministries through
internal audit.

93. Either an Internal Audit Department or an office of Controller of Internal Audit should be created--
and the head of this organization should report to the Permanent Secretary. All Internal audits staff of
the ministries may, on a permanent basis, belong to this new organization and be posted to the ministries
on a rotational basis. While deputed to the ministries, the Chief Internal Auditors may report to the
Permanent Secretary of the ministry and also have a regular formal collaboration mechanism with the
Internal Audit Departments/Controller of Internal Audit. The Chief Internal Auditor in a ministry needs
to be at least of a rank equivalent to that of a Director to ensure adequate independence in his/her
exercise of oversight functions. This risk is expected to be moderate after these mitigation measures.

Financial independence

94. The risk rating for this is high. The Internal Audit function across the ministries faces severe
financial constraints. Most internal audit assignments involve travel costs, per diem’s, fuel and other
expenses. Treasury has not been able to provide funding and there is no system of formally earmarking
funds towards Internal Audit in most ministries. Internal audit does not feature high in the spending
priorities of ministries-- resulting in limited coverage of the audit universe. At the Ministry of
Agriculture, the team was informed that internal audit visits are usually funded by the auditee units. The
auditee units therefore decide the size of the team and duration of the assignments. This not only limits
the scope of the audits, but seriously affects the independence of the internal auditors. In some cases,
planned audits are cancelled because of a lack of funding.

                                                                                                32 | P a g e
95.     It is recommended that Government review the existing practices to ensure that reasonable
financial resources are available to Internal Audit in each ministry. It may be appropriate to introduce a
budget line-- earmarking funds towards internal audit at each ministry and the amount to be appropriated
should be based on annual risk-assessment and an audit-planning exercise. The residual risk is expected
to be moderate after the mitigation measures.



Audit Committees

96. The risk rating for this is substantial. Audit Committees prescribed under Section 84 of the PFM
Act are yet to become functional. The requirements of Audit Committees and the role envisaged under
the legislation are consistent with international best practices and local requirements. However, Audit
Committees have not been constituted in any of the ministries—except for the Ministry of Health. The
Ministry of Health, with external funding derived from its own initiative, has constituted an Audit
Committee but it does not include external members-- as envisaged in the PFMA. MOFED plans to
play a facilitator role after regulations to the PFMA are promulgated. Funding availability for the Audit
Committees is also an area of concern. It is recommended that Audit Committees be constituted in all
ministries in accordance with the PFMA and the Audit Office Act with the Ministry of Finance
facilitating the process by issuing directives and technical advice. Funding should be made available for
the committees to function well. The risk is expected to be moderate after these mitigation measures.

Staff skills & competencies

97. Risk rating is substantial for skills and competencies. There have been noteworthy positive steps in
the recent past to upgrade knowledge and skills of Internal Auditors by a donor-funded project. That
project is supporting forty Internal Auditors to study towards becoming qualified Certified Internal
Auditors (CIA). Other training initiatives, including the AFDB, supporting Risk-Based Audit training
for one hundred and thirty-six auditors are noteworthy. Nevertheless, the academic qualifications and
training to Internal Audit staff are quite limited considering the key role played by Internal Audit in the
accountability chain. The entry requirements at junior level require a higher diploma and most of the
learning is through on-the-job experience. There are very few auditors who would comply with the
International Audit Education Standards in the Internal Audit. There are over five hundred internal
auditors in the public service-- out of which a small fraction of auditors hold professional certifications
appropriate to their work.25 Despite the training, the capability to embark on large–scale, risk-based
audits is limited. Most auditors do not possess skills on Computer Assisted Audit Techniques (CAATs)
like ACL or IDEA, and most of the audit teams lack access to CAATs software. Therefore, their ability
to interrogate IFMIS is limited. The team was not provided with the basis for the number of internal
auditors in each ministry— a number which should be commensurate with the audit universe and risk
assessment. Generally, staff shortages are considered one of the bottlenecks for internal audit function.
It is recommended that action plans be developed to progressively strengthen the technical competencies
of internal auditors by professional certifications and training-- including training in IT tools. The
residual risk is expected to be moderate after these mitigation measures.


25
     less than 30 are members of the Chartered Institute of Secretaries, Chartered Accountants of Zimbabwe, and Certified Public Accountants

                                                                                                                                           33 | P a g e
Nature of audit and quality

98. The risk associated with the nature and quality of internal audit reports is substantial. Internal
Audit is exclusively focused on compliance audits and review of financial statements. It has a very
limited role in conducting a Performance Audit, an Information Technology audit or other modern
audits. Internal auditors take up ‘special audits’, based on complaints or suspected frauds; however,
they use the normal compliance audit techniques in these assignments instead of forensic auditing
techniques. There is no assurance of the consistency of audit quality across ministries or even within a
ministry. There are no auditing standards or quality processes in place to govern audit engagements.
There is a need to establish quality assurance practices for internal audit across the ministries. It is
recommended that standard practices on audit charter, audit manual and audit practices across ministries
be implemented. The risk is expected to be moderate after these mitigation measures.

Auditees’ response and follow up

99. Risk is substantial. There is no consistent pattern of the quality of responses from auditees to audit
observations. While some ministries/agencies do respond well, many others are insufficient in terms of
timeliness and quality of responses. Though the reports are shared with AcG, the AG and other
stakeholders, they are primarily dealt with by the Chief Internal Auditor and the head of the audited
entity. Internal Audit function in most of the ministries does not follow up on audit observations and
responses owing to financial constraints on conducting follow-up audits. The Ministry of Agriculture is
one of the exceptional ministries where follow-up audits are conducted; however, such practice is not
wide-spread. Internal audit in most ministries does not maintain a database of audit observations for
follow-up. It is recommended that appropriate standard practices across ministries be developed to
follow up on audit observations and responses. It is expected that after the implementation of the
mitigation measures above, the residual risk will be moderate.


Conclusion

100. The risk of the current system for internal controls and internal audit is moderate, and that of the
country system is high. Most of the project-implementing entities do not have internal audit units. The
function is outsourced to accounting firms which provide timely assurance to management on a
quarterly or semi-annual basis, depending on the needs of the project. This arrangement works well
because the auditing and reports are timely and done in accordance with international standards. Prior to
using the internal auditors in the public sector for donor projects, there is the need to implement the
mitigation measures so as to bring the risk level to moderate.


External Audit
101. An external audit is the examination and expression of opinion on the accounting system and the
financial statements prepared for a project as performed by an independent and qualified accountant
(practicing auditor), using international auditing standards and terms of reference usually agreed with
the Bank. The external auditing currently used is compared with that conducted by the AG in the
paragraphs below.

                                                                                              34 | P a g e
Current external auditing system for donor projects

102. The system currently used for external auditing of donor projects is rated moderate. For donor
projects that use implementing agents, the external auditing is done by private accounting firms which
have been licensed by the Public Accountants and Auditors Board to practice auditing in the country.
Most of these accounting firms have the appropriate competencies and the audits are done using
international auditing standards and terms of reference agreed with the World Bank if it is a World
Bank-financed project. The merit in using these firms is that reports are produced on a timely basis and
of good quality. They come along with experience and lessons learnt from many other projects that they
audit. The disadvantage they have is that their scope is limited to particular projects and they may not be
able to expand their scope to cover other institutions and related projects that may help them to have a
broader perspective of the risk environment within which the project operates. Unlike the AG, who has
access at all times to the documents as well as accounting systems and financial management
arrangements of the project, the private firms are not able to follow up on audit findings until the audit
of another year is due.

Using the office of the AG to audit donor projects

103. The risk that the Office of the Auditor General (OAG) would not be able to provide adequate
audit oversight for donor projects is moderate. With the strengthened institutional structure under the
Constitution, the PFMA and the Audit Office Act 2009, the AG is in a much stronger position than ever
before to provide quality audit products on donor-funded projects. The legal framework provides that
the Audit Office Commission oversees the appointments and HR practices in the Audit office. It
provides for Audit Committees in ministries to review accounts and internal and external audit findings
and provides for taking of corrective action. The scope of audit has been increased to cover local
bodies. The AG has embarked on modern audits, including Performance Audits and IT Audits. The AG
conducted a system audit of IFMIS in 2013, following IT-audit training. The institution benefitted from
collaboration with AFROSAI–E in training and institutional development. Manuals on Regularity Audit
and Performance Audit have been customized to meet Zimbabwe requirements and are in use. The AG
has sound practices in terms of a strategic audit plan, operational plan and risk-based audit practices to
govern activities. However, there is still significant scope for improvement in the AG’s organization.

Financial independence and budget constraints

104. The risk that financial independence and budget constraints will affect auditing of donor projects
is substantial. While the AG structurally reports to the Parliament and has adequate legal safeguards in
terms of security of tenure and power to do his or her work, the office has minimal financial
independence. Sec 26 of the Audit Office Act 2009, identifies several sources of funding for the OAG,
but the office primarily relies on budget allocations controlled by MOFED. There seems to be a very
weak correlation between the priorities of AG-- in terms of strategic plans and operational plans-- with
the availability of funding. The AG in her Report for the financial year ended on 31 December, 2013,
specifically reported that there are a number of outstanding (i.e., incomplete) audits (of provincial and
district stations) as a result of inadequate funding. A mere 47 stations were audited in that year covering
8 ministries (out of 33). The majority of expenses of Government were left outside of the audit
coverage-- primarily because of financial constraints. The AG does not have any field offices and all

                                                                                               35 | P a g e
audit engagements are centrally coordinated and operated. Further, the unpredictability of cash releases
from the Ministry of Finance places uncertainty in the field audits and audits have been
deferred/cancelled because of a lack of timely funding towards travel, per diem expenses and petrol. It
is recommended that appropriate measures to ensure the financial independence of the AG be
considered. This can be achieved through several means, including: a legal provision whereby the AG’s
financial requirements are not revised downwards-- except through Parliamentary discussions-- could be
a first step in the right direction; and, each project should provide a budget for the external audit until
such time as the AG would have enough financial resources to undertake the audits. The residual risk,
following these mitigations, is expected to be low.


Skills and competencies in the auditing of donor-funded projects

105. The skills and competencies available at the OAG to audit donor projects is rated moderate.
Historically, the AG has been auditing externally aided projects (donor-funded projects). Since 1998,
the AG has had a specialized division with trained staff for conducting such audits. During the past five
years, given the steep decrease in external assistance and donors preferring to use ring-fenced
arrangements or donor systems to route the funds to public offices in Zimbabwe, the role of the AG in
audit of donor-funded projects has declined. There are very few donor-funded projects with funds routed
through the Government financial systems. Donors prefer to appoint private firms of auditors partly
because of perceived challenges relating to independence, capacity, quality, timeliness, trust and
responsiveness to development partners’ needs. Further, the practice of not using the country budgeting,
treasury, banking and accounting systems for routing donor funds reduces the advantage that an AG
audit has over private audit in terms of the AG’s understanding of the expertise of various Government
offices, staff and practices. The AG presently carries out audit of five donor-funded projects under the
Ministry of Environment. The Ministry of Health has recently been tasked with leading several
components of the UNDP-supported health project and it was decided that the AG would audit the
project accounts relating to the Ministry of Health.

106. While significant progress has been made in recent years to train the teams, major challenges in
terms of skills and competencies remain. The AG’s office falls short in terms of both professionally
qualified staff and total audit staff when compared to the increasing responsibilities the organization is
expected to shoulder. Out of authorized establishment strength of 334, only 257 posts have been
operating as of 31 December, 2013. About 180 staff are engaged in actual audit functions. There are
very few qualified accounting professionals. In 2013, academic support programs in the organization
have facilitated training for various qualifications including ACCA (21), CPA (3), CISA (4) and CISM
(1). In the absence of incentives for qualified professionals, the risk of high staff turnover among
qualified professional staff is a major concern. The AG has to collaborate with the private sector and
outsource the audits of Parastatals and some of the ministries. The AG is not even in a position to
exercise quality control over the audits conducted by private firms of auditors for Parastatals. The AG
is, therefore, collaborating with the Public Accountants and Auditors Board to ensure quality review of
audits done on behalf of the AG by private auditing firms. The AG has been tasked by the new
Constitution with the responsibility of auditing local bodies, which would increase the requirement for
resources in the organization. It is recommended that the OAG be augmented with additional human
resources and training in various aspects of audit. The residual risk will remain moderate.



                                                                                               36 | P a g e
Timeliness and effectiveness

107. Risk rating is moderate. In order to increase the effectiveness and timeliness of country-level
external audit arrangements, Government needs to address the challenges of delays in the finalization of
accounts and in responding to audit queries. Audit reports for the financial year ended December 31,
2013, were signed by the AG on 31 October, 2014. While this is a marked improvement when
compared to the previous year (when the report was signed only in December 2013), it significantly falls
short of the legal requirement of audit report presentation within six months of the end of the fiscal year
(requirement of Section 10 of the Audit Office Act). There are several audit observations in the audit
report to which management did not respond and many others where corrective action was not taken,
thereby affecting the effectiveness of the audit process. The Audit Office Act provides that the annual
audit reports on the consolidated financial statement will be tabled in Parliament by MOFED. Similarly,
audit reports on line ministries’ financial statements and performance audit reports are to be tabled in
Parliament by the respective ministries. These provisions cause delays in tabling of audit reports in
Parliament and affects the independence of the AG as he or she has to depend on the “Auditee?
Ministers for tabling of audit reports in Parliament. Follow-up on audit observations is limited and
delayed, as most of the follow-ups take place in the subsequent audit of the same entity. There is no
centralized database to monitor and review the progress on action taken on audit observations and draw
common themes for Government-level control improvements. The residual risk is expected to be
moderate

Leveraging technology

108. This risk is moderate. The office of the AG seeks to optimize the scarce hardware and software
available and to leverage such in order to improve audit quality. The OAG made significant progress on
IT-auditing and conducted an audit of IFMIS. However, there is substantial scope for improvements.
The OAG uses Interactive Data Extraction and Analysis (IDEA) and Audit Common Language (ACL)
applications as Computer Assisted Audit Techniques ( CAATs) for data analysis. The licenses are few
and the means for audit staff to upgrade their skills in automated tools are limited. The residual risk is
expected to remain moderate.

Conclusion

109. Risk associated with the current arrangement where independent private audit firms are used to
audit donor projects is moderate. The effectiveness of the OAG is also moderate, but with the
comparative advantage of a harmonized approach in auditing, reporting and follow-ups. The AG is
better placed to ensure that audit observations are addressed by the auditees. The AG has a broader
mandate and a better understanding of the auditing environment. It is recommended that the OAG will
be used for donor projects.

Payroll and Other factors affecting fiduciary risks
110. A number of IT systems are not linked to IFMIS, but their transactions are manually captured in
it. These include the Debt & Aid Management System, the Human Resource Management System
(including the payroll), and Revenue Authority. The current payroll system is not sustainable, as this
system (hardware, network and software) has been in place since 1994, with decreasing opportunities for

                                                                                               37 | P a g e
maintenance in recent years; thus, system failure poses a genuine risk. Manual integration increases the
risk of data manipulation and in the case of Zimbabwe, staff costs (payroll and pensions) constitute
about 80 percent26 of government expenditures. The payroll of the civil service runs on in-house
software—even though the Government has adopted SAP as its overall platform. The establishment
registers are being maintained manually and not integrated with the payroll. The Government plans to
implement HRMIS, including the establishment register, on the SAP platform by 2016, but it would be
costly and complicated to maintain establishment register in SAP and run payroll on a custom-developed
system. The payroll should be integrated with the establishment registers in the HRMIS through the use
of the same SAP platform to achieve better controls and enhanced sustainability. It is good to note that
apart from the better controls and enhanced sustainability, IFMIS, E-procurement and a number of
Parastatals,27 and private companies in Zimbabwe are currently using the SAP platform successfully.
This makes it imperative for the payroll module in the SAP to be used-- as the skills exist in the country
and within Government to manage the payroll in a better-controlled environment. The SAP platform
provides the opportunity for better payroll management; commitment controls, and revenue mobilization
from the PAYE. The team was also informed that the Public Service Commission is going to conduct a
payroll and personnel audit to address any challenges that may exist regarding the payroll; it will also
conduct a head-count to eliminate names that are wrongfully on the payroll. It is recommended that the
audit should be outsourced and done by an entity independent of the public service. The exercise may
be guided by lessons learnt from the payroll and personnel system audit funded by the World Bank in
2009, as well as similar exercises within the African region.

Public-Private Partnership through Contracted audits

111. Given the limitations in staff strength and skills available to the OAG, and the excessive wage
and salary bills, it will be difficult (at least in the interim) for the AG to recruit the number of staff
needed with the prerequisite skills (given the low levels of remuneration). The solution could be to use
Section 9 (1) of the Audit Office Act which empowers the AG, by notice in the Gazette, to appoint a
person (auditing firms) registered as a public auditor-- in terms of the Public Accountants and Auditors
Act-- to inspect, examine and audit accounts, records or stores as required by the Act-- or by any other
enactment, to be inspected, examined or audited by the Comptroller and AG-- and report the results.
This is in line with section 32 of the PFMA which states that the AG-- or any independent auditor-- shall
audit the annual financial statements and return the audited statements to the accounting officer within
sixty days of receipt thereof.

112. The Role of Parliament in Providing Oversight in Public Financial Management Public

Under the 2013 Constitution of Zimbabwe, Parliament has an oversight responsibility for PFM. Section
299 requires that Parliament must monitor and oversee expenditures by the State and all commissions
and institutions and agencies of government at every level-- including statutory authorities, government–
controlled entities, provincial and metropolitan councils and local authorities-- in order to ensure
(among other things) that all revenue is accounted for and all expenditures have been properly incurred.
The major challenge facing Parliament is inadequate funding from the Executive Branch. In 2014, the

2626
     The payroll if the Civil Service is about 50%. The other 30% covers pension and payroll cost for the Judicial Service, the Security services, Universities
27
 including the National Railways of Zimbabwe, Air Zimbabwe, TelOne, Grain Marketing Board, Zimbabwe Electricity Supply Agency and Zimbabwe
Minerals Development Corporation



                                                                                                                                             38 | P a g e
World Bank, using the multi-donor trust fund, trained the public accounts committee (PAC) and their
secretariat staff in PFM and equipped them with skills for identifying key issues in the Audit Reports.
As a result of the support provided to finance long sessions of the PAC, 32 audit reports were considered
within the 1st Session of the Eighth Parliament-- which ended on Thursday, 25th September, 2014;
previously, the average number of audit reports considered in a session was five. It is recommended that
the Parliamentary Committees, especially the Budget and Economic Management Committee and PAC
(including their secretariats) will be capacitated to discharge their oversight responsibilities, thus
ensuring that funds are used for intended purposes and accounted for in a timely and reliable manner.



Way Forward
113. It is recommended that the use of country system should be on an incremental basis. The use of
the OAG to audit donor projects should be the beginning point. The budgeting system can continue at
the current level where project expenses are incorporated into the national budget. The budget
execution, accounting and reporting, treasury and cash management systems of Government could be
used for projects after a considerable increase in the internal control system (especially internal audit).
The security and integrity of IFMIS can be guaranteed through continuous system-security audit. A
repeat of the security audit by SAP every two years, complimented by that of the AG (on an annual
basis) is a pre-requite for the use of country systems.

114. The Government is encouraged to implement mitigation measures, as stated in the report, to reduce
the risk of using the country’s financial management system, and to enhance reliability. There will be
significant savings and cost-effectiveness in moving from donor systems and ring-fenced
implementation arrangements to a focus on improving the capacity of ministries and central government
systems. Donors are also encouraged to help improve the PFM system in order to ensure efficiency for
all GoZ expenditures and that of donor funds. Furthermore, a country’s ownership of development
programs and projects is stronger when its own systems, rather than externally imposed systems, are
used; such usage will incentivize the GoZ to focus on strengthening PFM systems. Longer term, there
will be significant scope for reducing the costs of aid-- both the costs for countries to do business with
the donors and the donors’ own costs of project preparation if the GoZ can use its own systems and
procedures.




                                                                                               39 | P a g e
                                              Annex 1: Summary of Risk Assessment

Risk Area           Key Risk Element                 Current system   Use of country   Proposed Mitigation                                Residual Risk
                                                                      system
                    Insufficient appropriation                                         Ensure that financing agreements bind the          Moderate
                    may be made for projects in      Low              Substantial      GoZ to full appropriation of loan proceeds
Planning and        the annual budget                                                  over the life of the project.
budgeting                                                                              Include Donor-funded projects-- agreed to by
                                                                                       management-- in the budget at the (individual)
                                                                                       project level.


                    Not being transparent and        Substantial      Substantial      Mandatory requirement for MDA to provide           Low
                    comprehensive in the use of                                        estimates of all planned projects.
                    public funds                                                        Roll-out Grant Management Module to all
                                                                                       ministries to facilitate budgeting, accounting
                                                                                       and monitoring of project costs.


                                                                                       Procedures for project implementation need to
                    Project implementation may       Moderate         Moderate         be agreed with MOFED, until such time that
                    be delayed as a result of late                                     the project can be included in the estimates for   Low
                    appropriation                                                      Parliamentary approval. Procedures can be
                                                                                       treated in terms of effectiveness or
                                                                                       disbursement conditions.


                                                                                       The PFMA should provide rules for virement
                                                                                       and prohibit use of project funds for other
                    Diversion of project funds       Low              Substantial      purposes. Financing agreements should have         Moderate
                                                                                       a covenant prohibiting use of project funds for
                                                                                       other purposes.


                                                                                       Revise chart of accounts to cater to projects.
                                                                                       Roll-out the Grant Management Module.
                    The budget classification
                    may not adequately cater for     High             Substantial
                    projects                                                                                                              Low



Overall Risk for Planning and Budgeting              Moderate         Substantial                                                         Low
                    Delays in financial reporting    Moderate         Substantial      Define project-reporting requirements directly     Low
Accounting          for projects                                                       in IFMIS.
and                 Unauthorized access and          Moderate         Substantial      Set up in IFMIS specific bank accounts,            Moderate


                                                                                                                                40 | P a g e
Risk Area          Key Risk Element                  Current system   Use of country   Proposed Mitigation                                Residual Risk
                                                                      system
Reporting          unreliable data                                                     expenditure accounts, and reconciliation
                                                                                       controls for each project.
                   Project financial statements
                   not compliant with
                   international standards           Moderate         Substantial      Agree standards and format of the project for      Moderate
                                                                                       annual financial statements.
                                                                                       Fully implement IPSAS on IFMIS.
                                                                                       Implementation of the Project Management
                                                                                       and the Business Intelligence Modules of SAP
                                                                                       and roll-out to in all ministries.
                   Difficulty in tracking
                   project- related transactions                                       Revise Chart of Accounts and roll-out Grant
                   in the accounting system          Moderate         Substantial      Management Module to all MDA to allow for          Moderate
                                                                                       easy recording and reporting of project-related
                                                                                       expenses.
                   Project data lacking integrity                                                                                         Moderate
                   and reliability                                                     Tighten access controls, ensure segregation of
                                                     Moderate         Substantial      duties and conduct regular system audit.
                                                                                                                                          Moderate
                   Weak audit trail                                                    Improve record keeping and filing.

                                                     Substantial      Moderate
                                                                                                                                          Moderate
Overall Risk for Accounting and Reporting            Moderate         Substantial                                                         Moderate
Treasury and       Consolidation of project                                            The designated account for the project should
                   cash balances in the treasury     High             Moderate         be defined in IFMIS.                               Moderate
funds flow         single account

                   Project cash forecasts may        Moderate         Moderate
                   not be timely and reliable                                          Financing agreement should provide latest          Low
                                                                                       dates for submission of procurement and work
                                                                                       plans.

                   The reliability of budget         Moderate         Substantial
                   disbursements to projects                                           Establish authority, capacity and process to       Moderate
                                                                                       ensure timely submission of withdrawal
                                                                                       applications.


                   In-year changes to the
                   budget                            Low              Substantial      Prohibit in-year changes in the financing          Moderate
                                                                                       agreement and PFMA to provide guidance.

                   Inability of Treasury and
                   RBZ to support banking            Low              Moderate         Specific project bank accounts need to be
                   needs of projects                                                   opened and incorporated into IFMIS.                Low

                   The likelihood of losing
                   project funds if they are                                           Project funds should be transferred to sub-
                   commingled or unutilized at                                         control account of the Pay Master General
                   the end of the fiscal year; or,   Moderate         Moderate         Account and allowed to automatically roll
                   lack of access to project                                           over to the next year. This can be stipulated in   Moderate
                   funds over year-ends                                                the financing agreement.

Overall rating for Treasury and Funds Flow           Moderate         Moderate                                                            Moderate
Internal            Ineffective control              Substantial      High             Normal project expenditure procedures and          Moderate
                    framework and procedures or                                        controls prescribed in the PFM Act,
Control and         weak compliance with                                               regulations and other instructions will be


                                                                                                                               41 | P a g e
Risk Area          Key Risk Element                 Current system   Use of country   Proposed Mitigation                                Residual Risk
                                                                     system
Internal           internal controls                                                  applied to the project, subject to compliance to
                                                                                      procurement arrangements agreed in the
Audit              .                                                                  Financing Agreement. The development and
                                                                                      maintenance of fixed asset registers for
                                                                                      projects needs to be agreed.

                   Institutional arrangements       Moderate         High             Agree specific internal audit requirements for     Moderate
                   for Internal Auditing                                              each project, which could include scope,
                                                                                      approach and reporting requirements.

                   Financial independence           Substantial      Substantial      There is a need to revise the legal framework      Moderate
                                                                                      to provide for independence and better
                                                                                      institutional arrangement.
                   Audit Committees
                                                    Moderate         Substantial      The ministry where the project resides should      Moderate
                                                                                      set up the committee-- an important
                                                                                      effectiveness condition.
                   Staff skills, competencies                                                                                            Moderate
                   and nature of audit and          Substantial      Substantial      Need to train and equip Internal auditors;
                   quality                                                            otherwise, outsource the audit.

                   Auditees’ response and                                             Need to agree at the initiation of projects that
                   follow up                                                          without resolving audit queries, the Bank may
                                                                                      suspend disbursement.
                   Payroll system has limited       Low              High             Payroll should be moved onto the SAP               Substantive
                   controls, the cost is huge and                                     together with the HRMS and the
                   disturbs budget                                                    establishment controls.
                   implementation. The limited
                   fiscal space created by the
                   payroll poses the danger of
                   diverting project funds.
                   Internal Audit is unable to      Moderate         Substantial :     Establish the office of Comptroller of           Moderate
                   provide the assurance of                                             Internal Audit, reporting to appropriate
                   robustness of, and                                                   senior level officer in Ministry of Finance.
                   compliance with, controls                                           Provide internal audit with appropriate
                                                                                        capacity-development support.
                                                                                       Establish Audit Committees-- as envisaged
                                                                                        by the law.
                                                                                       Ensure that Chief Internal Auditor of MDA
                                                                                        is of a rank consistent with the role
                                                                                        envisaged.
                                                                                       Strengthen Internal Auditby providing a
                                                                                        legal mandate for the unit, developing an
                                                                                        internal audit charter, and applying
                                                                                        international internal auditing standards
                                                                                        which focus on risk and systems audit.
Overall rating for Internal Control and Audit       Moderate         High                                                                Moderate




                                                                                                                               42 | P a g e
Risk Area           Key Risk Element                 Current system   Use of country   Proposed Mitigation                              Residual Risk
                                                                      system
External            Timelines: OAG is required       Moderate         Moderate:          During the project negotiation, agree on      Moderate
                    to submit financial                                                   audit terms of reference, specifying the
Audit and           statements to the Legislature                                         approach, type of audit opinion and timing
oversight           within six months after fiscal                                        to submit the report.
                    year end. OAG is required                                            Operationalize the Regulations to the Audit
                    to submit financial              Moderate         Moderate            Office Act.                                   Moderate
                    statements of projects to the                                        Revise strategic plan to include
                    World Bank or Donor within                                            collaboration with private audit firms.
                    six months after fiscal year                                         Undertake capacity-building reforms to
                    end.                                                                  enhance compliance with INTOSAI
                                                                                          Standards.
                    OAG’s limitations in             Moderate         Substantial                                                       Moderate
                    competencies and
                    operational & financial
                    independence
                                                                                       Addressing audit observations should be made
                    Follow up of audit               Substantial      Moderate         a disbursement condition.                        Moderate
                    observations
                                                                                       FM and procurement staff will offer training
                    Competence in audit of           Moderate         Moderate         regarding the FM and procurement                 Low
                    donor-funded projects                                              arrangements for Bank-funded projects.

                                                                                       Funding should be provided under the project
                                                                                       for external audit.
                                                     Moderate         Substantial
                    Financial independence and                                                                                          Low
                    budget constraints                                                 The capacity-building envisaged in the
                                                                                       strategic plan should be carried out.
                                                     Moderate         Moderate
                    Skills and competencies                                            The skills-training should be complemented       Low
                                                                                       by audit assisted systems.
                                                                                                                                        Moderate
                                                     Substantial      Moderate
                    Leveraging technology


Overall Risk for External Audit Oversight            Moderate         Moderate                                                          Moderate

Staffing            Low number of suitably           Moderate         Substantial      Agree staffing skills and requirements to        Moderate
                    qualified public finance                                           manage Donor/Bank-funded operations during
                    management and auditing                                            project preparation.
                    staff
                                                                                       Design and implement a long-term,
                                                                                       comprehensive capacity-development strategy
                                                                                       to develop more professional PFM cadre
                                                                                       (planners, budget officers, accountants,
                                                                                       statisticians, monitoring and evaluation
                                                                                       officers).
Overall Risk for Staffing                            Moderate         Substantial                                                       Moderate

Legal               Weak legal framework may                                           Need to provide in the PFMA the rules for        Moderate
                    provide room for funds to be     Moderate         Substantial      virement.
framework           used for unintended purposes                                       Operationalize the regulations for the PFMA
                                                                                       and the Audit Office Act.
                    The draft PFM regulations                                          Financing agreement should cover gaps in the
                    and Draft Regulations for the                                      legal framework.
                    Audit Office Act not
                    operationalized
Overall Risk in the legal framework                  Moderate         Substantial                                                       Moderate



                                                                                                                                43 | P a g e
Annex 2.a: Summary of PEFA scores for Zimbabwe-2012
                              Indicator                                   Rating
A: PFM Out-turns
1. Aggregate expenditure out-turn compared to original approved            NR
    budget
2. Composition of expenditure out-turn compared to original approved        D
    budget
3. Aggregate revenue out-turn compared to original approved budget         D
4. Stock and monitoring of expenditure payment arrears                     C+

B: Key Cross-Cutting Issues
5. Classification of the budget                                             C
6. Comprehensiveness of information included in budget                      B
    documentation
7. Extent of unreported government operations                              D+
8. Transparency of intergovernmental fiscal relations                      NA
9. Oversight of aggregate fiscal risk from other public sector entities     C
10. Public access to key fiscal information                                 C

C: Budget Cycle
11. Orderliness and participation in the annual budget process              B
12. Multi-year perspective in fiscal planning, expenditure policy, and      C
    budgeting
13. Transparency of taxpayer obligations and liabilities                   B
14. Effectiveness of measures for taxpayer registration and tax            C+
    assessment
15. Effectiveness in collection of tax payments                            D+
16. Predictability in the availability of funds for commitment of          D+
    expenditures
17. Recording and management of cash balances, debt and guarantees         B
18. Effectiveness of payroll controls                                      C+
19. Competition, value for money and controls in procurement               D+
20. Effectiveness of internal controls for non-salary expenditure          C+
21. Effectiveness of internal audit                                        C+
22. Timeliness and regularity of accounts reconciliation                   C
23. Availability of information on resources received by service           D
    delivery units
24. Quality and timeliness of in-year budget reports                       A
25. Quality and timeliness of annual financial statements                  D
26. Scope, nature, and follow-up of external audit                         C+
27. Legislative scrutiny of the annual budget law                          C+
28. Legislative scrutiny of external audit reports                         D+

D: Donor Practices
D-1 Predictability of direct budget support                                NA
D-2 Reporting on project/ program aid                                       A
D-3 Proportion of aid that is managed by use of national procedures         D

                                                                                   44 | P a g e
Annex 2b: PEFA SCORES IN 2013




Annex 3 – Logical framework for channeling investment projects through country FM systems




                                                                                        45 | P a g e
Annex 4: Risk Concepts

Risk             Description
Inherent Risk    Inherent risk arises from the environment in which the project is located. It is the risk
                 that the project financial management system does not operate as intended due to such
                 factors as country governance, environment, rules, and regulations. Inherent risk
                 comprises three elements:
                      Country-level risk. This rating is determined at a portfolio level, for each fiscal
                         year, and is the same for all projects for which a risk assessment is prepared
                         during the same fiscal year.
                      Entity-level risk. When entities have implemented Bank-financed operations in
                         the past, the Bank may determine this risk using internal sources, such as
                         Implementation Completion and Results Reports and Country Portfolio
                         Performance Reviews. If the entity is new to implementing Bank-financed
                         operations, a risk assessment of the entity is undertaken.
                      Project-level risk. This risk is project-specific and is assessed for each project.
Control Risk     The risk that the project’s financial management system is inadequate to ensure project
                 funds are used economically and efficiently, and for the purpose intended. Control risk
                 is measured for all six elements of financial management: budgeting, accounting,
                 internal control, funds flow, financial reporting, and auditing.
Detection        The risk that a material misuse of loan proceeds takes place and is not detected.
Risk             Detection risk is lowered by: (1) capacity-strengthening measures for the weaknesses
                 identified as posing unacceptable levels of risk; and/or, (2) increasing Implementation
                 supervision.
Residual Risk Residual risk is the combination of the project’s inherent, and control, risks-- as
                 mitigated by borrower-control frameworks and Implementation supervision.
The fiduciary risks are mainly “control? risks, whereas the broader PFM risks are mainly “inherent?
risks.

The financial management risk rating is expressed as “high,? “substantial,? “modest,? or “low? based on
professional judgment; the rating provides a benchmark against which various aspects of project design,
supervision, and other actions that may be taken are established.

Professional judgment exercised in this context refers to the Financial Management Specialists’ (FMS)
appreciation of the Borrower’s financial management system to comply with the Bank’s financial
management policies. To provide such professional judgment, the Bank’s FMS assesses the evidence
collected as a result of procedures conducted, and he or she derives a conclusion. The professional
judgment which is provided is determined by the procedures performed, their results, and the country
context. The assessment is planned and performed with an attitude of professional scepticism and a
developmental approach recognizing that circumstances may exist which may affect the ability of the
financial management system to provide reliable and accurate data on which to evaluate whether funds
have been utilized for the intended purposes.



                                                                                              46 | P a g e
References

Constitution of the Republic of Zimbabwe
Public Finance Management Act 2009
Audit Office Act 2010
Country Integrated Fiduciary Assessment Report 2012
Budget Statements 2010 to 2015
Audit Reports on Consolidated financial statements 2013 and 2014
Staff Monitoring Programme Report 2014
Introducing Cash- Basis IPSAS Financial Reporting by IMF Fiscal Department September 2014




                                                                                      47 | P a g e
48 | P a g e
