                                                                                                                     102788
                                                                                                                    January 15, 2016

                Youth out of school and out of work in Brazil1

In Latin America, one in five youth—totaling more than 18 million individuals aged 15 to 24—is neither working
nor in school (ninis)2. Despite the strong economic performance of the region in recent years – with vibrant
economic growth and a significant reduction in poverty and inequality – the proportion of Latin American youth
who are ninis fell only marginally, and the absolute number of young people in this condition actually increased. The
ninis phenomenon has a strong equity and gender dimension. Nearly 60 percent of ninis in the region are from a
poor or vulnerable household in the bottom 40 percent of the income distribution, and two out of every three ninis
are women. The higher incidence of ninis among women and disadvantaged households, coupled with the long-
lasting negative labor-market effects of being a nini, means that the phenomenon can cause intergenerational
persistence of gender disparities and low incomes, which obstructs social mobility and poverty reduction in the
region.
As it is shown by Figure 1, the current situation in Brazil is not different from the average in Latin America, with
20.4 percent of the population between 15 and 24 years of age, representing 6.9 million young people, not working
nor studying in 2013. Contrary to what has happened in the region as a whole, the share of ninis in Brazil increased
constantly between 2008 and 2013 and the number of male ninis increased by almost one million in the last 20 years
(from 1.5 million in 1992 to 2.4 million in 2013). This is an important distinction, since male ninis—and not female
ninis—, within a context of high prevalence of criminal activities, appear to be correlated with crime and violence
(de Hoyos, Gutiérrez and Vargas, 2015). A closer look at the data shows that women account for two thirds of the
total nini population in Brazil. In Latin America, the single most important factor associated with the probability of
being a female nini is marriage before age 18, compounded with teenage pregnancy. For instance, in 2013
approximately 1/3 of female ninis between 15 and 19 years of age were already mothers (PNAD/IBGE, 2013).


                              Figure 1: Proportion of ninis (15-24 years of age) in Brazil, 1992 – 2013




                                  Source: World Bank with data from PNAD/IBGE, various years




1
  Note based on the regional study by de Hoyos, Rogers and Székely (2015) “Out of school and out of work: challenges and solutions around
the ninis in Latin America”, the World Bank, Washington DC.
2 In Spanish, the more usual term is nini, whereas in Brazil they are known as nem-nem (short for neither working, nor in education in

the respective languages).
                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                             January 15, 2016
Figure 2 shows that between ages 15 and 18 the proportion of youth ninis increases substantially, both for men and
women. In Brazil and other Latin American countries, the most common path to become a nini, particularly for
men, is through early school dropout into the informal labor market, followed by unemployment. Since youth who
dropout before finishing upper secondary do not have the skills necessary to secure a formal-sector job, in most
cases they settle for a temporary and unstable job in the informal sector. Once they lose this job, they never go back
to school.
                            Figure 2: Education and Labor Market Status by age and gender - 2013
                            Male                                                           Female




         Source: World Bank with data from PNAD/IBGE, 2013


Although the existing evidence to reduce dropouts among men in upper secondary is scarce, Brazil can learn from
the most recent successful socio-emotional interventions in the United States. Evidence in this area suggests that
combining early warning systems to identify youth at risk of dropping out, followed by socio-emotional
interventions such as tutoring and counseling would serve to more effectively reduce dropouts among this critically
demographic group.
Recent evidence suggests that there is a relatively high labor market turnover, which would make the nini condition
a relatively transitory one. In Brazil around one third of ninis leave this state within one year with this turnover rate
being higher among young men and among workers with higher education levels.3 A large range of policy actions
and programs can help youth leave the nini condition. A range of training programs with varying emphases (e.g.,
general academic, specific technical, or socio-emotional skills), settings (in training institutes or on the job), and
duration can help build the human capital of ninis. Public employment services can increase the speed and quality of
job matches, and they can identify the needs of individual youth and steer them to training, apprenticeships,
subsidized or market work. Governments can give youth a boost into the formal private job market via wage
subsidies or help them into independent employment via entrepreneurship programs; in each case, the limited
subsidy provided by the government is based on the premise that once there, the youths will be or soon become
productive enough to sustain the employment without subsidy.

3
 Menezes Filho, N. A., Cabanas, P. H. & Komatsu, B. K. (2013): A Condição “Nem-nem” entre os Jovens é Permanente?. Insper Policy
Paper nº 7.

                                                                                                                              2
