                                                                                             102852
          Applying IFRS 9 to Central Banks Foreign Reserves

                                                   January 20, 2016

                                                     Abstract


Effective January 1, 2018, IFRS 9 Financial Instruments will replace IAS 39 Financial Instruments:
Recognition and Measurement (IAS 39). Unlike most publications on IFRS 9, this paper focuses
primarily on the application of the new standard on central banks’ foreign reserve assets, which
increasingly constitute a substantial part of central banks’ balance sheet.

Based on IFRS 9 implementation assessment projects with several central banks, the World Bank RAMP1
Accounting team2 identified six factors that can help central banks determine appropriate business model
for foreign reserve assets. Empirically, the result of applying the six factors has indicated that central
banks’ reserve portfolios often display elements of more than one business model; hence management
judgment coupled with a well-articulated accounting policy paper will be critical when implementing
IFRS 9. Under most central banks reserves management frameworks, performing the solely payments of
principal and interest (SPPI) test should be a relatively straightforward exercise, and the practical
expedient option under the new impairment provisions should also apply.




Keywords: Foreign reserves, International Financial Reporting Standard 9 Financial Instruments (IFRS
9), Central banks, Business model, Held-to-collect, Collecting-and-selling, Solely payments of principal
and interest, Fair value through profit and loss, Amortized cost, Fair value through other comprehensive
income, Impairment, Expected Credit Loss model, Practical expedient option, Explicit probability of
default approach




1
  Reserve Advisory and Management Program (RAMP) is a capacity building service aimed towards central banks and other
official sector asset management entities. For more information, please go to:
  http://treasury.worldbank.org/sip/htm/central_bank.html
2
  This paper is a product of a team effort, with Lott Chidawaya as the key author, numerous insights and guidance from Amit
Bajaj, Wei Chen, Kelley Dai, Yunjung Ha, Ying Li, Diann Martin, Shaun Ng and Robert Anthony Surtees Shotter. The RAMP
Accounting Team is indebted to Salome Skhirtladze (Head of Finance and Accounting Department, National Bank of Georgia)
and Naidene Ford-Hoon (Chief Financial Officer, Reserve Bank of South Africa) for their generous collaboration. RAMP
Accounting Team is also grateful to World Bank’s Financial Advisory & Banking (FAB) team; Quantitative Solutions, SAA &
Analytics (QSA) team and Kenneth Sullivan for extensively reviewing the paper.

                                                            1
Executive Summary
Central banks are public policy agencies designed to maintain monetary and financial stability, set
regulatory standards for the financial system, establish financial infrastructure, provide other public good
functions, and monitor policy operations (Archer 2009). A part of the policy operations of central banks is
the foreign reserves management function, through which central banks hold official foreign exchange
reserves (foreign reserves) to meet unique purposes, such as to support foreign exchange rate
management, meet a country’s foreign financial obligations, and maintain a reserve for emergencies. In
the past decade, many central banks around the world have increased the foreign reserve assets on their
balance sheets (Morahan and Mulder 2013). While the trend of increasing reserve size continues, over the
years the appropriateness of IFRS standards as the financial reporting framework for central banks has
been discussed and explored in the literature (for example, Schwarz et al. 2014). Other publications (for
example, Archer and Moser-Boehm 2013; Sullivan 2003; Sullivan 2005) have commented on the
potential hazards of distributing resources based solely on accounting profit. While recognizing the
credibility and transparency benefits of complying with internationally recognized financial reporting
standards, this paper intentionally does not discuss these topics.

Instead, the paper provides guidance on how central banks that have adopted IFRS should classify and
measure foreign reserve assets as well as implement the impairment model.1 The translation of
transactions and balances from foreign currencies to functional and presentation currencies remains under
the domain of International Accounting Standard 21. The paper also intentionally does not discuss the
implications of IFRS 9 on central banks’ domestic assets, which arguably deserve at least equal attention
and effort. IFRS 9, as compared with International Accounting Standard 39 (IAS 39), has changed the
requirements for the classification and measurement of financial assets, enhanced the impairment model,
and simplified hedge accounting.2 The standard applies one classification approach for all types of
financial assets within its scope based on two criteria: the business model for managing the financial
assets and the contractual cash flow characteristics of the financial assets. The International Accounting
Standards Board (IASB)3 clarified that it is more efficient to consider the business model criterion first,
followed by the contractual cash flow characteristics criterion.

A business model refers to the way an entity (for the purpose of this discussion, entities denotes central
banks) manages its financial assets in order to generate cash flows. A business model is a matter of fact
rather than an assertion and is generally observable through activities that an entity undertakes to achieve
its business objectives. The standard envisages two distinct business models within which financial assets
can be managed—held-to-collect and collecting-and-selling—and a third residual category. The World
Bank Reserves Advisory and Management Program (RAMP) accounting team worked with several
central banks as part of its RAMP engagement in IFRS 9 implementation assessment projects on foreign
reserves.4 As a result of the in-depth practical experience, the RAMP Accounting team identified six
factors which are implicitly in the standard, which can help central banks determine the appropriate
business model for holding foreign reserve assets:

    1. Objectives for each foreign reserve tranche
    2. Frequency, value, and timing of sales in prior periods; the reasons for those sales; and
       expectations about future sales activity
    3. Basis of management decision making: whether or not central bank management focuses
       primarily on fair value information to make decisions

                                                     2
    4. Risk parameters under which portfolio reserve assets are managed to meet the objectives
    5. Performance evaluation (including compensation): how central bank portfolio managers’
       performance is evaluated and how it relates to compensation
    6. Relative significance of the various sources of income (for example, interest income relative to
       fair value gains and losses) as one objective determinant to assess how integral contractual cash
       flows are vis-à-vis fair value gains or losses

The result of applying the above six factors has shown that central banks’ reserve tranches very often
display elements of more than one business model. Consequently, the most appropriate business model
for a particular central bank usually requires management’s judgment. Similar portfolio s of foreign
reserve assets could be classified and measured differently according to each central bank’s unique
management objectives, trading strategies, and implementation styles.

The second criterion, contractual cash flow characteristics, is applied at individual instrument level to
verify whether contractual cash flows from the foreign reserves assets are solely payments of principal
and interest (SPPI). Performing the SPPI assessment is not a bright-line test and also requires professional
judgment. However, since many central banks’ foreign reserve assets consist of sovereign debt
instruments, performing the SPPI test may be a relatively straightforward exercise. Financial assets that
meet both the business model and SPPI tests can be classified and measured either at amortized cost or at
fair value through other comprehensive income (FVOCI). All other financial assets that do not meet the
business model or SPPI tests are classified and measured in the residual category, fair value through profit
and loss (FVTPL).

The standard also introduced a single impairment model for all financial assets measured at amortized
cost or FVOCI. The new IFRS 9 expected credit loss (ECL) model is a forward-looking approach that is
an enhancement from the current IAS 39 incurred loss model that produces different results depending on
asset classification. For high-quality assets typically characteristic of foreign reserve holdings, central
bank management can elect the practical expedient option, which reduces implementation challenges for
assets that are deemed to have low credit risk. Empirically, implementing the ECL model using the
explicit probability of default approach assuming the practical expedient option is elected may well result
in negligible expected credit loss provisions.

The Purpose of Central Banks’ Foreign Reserves
In the past decade, many central banks around the world have increased the foreign reserve assets on their
balance sheets (Morahan and Mulder 2013). Central banks hold foreign reserves in support of critical and
unique objectives of national importance. These include the following:5

       Supporting and maintaining confidence in the policies for monetary and exchange rate
        management, including the capacity to intervene in support of the national or union currency
       Limiting external vulnerability by maintaining foreign currency liquidity to absorb shocks during
        times of crisis or when access to borrowing is curtailed, and, in doing so,
        o provide a level of confidence to markets that a country can meet its current and future
            external obligations,
        o demonstrate the backing of domestic currency by external assets,
        o assist the government in meeting its foreign exchange needs and external debt obligations,
            and
        o maintain a reserve for national disasters or emergencies




                                                     3
In determining what foreign reserve assets are needed for which purpose, central banks perform elaborate
reserve-management processes by segregating assets into subportfolios, each with specific objectives and
guidelines. Most central banks create, through a process called tranching, portfolios of foreign reserve
assets based on time horizons when commitments (for example, import coverage, debt payments) are due
and payable. For example, a working capital tranche is usually set to meet financial needs falling within
the short term, say, up to 3 months, and a liquidity tranche is usually created to meet financial needs
within up to 12 months and to fund the working capital tranche. Another subportfolio, an investment
tranche, is usually set up for longer term financial needs and to generate moderate returns.

Central banks use traditional portfolio management frameworks such as the strategic asset allocation
(SAA) approach to manage foreign reserve asset portfolios. After determining appropriate monetary
amounts for each tranche and taking into consideration macroeconomic factors, the SAA is the
investment policy statement that defines currency and foreign reserve assets composition, risk budget,
acceptable credit risk and concentration limits, acceptable duration of the portfolio assets, and the
appropriate portfolio benchmarks. Tranche portfolios or subportfolios may be managed and performance
evaluated against benchmarks and conservative investment guidelines. Since the goal of central banks is
to maintain financial stability, usually these constraints ensure that foreign reserve assets are managed
within a capital preservation framework.

Overview of IFRS 9
The final IFRS 9 was issued on July 24, 2014, completing the three phases that the IASB embarked on to
replace IAS 39. Many users of financial statements and other interested parties had deemed IAS 39 as too
prescriptive and difficult to understand, apply, and interpret. IFRS 9 has a mandatory implementation date
effective for annual periods beginning on or after January 1, 2018, with early adoption permitted.6 The
new standard introduced changes in the way financial instruments are classified and measured, a new
impairment model, and a new approach to hedge accounting that better aligns with risk management
practices. Hedge accounting is outside the scope of this paper.

Financial Assets Classification and Measurement

IFRS 9 applies one classification approach for all types of financial assets based on two criteria:

    1. The business model for managing the financial assets
    2. The contractual cash flow characteristics of the financial assets

A business model refers to the way an entity (for the purpose of this discussion, entities denotes central
banks) manages its financial assets in order to generate cash flows. A business model is a matter of fact
rather than an assertion and is generally observable through activities that an entity undertakes to achieve
its business objectives. The standard envisages two distinct business models within which financial assets
can be managed—held-to-collect and collecting-and-selling—and a third residual category. Under both
the held-to-collect and collecting-and-selling models, contractual cash flows from the financial assets
must be SPPI.

Financial instruments that consist of SPPI-type cash flows are usually simple-debt financial assets,
including money market instruments. In this context, interest is deemed to be compensation for the time
value of money; credit risk, and other basic lending risks (for example, liquidity risk); costs (for example,
administrative costs); and profit margin, consistent with a basic lending arrangement. After considering
the classification criteria and performing the SPPI tests, financial assets that are held-to-collect cash flows
and whose contractual cash flows are SPPI will be classified and measured at amortized cost. On the other

                                                      4
hand, financial assets that are held for collecting-and-selling when generating cash flows and where
contractual cash flows are SPPI will be classified and measured at FVOCI. Financial assets that violate
any of the two classification criteria will be classified and measured in the FVTPL residual category.
Derivatives and equity investments do not meet the SPPI test, and are classified and measured at FVTPL.

Despite the classification criteria just discussed, entities may, at initial recognition when they become
party to the contractual provisions of debt financial assets, irrevocably designate such debt financial assets
as measured at FVTPL if doing so eliminates or significantly reduces a measurement or recognition
inconsistency that is commonly referred to as an accounting mismatch. In addition, entities that hold
equity instruments for non-contractual benefits, rather than primarily for increases in the value of the
investment, may make an irrevocable election at inception on an instrument-by-instrument basis to
classify and measure such equity investments at FVOCI. Unrealized gains or losses for both debt and
equity instruments measured at FVOCI are reported as other comprehensive income. Realized gains or
losses for debt instruments are subsequently reclassified to profit or loss, whereas realized gains or losses
for equity instruments are not reclassified to profit or loss. Instead, cumulative realized gains or losses for
equity instruments may be transferred within equity accounts.

A Brief Overview of the New Impairment Model

IFRS 9 introduced one impairment model for all financial assets that are classified and measured at
amortized cost or FVOCI. The new impairment approach is a forward-looking ECL model that is an
improvement over the current incurred-loss model under IAS 39. Under the incurred-loss model, entities
may consider only losses that arise from past events and current conditions, whereas under the ECL
model, the effects of possible future credit loss events are also considered. Consequently, IFRS 9
broadens the information entities must consider when determining expectations of credit losses.

This information must be reasonable, supportable, and available without undue cost or effort and
ordinarily would include historical, current, and forecast information. The standard is not prescriptive on
any particular measurement methods; entities will use sources that they generally use in their normal
business undertakings. The new ECL model for impairment ranks among the fundamental changes that
IFRS 9 has introduced. To enhance a robust and consistent implementation, the IASB created a discussion
forum called the IFRS Transition Resource Group for Impairment of Financial Instruments (ITG),7
mandated with soliciting, discussing, and opining on impairment implementation issues arising from ECL
model requirements.

In a nutshell, the ECL model consists of three stages for impairment based on changes in credit quality
since initial recognition. They are shown in figure ES1.




                                                      5
Figure ES.1 The Expected Credit Loss (ECL) Model’s Three Stages for Impairment




Entities will be required to calculate either 12-month or lifetime expected credit losses for each financial
asset, depending on what impairment stage the asset falls in. When measuring expected credit losses, the
following non-exhaustive list could be considered:

       The probability-weighted outcome that reflects the possibility that a credit loss occurs and the
        possibility that no credit loss occurs
       The time value of money, by discounting expected credit losses to the reporting date
       Reasonable, supportable, and available information without undue cost or effort

It is important to note that lifetime expected credit losses (stages 2 and 3) are recognized only after a
significant increase in credit risk. The standard elaborates on this point by stating that when credit is first
extended, the initial creditworthiness of the borrower and initial expectations of credit losses are taken
into account in determining acceptable pricing and other terms and conditions. True economic losses arise
when expected credit losses exceed initial expectations (that is, when the lender is not receiving
compensation for the level of credit risk to which it is now exposed).

Financial instruments that have low credit risk, such as investment grade rated assets (although an
external rating grade is not a prerequisite for a financial instrument to be considered low credit risk), are
generally assessed for 12-month expected credit losses under stage 1 of the ECL model. For operational
simplification convenience, entities can elect the practical expedient option, through which entities can
always assume that credit risk has not increased significantly since initial recognition for assets that are
deemed to have low credit risk. The practical expedient option is covered in more detail under the
subsection “ECL Impairment Approach to Foreign Reserves?.




                                                      6
Empirical Results of IFRS 9 Implementation Projects
The ideas discussed in this section were gathered from an extensive review of the IFRS 9 standard, Basis
for Conclusions on IFRS 9,8 as well as information shared in the various webcasts hosted by staff of the
IFRS Foundation. In this section, any reference simply to a paragraph number refers to the content in
IFRS 9. Paragraph references from the “Application Guidance? (appendix B of IFRS 9) are prefixed with
the letter “B?;9 and paragraph references from the Basis for Conclusions on IFRS 9 will be prefixed with
“BC?. Most important, the World Bank RAMP accounting team worked closely with several central
banks as part of the RAMP engagement and conducted in-depth IFRS 9 implementation analyses in order
to fully break down the issues and nuances specifically associated with foreign reserves management
within a central bank’s context.

When assessing the two criteria for determining how financial assets are classified and measured, the
IASB clarified in BC4.14 that it is more efficient for entities to consider the business model first,
followed by the contractual cash flow characteristics of financial assets. Consequently, the discussion
below follows the sequence in IFRS 9, starting with both aspects of the classification and measurement
approach (business model followed by contractual cash flow characteristics considerations) and the ECL
impairment approach. As previously indicated, hedge accounting is outside the scope of this paper.

Classification and Measurement: What Is the Business Model?

Paragraph 4.1.1(a) requires entities to classify financial assets on the basis of the entity’s business model
for managing the financial assets, unless management has elected as an option, in accordance with
paragraph 4.1.5, the accounting policy to designate financial assets at FVTPL. Based on the business
model as determined by the entity’s key management personnel,10 central banks must assess whether
financial assets meet one of the following conditions:

        Either in accordance with paragraph 4.1.2(a) the financial assets are held within a business model
         whose objective is to hold financial assets in order to collect contractual cash flows, or
        In accordance with paragraph 4.1.2A (a) the financial assets are held within a business model
         whose objective is achieved by both collecting contractual cash flows and selling financial assets.

Table ES.1, though not exhaustive, summarizes some of the factors that central banks need to consider
while assessing the business model within which foreign reserve assets are held in accordance with IFRS
9.

Table ES.1 Factors to Consider When Assessing the Business Model to Hold Foreign Reserves
           Factors                 IFRS 9     Possible focus points
Objectives for each foreign         B4.1.2    Investment guidelines and foreign reserve tranche documents
reserve tranche                                   must be worded in cognizance of IFRS 9 to reflect how groups of
                                                  financial assets are managed together to achieve a particular
                                                  business objective. For example, for central banks the primary
                                                  objective of the liquidity tranche assets is often to meet “liquidity
                                                  needs? and “match duration of the assets to the duration of
                                                  liabilities,? while the secondary objective is to maximize returns
                                                  within a very prudent risk budget. Assess and update investment
                                                  guidelines for the working capital and buffer tranches, if
                                                  applicable.


                                                        7
          Factors                       IFRS 9   Possible focus points
                                                  Information about past sales and expectations about future sales
                                                     provide evidence related to how central banks’ stated objectives
                                                     for managing the financial assets are achieved and, specifically,
                                                     how cash flows are realized.
Frequency, value, and                             Sales due to increase in assets’ credit risk, infrequent and
timing of sales in prior                B4.1.2C     significant in value or frequent but insignificant in value of sales
periods; the reasons for                B4.1.3A     to manage credit concentration risk or close to the assets’
those sales; and expectations           B4.1.3B     maturity do not preclude the held-to-collect business objective.
about future sales activity
                                                  Note that IFRS 9 makes it clear that frequent sales activity even
                                                     of significant value in itself does not automatically lead to
                                                     FVTPL. Other factors need to be considered to determine the
                                                     appropriate business model.

                                                        Review how tranche performance is computed and reported, e.g.,
                                                         for certain subportfolios, central banks may report performance
Basis of management                                      based on interest yields and income, while for other tranches,
decision making: whether or                              performance may be computed and reported on the total return
not central bank                       B4.1.2B(a)       fair value basis.
management focuses
                                       B4.1.6          Very often, the best practice for well-managed central banks is
primarily on fair value
information to make                                      that many of the subportfolios of foreign reserves are monitored
decisions                                                and reported on a fair value basis to management. This tends to
                                                         support the argument for the FVTPL model.

                                                        For central banks, an operational objective is very often capital
                                                         preservation. As such, risk parameters and guidelines are often
                                                         very prudent in order to ensure with a high confidence level that
                                                         the proceeds after selling these assets are sufficient to meet the
                                                         stated objectives. Consequently, the intent to collect contractual
Risk parameters under                                    cash flows (amortized cost) and to collect contractual cash flows
which portfolio reserve                                  and sell (FVOCI) is often integral to central banks’ business
                                       B4.1.2B(b)
assets are managed to meet                               models.
the objectives                                          In some circumstances, a particular tranche may have objectives
                                                         and trading strategies that are more consistent with maximizing
                                                         short-term gains and losses (FVTPL). The key is to have clarity
                                                         about the purpose of each subportfolio and document that linkage
                                                         in unambiguous terms.

Performance evaluation                                  Review whether portfolio managers are compensated based on
(including compensation):                                performance results. Determine whether portfolio managers’
how central bank portfolio
                                       B4.1.2B(c)       performance is assessed based on tranche net asset values
managers’ performance is
                                                         measured on a fair value basis.
evaluated and how it relates
to compensation




                                                              8
           Factors                   IFRS 9     Possible focus points
                                                 Central banks should perform quantitative assessments to
                                                    determine whether interest income forms a significant part
Relative significance of the
various sources of income                           relative to fair value gains and losses of the tranche’s income. If
(for example, interest income                       yes, then there seems to be evidence to argue that the collection
relative to fair value gains                        of contractual cash flows is more integral to achieving the
and losses) as one objective          B4.1.5       business model’s objective (amortized cost or FVOCI). If, on the
determinant to assess how                           other hand, the fair value gains and losses are significant relative
integral contractual cash                           to interest income, then collection of contractual cash flows may
flows are vis-à-vis fair value
                                                    be more incidental and suggest that a FVTPL classification is
gains or losses
                                                    more appropriate.



Classification and Measurement: Are Cash Flows SPPI?

Paragraph 4.1.1(b) requires central banks to classify financial assets on the basis of the contractual cash
flow characteristics of the financial assets, unless management has elected as an option, in accordance
with paragraph 4.1.5, the accounting policy to designate financial assets at FVTPL. According to the
standard as stipulated in both paragraphs 4.1.2(b) and 4.1.2A (b), central banks must assess whether the
contractual terms of financial assets give rise on specified dates to cash flows that are SPPI on the
principal amount outstanding.

Contractual cash flows that are SPPI on the principal amount outstanding are consistent with a basic
lending arrangement. Contractual terms that introduce exposure to risks or volatility in the contractual
cash flows that are unrelated to a basic lending arrangement, such as exposure to changes in equity prices
or commodity prices, are inconsistent with SPPI cash flows. For contractual terms that change the timing
or amount of cash flows (for example, prepayment or term extension provisions), central banks must
assess either quantitatively or qualitatively the contractual cash flows that could arise both before and
after the change in contractual cash flows. In cases where these changes in contractual cash flows are
significantly different from each other, financial assets fail to meet the SPPI test. Management must use
professional judgment to determine the significant threshold. Cash flow characteristics that do not
represent SPPI but have a de minimis effect on the contractual cash flows of the asset can be safely
disregarded.

To assess whether the effect is de minimis, central banks must consider the possible effect of the
contractual cash flow characteristic in each reporting period and cumulatively over the life of financial
assets. However, if contractual cash flow characteristics could have an effect on the contractual cash
flows that is more than de minimis, but that cash flow characteristic is “not genuine,? it does not affect the
classification of a financial asset. According to the standard, a cash flow characteristic is not genuine if it
affects the instrument’s contractual cash flows only on the occurrence of an event that is extremely rare,
highly abnormal, and very unlikely to occur. Again, central bank management must use professional
judgment to determine whether contractual terms could be considered not genuine and therefore safely
disregarded. Figure ES.2 summarizes the process for determining whether cash flows are SPPI.




                                                          9
Figure ES.2 Determining Whether Cash Flows Are Solely Payments of Principal and Interest
(SPPI)




To summarize, IFRS 9 applies one classification approach for all types of financial assets within its scope,
based on two criteria: the business model for managing the financial assets and the contractual cash flow
characteristics of the financial assets. However, the criteria are not straightforward and require
professional judgment. Similar foreign reserve assets could be classified and measured differently among
central banks and even within the same central bank. For example, certain foreign reserve assets that meet
the SPPI condition could be held in, say, the working capital tranches in order to collect contractual cash
flows to meet short-term liquidity needs. Similar foreign reserve assets could also be held in another
portfolio whose main purpose is to meet potential liquidity needs necessary to fulfil central banks’
multiple functions. In the meantime, central banks may hold these assets to collect contractual cash flows
and to sell in part to increase financial returns under certain strict parameters. Unless if FVTPL was
elected, in the former case for working capital tranches, the assets would be classified and measured at
amortized cost and in the latter case, these assets would be classified and measured at FVOCI.

Similar assets can also be held in a portfolio whose main objective is to actively trade in order to
maximize returns to offset against the costs of accumulating reserves for central banks. Under this
scenario, the assets would be classified and measured at FVTPL. Also, even though the business model of
a certain tranche is determined to be collecting-and-selling, if any financial assets in that tranche fail
SPPI, such assets would be classified and measured at FVTPL instead of FVOCI. For instance, if a
liquidity tranche whose business model is collecting-and-selling holds either financial assets with
leveraged cash flows such as derivatives (for example, futures and foreign exchange forwards) or

                                                    10
financial assets with complex features that fail SPPI, such assets would be classified and measured at
FVTPL.

When central banks become party to the contractual provisions of equity investments (for example, Bank
for International Settlements, or BIS, shares), they can make an irrevocable election at initial recognition
to classify and measure such equity investments at FVOCI11. For unquoted equity investments such as
BIS shares, central banks would be required under IFRS 9 to record fair value except under limited
circumstances. In practice some central banks value BIS shares at net asset value less a 30 percent
discount to estimate fair value. The 30 percent discount is a precedent of the International Court at The
Hague’s decision for the BIS shares repurchase in 2001 and which is now used as the basis for
determining fair value of BIS shares. In limited circumstances IFRS 9 allows the use of cost as a proxy
for fair value. One example when this is allowed is where there is a wide range of possible fair value
measurements and cost represents the best estimate of fair value within that range. Judgment will need to
be used in the final assessment, and this will need to withstand the scrutiny of the auditors. The standard
includes indicators where cost might not be used as an estimate of fair value, one such indicator being
where evidence could be drawn from external transactions in the investee’s equity. Central banks may
need to evaluate and justify the basis of valuation in light of the changes under IFRS 9.

ECL Impairment Approach to Foreign Reserves

The preceding sections dealing with classification and measurement are vitally important in ECL
determination. Only foreign reserve assets measured at amortized cost or FVOCI fall in the scope of the
ECL impairment model (but excluding equity investments for which irrevocable election was made to
classify and measure at FVOCI). Any computed ECL charges will be reported through the profit or loss
accounts, with the corresponding entries posted in either “other comprehensive income? or “loss
allowance? accounts for assets measured at FVOCI or amortized cost, respectively.

For operational convenience, the standard provides a practical expedient option for assets that are deemed
to have low credit risk. Examples of low credit risk assets include investment grade assets or assets so
categorized by management based on central banks’ internal credit rating systems. Since most central
banks hold investment grade and quoted instruments in foreign reserve portfolios because of the
overriding capital preservation objective, electing the practical expedient approach under the ECL model
is likely to be a viable option.12

Under the practical expedient option, central banks need to compute only the 12-month ECL. The
standard is intentionally not prescriptive and allows management to adopt a variety of methods in
computing ECL. For more sophisticated central banks that already have an internal credit risk function as
part of total financial risk management, the existing internal model is likely to be adequate in most
cases.13 For the vast majority of the central banks, an acceptable and yet simple method would be to
utilize an explicit probability of default approach:

Expected credit losses = Exposure at default (EAD) · Probability of default (PD) · Loss given default (LGD).

PD and LGD parameters can be derived from data published by global credit rating agencies (for
example, Moody’s, Standard & Poor’s, and Fitch). A cursory review of the sovereign ratings transition
matrices published by these rating agencies for a one-year holding horizon (12-month PD) reveals that
investment grade sovereign debt (a common asset class for many central banks) usually has a zero or
close to zero 12-month PD, in which case expected credit losses will be negligible.

Financial instruments deemed to have low credit risk are not required to be externally rated. Instead,
central banks can use their internal credit ratings that are consistent with a global credit rating definition

                                                           11
of investment grade. The low credit risk operational simplification is not meant to be a bright-line trigger
for recognizing lifetime ECL when financial instruments are not considered to have low credit risk at the
reporting date. In such a case, central banks must assess whether there has been a significant increase in
credit risk since initial recognition and thus whether lifetime expected credit losses are required to be
recognized.

For central banks whose foreign reserves include assets assessed as having high credit risk, the new ECL
model is likely to result in process and/or accounting system changes. A direct input in the ECL model is
information that impacts credit expectations. Therefore implementing the model will invariably be data
intensive. As market data input will be used, it is foreseen that the effect on profit and loss may become
more volatile, since impairment losses will be reported as profit or loss and may affect distributable
income. Professional judgment will need to be made, and auditors will need to both understand and
review the processes supporting the ECL calculations. The information will then need to be presented in a
manner that is understandable to the users of financial statements and in compliance with the standard,
disclosing quantitative and qualitative factors, including inputs, assumptions, and estimation techniques
used to determine impairment losses.

Table ES.2, though not exhaustive, summarizes some of the issues that central banks need to consider to
effectively implement the ECL impairment model in accordance with IFRS 9.

Table ES.2 Issues in Implementing the Expected Credit Loss (ECL) Impairment Model
   Considerations           IFRS 9                                 Possible focus points
                                            Review existing holdings and determine if there are assets with
                                             high credit risks.
                           B5.5.22         Review existing investment guidelines and align to IFRS 9 ECL
                           B5.5.23          model requirements.
Portfolio review
                           B5.5.24         Clearly define criteria for low credit risk; at a minimum include
                                             issuers’ risk of default, capacity to meet obligations, and whether
                                             there are adverse economic conditions that may impact
                                             counterparties’ ability to meet obligations.
                           B5.5.41         Policy and guidelines for determining default probabilities, loss
                           B5.5.42          given defaults, exposures at default, or mapping from external
Finance, credit, and
market risk                B5.5.43          sources
                           B5.5.37         Corroboration between finance or accounting department with
departments
                                             credit or market risk departments and leveraging existing
corroboration
                                             infrastructure—perform internal credit rating systems review, if
                                             applicable
                           B5.5.28-29      Models to calculate 12-month ECL and if needs be, lifetime ECL
ECL model review
                           B5.5.44         Policy for ECL discount rate (effective interest rate)
                           B5.5.15-21      Policy for credit risk migration between stages 1, 2, and 3 and
                                             clearly defined credit events that constitute “significant increase in
Credit risk
                                             credit risk?
expectations
                                            Frequency of portfolio reviews and possibility of implementing
                                             “watch lists? to effectively monitor credit events
                                            Model       risk    management        frameworks:       development,
Governance                                   implementation, use, and ongoing model validation
                                            Roles and responsibilities between various departments

There are two potential missteps that central bank management may make with regard to implementing
the ECL model.



                                                    12
    1. The first would be to panic. Many have estimated it will take the entire remaining two and a
       half years to implement the standard and seem to suggest that entire information and accounting
       systems need to be overhauled. While the new standard is expected to be complex, it is also
       expected to be implemented without undue cost and effort. The implications of IFRS 9 on central
       banks’ domestic assets may require special attention and effort depending on the types of asset
       classes and asset classifications. However, the scope of this paper is limited to foreign reserve
       portfolio assets. Due to the conservative nature of central banks’ reserve portfolios and strategic
       asset allocations, electing the practical expedient option could be an operational simplification for
       most central banks. Central bank management should not panic, but rather start the assessment
       early, assess whether the practical expedient is applicable, and ensure that the principle of undue
       cost and effort is not compromised.

    2. The second is to start implementing IFRS 9 too late or to underestimate the implications
       and complexity of implementing the standard. Implementing the ECL model will involve
       collaboration across several business lines, through which suitable models must be identified for
       calculating expected credit losses. Central banks should consider setting up an IFRS 9
       implementation team that includes risk specialists in order to determine appropriate
       categorization logic, credit quality indicators, and thresholds for the three-stage model. It will be
       necessary to introduce processes and procedures on how to monitor changes in credit quality for
       allocation within the ECL model. There could be an impact on systems and processes, and that is
       why implementation impact assessment should start early. The new disclosures are far reaching,
       and central banks should not underestimate the effort required, including having systems and
       processes in place to collect data. IFRS 9 implementation teams should closely monitor the work
       of the ITG discussion forum.

Conclusion
With just two years remaining before the mandatory IFRS 9 implementation date of January 1, 2018,
central banks have their work cut out. Early adoption of the standard is permissible. Starting February
2015, central banks that decide to early apply the standard will apply the version of IFRS 9 issued in July
2014 (see figure ES.3).

Figure ES.3 Key Dates for Implementing IFRS 9




IFRS 9 impact assessment should start early, with the collaboration of accounting and foreign reserves
management departments. Work on assessing current foreign reserve assets classification under IFRS 9
and any associated transition adjustments should rank high on every central bank’s agenda of priorities.
Internal business documentation will need to be aligned to IFRS 9 requirements for business model and
contractual cash flow characteristics requirements.

                                                    13
The six factors for determining the business model provide a useful framework that central banks can use
to perform classification and measurement assessment. When the assessment is applied to a portfolio or
subportfolio, experience has shown that each of the six factors when considered separately can often lead
to different classifications. Therefore, all of the factors need to be considered in totality. The importance
of each factor to the business model is also likely to be different among central banks. Management must
use best judgment to determine which objectives (held-to-collect, collecting-and-selling, or neither—for
example, active trading to maximize fair value gains) for investing financial assets are most integral to the
business model. Once the business model is determined, each financial asset must be assessed to
determine whether contractual cash flows are SPPI.

When assessing the impact of the newly introduced ECL impairment model, central banks’ accounting
departments must closely collaborate with credit and markets departments to determine the best approach
to applying the model. Central banks are advised not to underestimate the potential level of preparation
work, especially if systems need to be modified and new processes need to be designed.



Notes

1
  While IFRS 9 will arguably have an equal or larger significant impact on central banks’ domestic asset base, this paper focus es
only on implementing IFRS 9 on foreign reserve assets.
2
  Due to lack of wide applicability to the central bank community, hedge accounting is outside the scope of this paper.
3
  The IFRS Foundation develops the International Financial Reporting Standards through the IASB, its independent standard-
setting body.
4
   Reserves Advisory and Management Program (RAMP) engagements are designed to help official sector partners develop
world-class asset management operations through building in-house capacity and employing financial service providers. For
more, see the program’s website at http://treasury.worldbank.org/sip/htm/index.html.
5
   Objectives of foreign exchange reserves were drawn from International Monetary Fund (2013), Guidelines for Foreign
Exchange Reserve Management.
6
  IFRS 9 Financial Instruments as published by the International Accounting Standards Board in July 2014.
7
  Terms of reference of the IFRS Transition Resource Group for Impairment of Financial Instruments can be accessed at
http://www.ifrs.org/About-us/IASB/Advisory-bodies/ITG-Impairment-Financial-Instrument/Pages/Home.aspx.
8
  The Basis for Conclusions on IFRS 9 analyses the considerations of the IASB when developing IFRS 9 and includes an analysis
of the feedback received on the proposals that preceded the standard and how the IASB responded to that feedback. It also
includes an analysis of the likely effects of IFRS 9. While the Basis for Conclusions accompanies IFRS 9, it is not part of IFRS 9.
9
  Appendix B, “Application Guidance,? is an integral part of IFRS 9 standard.
10
   Per International Accounting Standard 24 Related Party Disclosures, key management personnel are those persons having
authority and responsibility for planning, directing, and controlling the activities of the entity, directly or indirectly, including any
director (whether executive or otherwise) of that entity.
11
   Unrealized gains or losses for both debt and equity instruments measured at FVOCI are reported as other comprehensive
income. However, since equity instruments are not assessed for impairment under IFRS 9, realized gains or losses for equity
instruments are not recycled to profit or loss, whereas realized gains or losses for debt instruments are appropriately recycled to
profit or loss. Instead, cumulative realized gains or losses for equity instruments may be transferred within equity accounts..
12
   The practical expedient option per IFRS 9 paragraph 5.5.10 can be elected provided the following criteria per paragraph
B5.5.22 are met:
1.      The financial instrument has a low risk of default.
2.      The borrower has a strong capacity to meet its contractual cash flow obligations in the near term.
3.      Adverse changes in economic and business conditions in the longer term may, but will not necessarily, reduce the ability
        of the borrower to fulfil its contractual cash flow obligations.
Central banks’ objectives and strategic asset allocations usually ensure conservative investment guidelines, wealth preservat ion,
capital stability, limited downside risk, and limited downside losses. These factors may indicate that the first two criteria are met.
The third criterion does not mean that the economy might not change if the country went to war, or suffered a natural disaster, but
only that at the time of impairment review none of these conditions exist.
13
   Managers with questions are advised to contact RAMPAccounting@worldbank.org. RAMP’s credit risk and accounting
professionals will be able to verify and assist.


                                                                  14
References
Archer, D. 2009 “Roles and Objectives of Modern Central Banks.? In Issues in the Governance of Central Banks, Bank for
International Settlements. Basel, Switzerland, http://www.bis.org/publ/othp04_2.pdf, full report at
http://www.bis.org/publ/othp04.htm.

Archer, D., and P. Moser-Boehm, P. 2013 “Central Bank Finances.? BIS Papers no. 71, April,
http://www.bis.org/publ/bppdf/bispap71.pdf.

International Accounting Standards Board (IASB). 2014. IFRS 9 Financial Instruments. London: IASB, July.

International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2013. Guidelines for Foreign Exchange Reserve Management, Washington, DC: IMF,
http://www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2013/020113.pdf.

Morahan, A and C. Mulder, 2013, “SURVEY OF RESERVE MANAGERS: LESSONS FROM THE CRISIS?, IMF Working
Paper, WP/13/99, IMF, Washington, DC, https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/wp/2013/wp1399.pdf

Schwarz, C., P. Karakitsos, N. Merriaman, and W. Studener. 2014, “Why Accounting Matters: A Central Bank Perspective.?
Occasional Paper Series no. 153, European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main,
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/scpops/ecbop153.pdf.

Sullivan, K. 2003. “Profits, Dividends and Capital: Considerations for Central Banks.? In Accounting Standards for Central
Banks, edited by N. Courtis and B. Mander, 25–34. London: Central Banking Publications.

Sullivan, K. 2005, “Transparency in Central Bank Financial Statement Disclosures?, IMF Working Paper, WP/05/80, IMF,
Washington, DC, http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/wp/2005/wp0580.pdf.




                                                              15
