                                                                                                                    102951
                                                           Nepal Rural Housing
                                                           Reconstruction Program




Program Overview
scope of the disaster
    O   n April 25, 2015, a 7.8 magnitude
   earthquake struck Nepal. Following a
   second strong earthquake on May 12
   (7.3 magnitude), and a sequence of
   aftershocks, the Government of Nepal
   (GoN) reported the death toll at 8,700,
   while those injured reached 25,000.
   A Post-Disaster Needs Assessment
   (PDNA), completed in June 2015,
   found that total damages and losses
                                                                                                              Photo: The World Bank
   amounted to about US$7 billion, Housing reconstruction and human settlements were identified in the PDNA as the largest
   with reconstruction needs of about single need, accounting for almost half of the total reconstruction needs
   US$6.7 billion. As the earthquake sequence destroyed 490,000 houses -- mostly traditional mud-brick
   and mud-stone houses built and occupied by the rural poor -- and rendered another 265,000 houses at
   least temporarily uninhabitable, the largest single need identified in the PDNA was housing and human
   settlements, accounting for US$3.27 billion or almost half of the total reconstruction needs.


nepal housing reconstruction program
    To address the housing reconstruction needs and to build a more resilient Nepal, the Government of
   Nepal is leading the overall housing reconstruction efforts nationally through a housing reconstruction
   program meant to encompass all of the housing stock to be rebuilt. The program will also serve as a
   coordinating framework to standardize housing reconstruction policy, irrespective of the funding sources.


rural housing reconstruction program (rhrp)
    The Rural Housing Reconstruction Program will focus on restoring affected housing in 14 targeted
   rural districts while providing technical support to enhance the government’s ability to improve long-term
   disaster resilience.

    The program’s overall objective will ensure that houses destroyed in the most-affected districts of the
   country will be rebuilt using earthquake-safer building techniques through grants and technical assistance
   to eligible households from the Government of Nepal.
Nepal Rural Housing Reconstruction Program




                   The program also seeks to equip beneficiaries with skills to construct earthquake-safer core housing
                 units supported by training, technical support and a subsidy program, and allow people to continue
                 incremental construction with improved techniques.

                   To support the Government of Nepal’s rural housing reconstruction efforts, a Multi-Donor Trust Fund has
                 been established with support from the US Agency for International Development (USAID), the Swiss Agency
                 for Development and Cooperation (SDC) and the World Bank. Key Development Partners, such as the Japan
                 International Cooperation Agency (JICA), are working in close collaboration with MDTF partners in extending
                 the coverage of the rural housing reconstruction program services to additional areas of the country.


          beneficiaries & eligibility
                   The program will directly benefit approximately 55,000 households (or about one-tenth of the housing
                 destroyed in the earthquake sequence) located in municipalities within the 14 most-affected districts of
                 Nepal: Sindhupalchowk; Kathmandu; Nuwakot; Dhading; Rasuwa; Gorkha; Bhaktapur; Kavrepalanchowk;
                 Lalitpur; Dolakha; Ramechhap; Makawanpur; Okhaldhunga; Sindhuli. A high proportion of houses in these
                 districts are categorized as completely damaged and/or in need of demolition.

                  Technical advice (provided through the RHRP), to improve long-term disaster resilience, will be aimed at
                 all housing reconstruction beneficiaries estimated to be approximately 490,000 households.

                   Eligibility will be determined based on a comprehensive, door-to-door assessment of the damages to the
                 housing stock in the affected districts, carried out by the Central Bureau of Statistics (CBS).


          implementation roles and responsibilities
                   Under the leadership of the Government of Nepal, the Rural Housing Reconstruction Program’s
                 implementation has been carefully structured to reflect the program’s operating principles (mentioned
                 above in Box 1) as well as the conditions on the ground. As shown in Diagram 1, there is both flexibility
                 as well as regular monitoring and evaluation to assure that implementation is responsive to the needs of
                 beneficiaries. Best practices have been gleaned from other international reconstruction experiences and
                 incorporated into the implementation structure and procedures for the RHRP.




                                                                                                                              Photo: The World Bank
                          The Program’s objective is to restore and improve long-term resilience to rural housing damaged during the April and May
                          2015 earthquakes in Nepal using earthquake-safer building techniques and materials through an owner-driven approach while
                          encouraging a culture of safer and sustainable housing and settlements.
implementation procedures
      The Nepal Rural Housing Reconstruction Program is structured
    around five major stages of implementation (see Figure 1) --                   Figure 1 - Building Resilience in
                                                                                   Nepal: Stages of Implementation
    each one building upon the other, as follows:

Stage I: The Survey
                                                                                               Stage V:
      T he Central Bureau of Statistics (CBS) is conducting a
                                                                                              Completion

    comprehensive census of damage to the housing stock in each
                                                                                              Stage IV:
    of the fourteen most-affected districts. Technical and logistical                       Reconstruction
    support is being provided by UNDP (United Nations Development
                                                                                               Stage III:
    Programme). This door-to-door assessment will generate a                                  Enrollment
    beneficiary/damage database to serve as the basis of the rural
                                                                                                 Stage II:
    housing reconstruction program as well as assist in the effective                  Identification & Validation
    monitoring of the recovery process.
                                                                                               Stage I:
                                                                                              The Survey
     CBS will liaise with the Ministry of Housing Affairs (MoHA)/
    District Disaster Relief Committees (DDRC) in the data collection
    and use the data already collected by the rapid visual assessment that has been conducted by the MoHA/
    Ministry of Federal Affairs and Local Development (MoFALD).
	
Stage II: Identification and Validation

      B  ased on the eligibility criteria, an analysis of the survey results will generate a list of eligible households
    at the Village Development Committee level (and when possible, at the local ward level). The beneficiary
    list will be published at the local level and a grievance period of 35 days will be provided to allow for
    inclusion/exclusion claims and grievances.

Stage III: Enrollment

      Eligible beneficiaries will enroll in the program
    by entering into a legally binding Participation
    Agreement (PA) with their VDC or municipality.
    The PA outlines the entitlements and obligations of
    both parties regarding key details of the program
    such as:

       •	   payment

       •	   housing construction standards and

       •	   grievance redress mechanisms (how
            beneficiaries can address any complaints).

     During enrollment, those beneficiaries without
    bank accounts will be assisted with opening one
    or with determining another workable payment
    mechanism.
                                                                                                            Photo: The World Bank




                                                                                                                          Program Overview
           Stage IV: Reconstruction

                  The    principal of owner-driven reconstruction is fundamental to the Nepal housing program.
                 Beneficiaries will be supported with socio-technical assistance; training and market facilitation; and cash-
                 based assistance, provided in tranches, upon certification of earthquake-safer techniques guided by
                 Nepal’s National Building Code (NBC). The reconstruction stage encompasses the following components
                 (see Figure 2):


                      Figure 2 - The Nepal Rural Reconstruction Program: Support to Beneficiaries during Reconstruction


                                                       TRAINING
                                                       Cascading training program to help homeowners


                                                       SUBSIDIES
                                                       Awarded in tranches to assure alignment to resilient construction


                                                       LOGISTICS HUB
                                                       Labor and Building Materials Markets Facilitation

                  OWNER DRIVEN                         IMPLEMENTATION SUPPORT
                                                       Through Mobile Teams


                                                       INSPECTION & CERTIFICATION
                                                       Conducted at key stages of construction for payment disbursement




           Stage V: Completion

                  In the final stage of the program cycle, the beneficiary will obtain the “Building Construction Completion
                 Certificate”, which precedes the occupancy of the housing unit. At the completion stage, it will be vital for
                 the RHRP to broadly launch a clear communications message to inform beneficiaries on how to request
                 and obtain the Building Construction Completion Certificate.




This material has been funded through the Nepal Rural Housing Reconstruction Program Multi-Donor Trust Fund, thanks to the contributions of:
US Agency for International Development (USAID), Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation (SDC) and the World Bank. The views expressed
do not necessarily reflect the US or Swiss government’s official policies or the policies of the World Bank and its Board of Executive Directors.


                                                                                                                                   January 2016


     FUNDED BY
                                                                                                       MANAGED BY
