                         102944

        Nepal Rural Housing
        Reconstruction Program




Program Overview
and
Operations Manual
Summary
Program Overview                                                                                    1
scope of the disaster
    On April 25, 2015, a 7.8 magnitude earthquake struck Nepal. Following a second strong earthquake on
   May 12 (7.3 magnitude), and a sequence of aftershocks, the Government of Nepal (GoN) reported the death
   toll at 8,700, while those injured reached 25,000. A Post-Disaster Needs Assessment (PDNA), completed
   in June 2015, found that total damages and losses amounted to about US$7 billion, with reconstruction
   needs of about US$6.7 billion. As the earthquake sequence destroyed 490,000 houses -- mostly traditional
   mud-brick and mud-stone houses built and occupied by the rural poor -- and rendered another 265,000
   houses at least temporarily uninhabitable, the largest single need identified in the PDNA was housing and
   human settlements, accounting for US$3.27 billion or almost half of the total reconstruction needs.




                                                                                                    Photo: The World Bank

    Housing reconstruction and human settlements were identified in the PDNA as the largest single need,
    accounting for almost half of the total reconstruction needs


nepal housing reconstruction program
    To address the housing reconstruction needs and to build a more resilient Nepal, the Government of
   Nepal is leading the overall housing reconstruction efforts nationally through a housing reconstruction
   program meant to encompass all of the housing stock to be rebuilt. The program will also serve as a
   coordinating framework to standardize housing reconstruction policy, irrespective of the funding sources.




                                                       2
                                                                                                         Program Overview




rural housing reconstruction program (rhrp)
    The Rural Housing Reconstruction Program will focus on restoring
   affected housing in 14 targeted rural districts while providing
   technical support to enhance the government’s ability to improve long-            Box 1 - Operating Principles
                                                                                     of the Nepal Rural Housing
   term disaster resilience.                                                         Reconstruction Program
                                                                                       •	 Owner-driven
    The program’s overall objective will ensure that houses destroyed in the
                                                                                       •	 Harmonized approach
   most-affected districts of the country will be rebuilt using earthquake-
                                                                                       •	 Flexible to local realities
   safer building techniques through grants and technical assistance to
   eligible households from the Government of Nepal.                                   •	 Multiple tranches of
                                                                                          grant assistance with
                                                                                          verification
     The program also seeks to equip beneficiaries with skills to construct            •	 Designed around
   earthquake-safer core housing units supported by training, technical                   rebuilding with greater
   support and a subsidy program, and allow households to continue                        resilience
   incremental construction with improved techniques.                                  •	 Based upon international
                                                                                          experiences and best
                                                                                          practices from other
     To support the Government of Nepal’s rural housing reconstruction                    Housing Reconstruction
   efforts, a Multi-Donor Trust Fund has been established with support                    Programs
   from the US Agency for International Development (USAID), the Swiss
   Agency for Development and Cooperation (SDC) and the World Bank.
   Key Development Partners, such as the Japan International Cooperation
   Agency (JICA), are working in close collaboration with MDTF partners
   in extending the coverage of the rural housing reconstruction program
   services to additional areas of the country.




                                                                                                       Photo: The World Bank

    The Program’s objective is to restore and improve long-term resilience to rural housing damaged during the April
    and May 2015 earthquakes in Nepal using earthquake-safer building techniques and materials through an owner-
    driven approach while encouraging a culture of safer and sustainable housing and settlements.




                                                        3
                                                                                                                                    Program Overview




beneficiaries
     The     program will directly benefit approximately
    55,000 households (or about one-tenth of the
    housing destroyed in the earthquake sequence)
    located in municipalities within the 14 most-affected
    districts of Nepal (see figure 1). A high proportion
    of houses in these districts are categorized as
    completely damaged and/or in need of demolition.

     Technical advice (provided through the RHRP),
    to improve long-term disaster resilience, will be
    aimed at all housing reconstruction beneficiaries
    estimated to be approximately 490,000 households.                                                                             Photo: The World Bank




                      Figure 1- Target Districts of the Rural Housing Reconstruction Program




                                   NEPAL - April 2015 Earthquake:Estimated Affected Areas as of 25th April 2015.
                                   Produced by OCHA / REACH on April 27, 2015, available at:
                                   http://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/reach_npl_map_earthquakeaffected_27apr2015_a3.pdf


     The 14 targeted areas of the Nepal Rural Housing Reconstruction Program include the following districts:
          •	   Sindhupalchowk             •	   Kavrepalanchowk
          •	   Kathmandu                  •	   Lalitpur
          •	   Nuwakot                    •	   Dolakha
          •	   Dhading                    •	   Ramechhap
          •	   Rasuwa                     •	   Makawanpur
          •	   Gorkha                     •	   Okhaldhunga
          •	   Bhaktapur                  •	   Sindhuli




                                                                  4
                                                                                                           Program Overview




eligibility
      Eligibility will be determined based on a comprehensive, door-to-door assessment of the damages to the
    housing stock in the affected districts, carried out by the Central Bureau of Statistics (CBS).



Key Steps in the Eligibility Process:
       •	   Eligible beneficiaries under this program must sign a legally binding Participation Agreement (PA)
            with their respective Village District Committee (VDC) or municipality. The Participation Agreement
            outlines the entitlements and obligations of both parties regarding key details of the program such
            as payment, housing construction standards, and grievance redress mechanisms.

       •	   Those who have started reconstruction with their own initiatives are eligible to receive a subsidy
            provided that inspections certify that they are following the Nepalese Building Code (NBC)
            standards as well as environmental and social standards.

       •	   Beneficiaries will receive technical and social support to rebuild their houses using earthquake-
            safer construction standards, in line with the NBC, and a subsidy of NPR 200,000 (Nepalese Rupee)
            per house.

       •	   The subsidy will be disbursed in three tranches, conditional on meeting the program standards as
            follows: NPR 50,000 upon signing the Participation Agreement, NPR 100,000 upon completion up
            to lintel/wall level, and NPR 50,000 upon casting of the roof.




                                                                                 Photo: © Simone D. McCourtie / The World Bank




                                                       5
Program Implementation                                                                                                          2
implementation roles and responsibilities
        Under the leadership of the Government of Nepal, the Rural Housing Reconstruction Program’s
     implementation has been carefully structured to reflect the program’s operating principles (mentioned
     above in Box 1) as well as the conditions on the ground. As shown in Diagram 1, there is both flexibility
     as well as regular monitoring and evaluation to assure that implementation is responsive to the needs of
     beneficiaries. Best practices have been gleaned from other international reconstruction experiences and
     incorporated into the implementation structure and procedures for the RHRP.


                     Diagram 1 - Nepal Rural Housing Reconstruction Program Implementation Structure


                                                     1
                                                                National Reconstruction Authority (NRA)
                                                                        (Chief Executive Officer)



                                                                                                                            Donor Coordination
                                                                                                                               Committee
                                                                    Program Management Unit (PMU)
                                                                           (Program Director)                                  Thematic
                                                                                                                             Working Groups



                                          Ministry of Federal Affairs and
                                                                                            Ministry of Urban Development (MoUD)
                                          Local Development (MoFALD)
                                                                                                           (Secretary)
                                                    (Secretary)




                                                DOLIDAR Project                                        DUDBC Project
    4                                       Implementation Unit (PIU)
                                              (Project Coordinator)
                                                                                                  Implementation Unit (PIU)
                                                                                                    (Project Coordinator)
                                                                                                                                            2
  Partner Organizations (POs)

                                                            District Development
        District Level

                                                                                                                                            3
                                District Technical          Committee (DDC) /
  Technical Assistance (TA):                                                                              Division Office
                                  Office (DTO)             District Level (DL) PIU
  Lead Partner Organization
                                                                     (LDO)

     VDC Cluster Level TA:
     Partner Organization

        Mobile Technical                                                                 Village
        Support Teams                                                                  Development
                                                                                     Committee (VDC)



                                        BENEFICIARIES




                                                                      6
                                                                                               Program Implementation




1 NATIONAL LEVEL
   National Reconstruction Authority (NRA)
   Leads the Housing Reconstruction Program Nationally
      •	   Provides policy guidance, coordination and oversight of the Earthquake Housing Reconstruction
           Program (EHRP)
      •	   Facilitates broad communication and coordination across the Government of Nepal
      •	   Established by the Government of Nepal with participation from high-level representatives from
           concerned ministries, divisions and implementing agencies

   Program Management Unit (PMU)
   Leads the Rural Housing Reconstruction Program
      •	   Coordinates program activities and oversees the reconstruction process in rural areas
      •	   Will establish and support a Donor Coordination Committee (DCC) for all donors providing financial
           assistance to the program
      •	   Housed in the National Reconstruction Authority
      •	   Headed by a Program Director responsible for program supervision

           Donor Coordination Committee (DCC)
           Under the PMU, the DCC provides a platform for the Government of Nepal’s Donor Coordination of
           the overall programmatic strategy
             •	   Chaired by the National Reconstruction Authority’s Chief Executive Officer (CEO)

           Project Management Units (PMU) Thematic Working Groups
           Supports the overall programmatic strategy in specific areas
             •	   Coordinates with and supports the Program Management Unit (PMU) through thematic groups
             •	   Will include representatives from the Government of Nepal and Development Partners
                  supporting the program. May be extended to include representatives from international and
                  national non-governmental organizations (NGOs), and national/international experts, based
                  on need
             •	   Thematic Working Groups include: i) Technical Information; (ii) Technical Capacity
                  Development; (iii) Supply and demand projection and information chain; (iv) Social and
                  community recovery and development; (v) Communication and outreach; (vi) Coordination,
                  reporting, monitoring and evaluation; (vii) Financial inclusion; (viii) Disaster risk management
                  (housing and settlement)


   GoN PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION UNITS (PIUs)
   Project Implementation Unit (PIU)
2 Coordinates & oversees implementation at the project level
      •	   PIUs are established under the Program Management Unit and under the overall guidance and
           coordination of the respective ministries and implementing agencies.
      •	   Each PIU will be headed by a project director and will coordinate closely with each other.
      •	   These two units, specified below, are responsible for efficient and effective implementation and
           regular monitoring of activities.




                                                        7
                                                                                          Program Implementation




         Department of Urban Development and Guild Reconstruction (DUDBC) Project Implementing
         Unit (PIU)
         Under the Ministry of Urban Development (MoUD), and established in the Department of Urban
         Development and Building Construction (DUDBC), the DUDBC-PIU will be responsible for:
           •	   establishing housing construction standards,
           •	   procuring and managing Partner Organizations,
           •	   developing and overseeing the implementation of the cascading training, and
           •	   providing technical inputs to oversee housing reconstruction.

         Department of Local Infrastructure Development and Agricultural Roads (DoLIDAR) Project
         Implementing Unit (PIU)
         Under the Ministry of Federal Affairs and Local Development (MoFALD), the DoLIDAR PIU will be
         responsible for the:
           •	   provision of housing reconstruction grants,
           •	   management of household and beneficiary databases,
           •	   management of feedback mechanisms, and
           •	   hosting survey data: the beneficiary survey data will reside under the Department of Civil
                Registration (DoCR) of the MoFALD.


3 GoN SUB NATIONAL LEVEL
  Fourteen District Development Committees (DDCs) (or District Level Project Implementing Units (DL PIUs))
  Responsible for overall development of activities at the District Level
    •	   Within the GoN’s local government administrative structure and overall policy guidance and
         coordination of MoFALD, the DDCs (or DL PIUs) are headed by a Local Development Officer (LDO)
         who acts as the District Level (DL) Project Implementation Unit’s Project Coordinator and will be
         responsible for implementation at the District Level.
    •	   The heads of the District Technical Office (DTO) and the Department of Urban Development and
         Building Construction’s (DUDBC) Division Office (DO) will work closely with the Local Development
         Officer/District Level PIU Project Coordinator and provide technical and administrative input.

         The Village Development Committees (VDCs)
         Coordinates village-level activities
           •	   The next tier of local government are the VDCs who will report to the Local Development
                Officer (LDO)/District Level PIU Project Coordinator. This coordinator, will also coordinate
                and report to the DoLIDAR and DUDBC PIUs on the implementation progress at the District
                Level.
           •	   The GoN will set up an inspection system and process to ensure that every reconstructed
                household gets inspected. Each Village Development Committee (VDC) should have at
                least one inspector who will be responsible for: 1) issuing building permits; 2) conducting
                inspections and helping to process the documentation for release of pending tranche, and 3)
                ensuring compliance with environmental and social safeguard criteria, and communicating the
                National Building Code and earthquake-safer construction guidelines.




                                                     8
                                                                                               Program Implementation




 4 Partner Organizations (POs)
    POs will be contracted by the program (through DoLIDAR PIU) to carry out field-level project activities with
    regard to enrollment, training, mobilization, orientation, and the mobile technical support teams. Support
    provided by POs will include:
       •	   Cluster-Level Training Centers, of which there will be one per cluster of 10-15 Village Development
            Committees (VDCs).
       •	   Mobile Technical Support Teams, of which there will be at least one in each Village Development
            Committee (or per 1,000 buildings) for technical assistance to household beneficiaries.




implementation procedures
     T he Nepal Rural Housing Reconstruction Program is structured around five major stages of
    implementation (see Figure 1) -- each one building upon the other, as follows:




Stage I: The Survey
                                                                 Figure 1 - Building Resilience in Nepal:
     The     Central Bureau of Statistics (CBS)                        Stages of Implementation
    is conducting a comprehensive census of
    damage to the housing stock in each of the
    fourteen most-affected districts. Technical and
    logistical support is being provided by UNDP
    (United Nations Development Programme).                                    Stage V:
    This door-to-door assessment will generate                                Completion
    a beneficiary/damage database to serve as
    the basis of the rural housing reconstruction                              Stage IV:
    program as well as assist in the effective                               Reconstruction
    monitoring of the recovery process.
                                                                                Stage III:
     CBS will liaise with the Ministry of Housing                              Enrollment
    Affairs (MoHA)/District Disaster Relief
    Committees (DDRC) in the data collection                                     Stage II:
                                                                       Identification & Validation
    and use the data already collected by the rapid
    visual assessment that has been conducted
                                                                                Stage I:
    by the MoHA/Ministry of Federal Affairs and                                The Survey
    Local Development (MoFALD).

	




                                                       9
                                                                                                    Program Implementation




Stage II: Identification and Validation

      Based on the eligibility criteria, an analysis of the survey results will generate a list of eligible households
    at the Village Development Committee level (and when possible, at the local ward level). The beneficiary
    list will be published at the local level and a grievance period of 35 days will be provided to allow for
    inclusion/exclusion claims and grievances.


Stage III: Enrollment

      Eligible beneficiaries will enroll in the program by entering into a legally binding Participation Agreement
    (PA) with their VDC or municipality. The PA outlines the entitlements and obligations of both parties
    regarding key details of the program such as:

       •	   payment

       •	   housing construction standards and

       •	   grievance redress mechanisms (how beneficiaries can address any complaints).

     During enrollment, those beneficiaries without bank accounts will be assisted with opening one or with
    determining another workable payment mechanism.


Stage IV: Reconstruction

      The   principal of owner-driven reconstruction is fundamental to the Nepal housing program.
    Beneficiaries will be supported with socio-technical assistance; training and market facilitation; and cash-
    based assistance, provided in tranches, upon certification of earthquake-safer techniques guided by
    Nepal’s National Building Code (NBC). The reconstruction stage encompasses the following components
    (see Figure 2):



             Figure 2 - The Nepal Rural Reconstruction Program: Support to Beneficiaries during Reconstruction


                                              TRAINING
                                              Cascading training program to help homeowners


                                              SUBSIDIES
                                              Awarded in tranches to assure alignment to resilient construction


                                              LOGISTICS HUB
                                              Labor and Building Materials Markets Facilitation

            OWNER DRIVEN                      IMPLEMENTATION SUPPORT
                                              Through Mobile Teams


                                              INSPECTION & CERTIFICATION
                                              Conducted at key stages of construction for payment disbursement




                                                         10
                                                                                          Program Implementation




  Training: A cascading training program is an integral part of the reconstruction effort. A uniform
reconstruction training curriculum has been developed and approved by the Ministry of Urban Development
(MoUD). At the national level, “master trainers” are being prepared to instruct and coach mobile teams
on resilient construction techniques/materials. The mobile teams will, in turn, work in individual VDCs/
municipalities to train artisans and contractors who will be directly involved in the reconstruction. Training
centers and technical assistance support will be set up in collaboration with partner organizations (e.g.,
NGOs, private sector firms, academia, etc.), which will be responsible for the training of master artisan
trainers, mobile trainers, artisans and homeowners.


 Subsidies: In conjunction with training, a subsidy for housing reconstruction will be provided in tranches,
based on proper completion of various stages of construction. This will encourage owner-driven
reconstruction alignment with Nepal’s National Building Code (NBC). The VDC/municipality will assure
the layout and building as per the LSGA (Local Self Government Act); DUDBC (working in conjunction with
DTO/DoLIDAR and other Partner Organizations (POs)) will ensure the adaptation of the National Building
Code. Housing grants will be directly deposited into individual beneficiary bank accounts which will follow
a relaxed Know-Your-Customer (KYC) requirement as specified by NRB (Nepal Rastra Bank, the Central
Bank of Nepal). The accounts will include the following minimum service features:

  •	   a savings account with transaction facility,

  •	   relaxed KYC attributes, including Earthquake-Affected Household IDs in cases where a beneficiary
       does not possess a citizenship document, and

  •	   accessible at a bank branch, an ATM or an agent.


 Logistics Hub, Labor and Building Material Markets Facilitation: The program will help guarantee a
continuous supply of building materials and skilled labor, and manage potential shortage and/or adverse
price fluctuations of the resources through Partner Organizations. To this end, the program will:

  •	   develop area-specific demand and supply projections, and provide this information to the private
       sector and consumers,

  •	   establish resource availability and price-tracking mechanisms,

  •	   provide continuous information on prices, location, and mechanisms for procurement to beneficiaries,
       POs, and the private sector, and

  •	   develop action plans to ensure appropriate and continuous supply of materials and skilled labor


  Implementation Support: Each VDC will have a mobile team composed of technicians and social
mobilizers. The team’s main responsibility will be to conduct awareness campaigns and orientations
for homeowners, provide on-the-job assistance to workers on site, and organize social gatherings and
meetings to discuss problems and difficulties faced during the reconstruction phase in order to help
identify solutions.




                                                      11
                                                                                                                Program Implementation




     Inspection and Certification: Inspection will be conducted to ensure that the housing reconstruction
    follows the NBC and is in compliance with the necessary conditions for the cash transfer. Inspection will be
    done per stage:

      1.	 upon signing of the Participation Agreement,

      2.	 upon completion of the foundation up to the lintel/wall, and

      3.	 upon completion of the roof.


Stage V: Completion

     In the final stage of the program cycle, the beneficiary will obtain the “Building Construction Completion
    Certificate”, which precedes the occupancy of the housing unit. At the completion stage, it will be vital for
    the RHRP to broadly launch a clear communications message to inform beneficiaries on how to request
    and obtain the Building Construction Completion Certificate.




grievance redress mechanism (grm)
     The housing reconstruction program offers beneficiaries the opportunity to pursue complaints with the
    program. This grievance mechanism system includes:

      •	   a recording and reporting system, with the ability to file grievances both verbally and in writing,

      •	   designated staff with responsibility at various levels of governments, and

      •	   a specific protocol for handling grievances including the minimum time frame within which different
           types of grievances should be addressed.

     Beneficiaries or non-beneficiaries may file grievances at one of following reporting locations depending
    upon convenience for the filer and on the nature of the complaint: (i) the VDC/municipality office, or (ii)
    the PO offices.




                                                                      Photo: Ignacio Urrutia / The World Bank




                                                       12
                                                                                             Program Implementation




monitoring and evaluation (m&e)
    An effective reporting, monitoring and evaluation system will be in place to gather, standardize and
   measure all data streams related to reconstruction, earthquake-safer compliance and technical support
   activities. The information will be used for analysis, planning and course corrections. Clear mechanisms will
   be set in place to monitor the effectiveness and efficiency of various activities in order to rapidly improve
   strategies or any aspect of program implementation (for example, improving training programs over time).

    The M&E system will be built upon the information collected during the Earthquake Household Damages
   and Characteristics (EHDC) survey as well as data generated during the program cycle.




management information system (mis)
    The Nepal Rural Housing Reconstruction Program (RHRP) will use the Department of Civil Registration
   (DoCR1/MoFALD) MIS design framework to automate the business process of RHRP. This means that the
   MIS for RHRP will use the same architecture and interface design framework of the existing MoFALD MIS
   in terms of database design structure, data flows, user interface look-and-feel, and its navigation. However,
   the sub-system for RHRP will be managed by DoLIDAR.

    The approach will develop a ‘sub-system’ for RHRP in compliance with the overall MoFALD MIS platform
   that will help ensure data standardization, maintain uniformity and establish the potential data sharing
   mechanism between the RHRP sub-system and DoCR/MoFALD MIS as per the business requirements
   of the program.




communications strategy
    A  communications strategy and plan are being
   prepared for approval by the Program Steering
   Committee. The communications strategy will
   be consistent with the following fundamental
   tenets of the program:

     •	     consistency and clarity,

     •	     beneficiary-centered,

     •	     culturally/socially sensitive,

     •	     timely,

     •	     responsible,

     •	     planned, and
                                                                                                 Photo: The World Bank
     •	     continuously adjusted, based on feedback.


     1
         A department within the Ministry of Federal Affairs and Local Development



                                                                13
This material has been funded through the Nepal Rural Housing Reconstruction Program Multi-Donor Trust Fund, thanks to the
contributions of: US Agency for International Development (USAID), Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation (SDC) and the
World Bank. The views expressed do not necessarily reflect the US or Swiss government’s official policies or the policies of the World
Bank and its Board of Executive Directors.




                                                                                                                         January 2016




                                             FUNDED BY




                                             MANAGED BY
