                               103069




Doing Business Reform Memorandum



            Bulgaria

             October 2015




                  1
Introduction
Bulgaria experienced strong economic growth prior to and shortly after joining the
European Union (EU) in 2007. Bulgaria’s economic growth of 6 per cent a year in real
per capita PPP terms between 2000 and 2013 was the strongest in the EU. Foreign Direct
Investment (FDI) inflows grew at a rate of 40 per cent of Gross Domestic Product (GDP)
a year until the period 2005-2008. FDI was, in fact, mainly channeled to non-tradable
sectors, like construction, real estate, transport and tourism, which provided an abundant
labor force. About 600,000 new jobs were created. Foreign investments were also made in
high value added industries of the economy, like information and communication
technologies (ICT) and pharma, which accelerated their pace of development in the early
2000s. These two sectors, eventually, became one of the key innovation drivers of the
economy, instigating a unique innovation ecosystem that started to grow since 2009. In
addition to the jump in FDI flows, the fast rate economic growth was supported by other
macroeconomic factors, including the currency board, which pegged the national currency
(Bulgarian lev) to the deutsche mark (1997) and then to the euro (1999); sustainable
macroeconomic reforms; integration with the EU through accession negotiations and
membership to the club (in 2007), low tax rate (corporate tax of 10 per cent); and a
relatively highly-skilled work force.1
The impact of the global financial crisis, however, drastically slowed down Bulgaria’s
growth rate. Between 2008 and 2013 annual GDP per capita growth went down to just 1
per cent. About 400,000 Bulgarians lost their jobs, mostly in industry, construction, and
agriculture. The official unemployment rate climbed up to 13 per cent in 2013, mainly
affecting the portion of the workforce who’d only gained a primary education. As a result,
the poverty rate rose from 16.1 per cent of Bulgarians in 2008 to 18.5 per cent by 2012.2
Yet, Bulgaria has managed to recover in recent years by intensifying and diversifying
its export market share. Bulgaria was among the 4 top Eastern European countries
(together with Croatia, Poland and Romania) which managed to gain export market share
between 2010 and 2014. This growth in market share can be attributed to the intensification



1
  The currency board has been a key factor for guaranteeing macro-fiscal stability. Yet, the fiscal balance
worsened abruptly from a surplus of 1.6 per cent of GDP in 2008 to a deficit of 4.2 per cent in 2009, and
Bulgaria became subject to the EU Excessive Deficit Procedure (EDP) when the deficit exceeded the EU
Growth and Stability Pact threshold of 3 per cent of GDP. Nevertheless, the excessive deficit was corrected
quickly and since 2011 deficits have been at or below 2 per cent of GDP, among the lowest in the EU. Public
debt stood at only 18.3 per cent of GDP in 2013 was the second lowest in the EU. The country’s current
account deficit moved from 24 per cent of GDP in 2007 to smaller deficits and even a surplus of 1.8 per cent
in 2013 as a result of fewer imports, higher transfers due to faster absorption of EU funds, and a solid recovery
in exports of goods. For more discussion of the macro-economic context, see World Bank (2015). Bulgaria
Systematic Country Diagnostic. Sustainable Growth and Shared Prosperity: Today and Tomorrow.
Washington DC.
2
  Ibid.


                                                       2
of existing trade flows. Bulgaria succeeded in diversifying its export base in established
markets and started to raise the number of export destinations for existing products.3
The Bulgarian Government recognizes that improving Bulgaria’s business
environment would help unlock job creation and economic growth. Since 2008, the
government has demonstrated a commitment to improving the business environment, and
launched a number of initiatives aiming to target business environment constraints. The
Better Regulation Program is one such initiative, which includes the development of annual
action plans that aim to reduce the administrative burden for businesses. Three of the
Action Plans have been adopted by the Bulgarian government. The first one was adopted
in 2010 for the period 2010-2012, and successfully cut the administrative burden by 20 per
cent. The second one had a similar impact and cut the administrative burden by a further
20 per cent in the period 2012-2014. The most recent one was adopted in May 2015, and
it aims to cut red tape by 30 per cent for the period 2015-2017.4 The government also used
the regulatory guillotine in 2013, which aimed to cut the regulatory burden through the
introduction of over 100 measures.5
However, the implementation of regulatory initiatives has had mixed success. Under
the Better Regulation Program, the government adopted over 100 measures to reduce the
regulatory and administrative burden, but no formal mechanism was introduced to
regularly monitor and review its implementation at the national or municipal level. Some
areas in which entrepreneurs expected to see improved efficiency, actually saw setbacks.
The time needed to get a construction permit, import license, or operational license almost
doubled between 2008 and 2013, and senior managers of firms reported that they were
spending more time – 22 per cent in 2013 – dealing with public officials or public services
than in 2008, when it took 14 per cent of their time.6
At the central level, the government introduced the online public consultation portal
(www.strategy.bg), which was recognized as good practice of digital democracy by the
Parliamentary Assembly of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe.
However, in practice, the public consultation process is not yet systematically
implemented, and public consultation does not take place for many government initiatives.


3
  World Bank (2015). EU Regular Economic Report: Modest Recovery, Global Risk. Europe and Central
Asia. World Bank Group. May 2015.
4
  They are accessible at: (http://www.strategy.bg/StrategicDocuments/View.aspx?lang=bg-BG&Id=960)
5
   The first Bulgarian Regulation Program 2008-2010 was developed with the support of international
institutions, like the World Bank and Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD).
The goals of the Program were aimed at (i) simplification of administrative regimes; (ii) creation of an
institutional structure to implement the better regulation policy; (iii) stimulation of the dialogue with the
stakeholders; (iv) implementation of better regulatory policies at the local level. In 2010 the Program was
extended until 2013 and 3 specific goals were set, namely: (i) improvement of the administrative regulation;
(ii) introduction of regulatory impact assessment, and (iii) improvement of administrative service delivery
through e-governance.
6
  2013 Business Environment Enterprise Survey (BEEPS ).


                                                     3
At the municipal level, the implementation of administrative reform has been inconsistent.
Different municipalities followed different procedures, with different documentation
requirements and fee schedules for delivering the same services. While most local
administrations were well computerized, electronic services were limited largely to second-
generation reforms based on websites offering only basic information and application
forms for a subset of administrative services.
The current Bulgarian government made administrative reform and better
regulation a policy priority. The Deputy Prime Minister for Coalition Policy and State
Administration holds the political leadership for the Better Regulation Agenda. The
Council for Administrative Reform, established in 2009 and chaired by the Deputy Prime
Minister, is the main platform for discussing administrative reform. 7 The council has
already had traction: new legislation related to the introduction of mandatory regulatory
impact assessment is close to adoption; the council is aiming to improve transparency at
all bureaucratic levels and established a new E-Government Agency in June 2015; the
council and the government as a whole are working to improve the accessibility of public
registers and data for businesses and citizens, called the Open Data initiative. Government
efforts in the better regulation agenda are in line with key strategic documents, including
the Government’s Program for Sustainable Development of the Republic of Bulgaria
(2014-2018); the Strategy for the Development of Public Administration (2014-2020); the
National Program for Development: Bulgaria 2020; the National Program for Reforms of
the Republic of Bulgaria in line with the implementation of the Europe 2020 Strategy;
Second Action Plan of the Republic of Bulgaria under the initiative “Partnership for Open
Management”; and the Strategy for Continuation of the Judicial Reform.


Bulgaria’s Business Environment as Measured by International Benchmarks
The overall business environment in an economy depends on many factors, ranging from
market size, macroeconomic conditions, and business regulations. A number of
international benchmarks and surveys aim at identifying key constraints to a country’s
competitiveness and private sector development. The World Economic Forum’s (WEF)
Global Competitiveness Report aims to measure competitiveness across 12 pillars
measuring different aspects of investment climate. The results are derived to a large extent
from WEF’s Executive Opinion Survey, which also provides firm-level insights on the top
barriers to doing business in each economy. The World Bank’s World Investment and
Political Risk survey examines the short- and medium-term obstacles to investment in the
next 1 to 3 years. Similarly, the World Bank’s Enterprise Surveys, last conducted in
Bulgaria in 2013, collect data from firms varying in size, sector, and industry to assess
firm-level perceptions of the investment climate. The World Bank Group’s Doing Business

7
    For more information about the Council, please see, http://saveti.government.bg/web/cc_203/1.


                                                      4
indicators focus on the impact of laws, regulations and their enforcement on the ease of
doing business for domestic firms in 10 areas, from starting a business to insolvency. While
such benchmarks only give an indication of the overall enabling environment for firms,
they can help the government of Bulgaria to identify specific areas of business regulation
in need of reform, to create a more business-friendly environment for firms, supporting
private sector productivity and growth.

In WEF’s Global Competitiveness Index, Bulgaria ranked 54th out of 148 countries in the
latest report (2014-2015). The country is classified as an efficiency-driven economy.
Bulgaria’s highest rankings are in the categories of Macroeconomic Environment (36th out
of 148), Technological Readiness (41st out of 148), and Health and Primary Education
(51st out of 148). It scores in the bottom third globally on the pillars Institutions (112th),
Business Sophistication (105th), and Innovation (105th). Over the last 4 years, Bulgaria
improved in 6 of the 12 pillars, including Infrastructure, Health and Primary Education,
Higher Education and Training, Goods Market Efficiency, Financial Market Development,
and Technological Readiness. There was no significant change in the pillars on Market
Size and Business Sophistication, and a decline was recorded in Institutions,
Macroeconomic Environment, Labor Market Efficiency, and Innovation. (Figure 1.1)

Figure 1.1: Bulgaria’s performance on the Global Competitiveness Index (2014-
12015)




        Bulgaria         Europe and Central Asia

Source: Global Competitiveness Report, 2014-2015 (WEF)

Firms interviewed in WEF’s Executive Opinion Survey identify 5 key obstacles to doing
business. Nearly 14 per cent of firms point to corruption as the main obstacle to business;
13 per cent cite inefficient government bureaucracy; 11 per cent identify access to finance;
and 9 per cent see policy instability and an inadequately educated workforce as the key
constraints to business. (Figure 1.2)




                                              5
Figure 1.2: Top 10 Obstacles to Doing Business, % of Bulgarian firms




Source: WEF’s Executive Opinion Survey (2014-2015)



Another study, the World Investment and Political Risk survey, presents a forward looking
picture of entrepreneurs’ perceptions of short and medium term obstacles to investment in
the next 1 to 3 years. The business community expects that political risk and corruption
remain burdensome in the near future while macroeconomic stability is also expected to
deteriorate and become more of a hurdle in the next 1-3 years. (Figure 1.3).

Figure 1.3: Key constraints to investment, Bulgaria




       Top constraint in next year        Top constraint in next 3 years

Source: World Investment and Political Risk survey (World Bank Group, 2013)




                                           6
Further insights into entrepreneurs’ perceptions of the business environment are offered by
the World Bank Group’s Enterprise Survey (conducted in Bulgaria in 2009 and 2013). The
survey shows a substantial increase in respondents, from 15 per cent in 2009 to 28 per cent
in 2013, identifying informal practices as the leading constraint to doing business. This
result also significantly exceeds the regional average of 16 per cent of firms identifying
informal practices as the main obstacle. Nearly 14 per cent identified political instability
as the main obstacle, similar to the regional average of around 15 per cent for the same
indicator. The next 2 top responses were corruption (13 per cent) and taxes (8 per cent),
followed closely by labor regulations, access to finance, an inadequately educated labor
force, and courts from the list of 15 potential obstacles. Access to finance, often featuring
among the top obstacles perceived in other countries, was only 6th on the list (see Figure
1.4).

Figure 1.4: Top 10 Obstacles to Doing Business, % of Bulgarian firms, Enterprise
Surveys, 2013




        2009          2013          Eastern Europe and Central Asia

Source: World Bank Enterprise Surveys

The results vary slightly depending on the firm size. Corruption weighs equally on the
minds of all firms – small, medium, and large. However, small and medium firms find
informal practices twice as burdensome as large firms. This may be because informal
competitors are often small to medium in size and compete mainly in that space, unable to
break into large firm operations. The data also show that in the Bulgarian context, an
insufficiently educated workforce, taxes, and licenses affect small and medium firms more
negatively. For small firms, access to finance is also cited as a serious constraint. Medium
firms report particular difficulties with labor regulations, which may reflect their efforts to
grow their operations while facing difficulties complying with labor laws.




                                              7
The final diagnostic study considered in this memo is the Doing Business report, which is
also the basis for the reform recommendations presented in the document. According to
last year’s Doing Business report, business regulation in Bulgaria varies significantly
across the areas measured. Bulgaria is among the global top 50 performers in 4 of the 10
areas– specifically, Protecting Minority Shareholders (14th), Getting Credit (23rd),
Resolving Insolvency (38th), and Starting a Business (49th). Bulgaria‘s performance lags
behind in four areas – Getting Electricity (125th), Dealing with Construction Permits
(101st), Paying Taxes (89th), and Enforcing Contracts (75th) (Figure 1.5).

A similar variation is reflected by the Distance to the Frontier (DTF) metric, which
provides an indication of how far a country’s performance is from global good practice.
Bulgaria scores 71.8 points, ahead of the regional average of 66.67 points. Bulgaria
outperforms the regional average on 7 of the 10 indicators (excluding Registering Property,
Paying Taxes, and Enforcing Contracts) (Figure 1.6)

Figure 1.5: Bulgaria’s rankings on Doing Business Indicators, 2015




Figure 1.6: Bulgaria’s performance on the Distance to the Frontier Metric




                            Bulgaria         East Europe and Central Asia

Source: Doing Business 2015




                                            8
Since 2007, Bulgaria has engaged in 14 reforms recognized by Doing Business, in 6 of the
10 areas covered by the report, although the pace of reforms has slowed down since 2010.
Most recently, in 2014, Bulgaria made starting a business easier by lowering registration
fees. In the period 2012-2103, Bulgaria made trading across borders faster by introducing
online submission of customs declaration forms, amended its commerce act to extend
further rights to secured creditors, and increased the efficiency of insolvency proceedings.
In 2011, Bulgaria eased business start-up by reducing the minimum capital requirement
from 5,000 leva ($3,250) to 2 leva ($1.30). During the period 2009-2010, a number of
reforms were implemented. In 2010, Bulgaria made starting a business easier by reducing
the paid-in minimum capital requirement; enhancing the efficiency at the company
registry; and creating a centralized electronic database for commercial registration, which
consolidated registration procedures and eliminated some registration formalities. Bulgaria
reduced the time to register property by launching an integrated web-based property
register, and making it possible to check the ownership and Cadaster status of properties
online. Bulgaria also made paying taxes easier for companies by introducing new corporate
income and value added tax (VAT) laws, abolishing the requirement for an additional
annual VAT return, and reducing the employer share of social security contributions.
Furthermore, the contract enforcement system was improved by amending rules for
evidence and default judgment, raising the minimum threshold value for the lower
jurisdiction, and giving the civil court of last instance the power to select which cases to
hear so as to limit abuse of the appeals process. Bulgaria adopted a new civil procedure
code and a new law for the commercial registry, introducing changes aimed at reducing
delays and allowing for faster resolution of insolvency cases. Among other aspects, the
commercial registry law requires that major decisions and rulings of the bankruptcy court
be posted on the commercial registry’s website. In 2008, Bul garia made paying taxes
easier and less costly for companies by encouraging electronic filing and payment, and by
reducing the corporate income tax rate and employers’ social security contribution rate. In
the same year, changes to the judicial system were introduced, increasing transparency in
the system and appointing private bailiffs.

Scope of the Reform Memorandum
The reform memorandum addresses a number of gaps that require different degrees
of intervention by the government. It highlights potential reform opportunities in the
areas covered by the Doing Business report that would allow the government to have a
direct impact on business conditions by addressing some of these shortcomings through
legal, regulatory or administrative reforms.8



8
 It must be noted that the reform memorandum does not include recommendations on the Getting
Electricity indicator as the topic is outside of the scope of work covered by the Trade and Competitiveness
Global Practice of the World Bank Group.


                                                     9
A series of inputs are used from primary and secondary sources to develop the
memorandum. The document uses inputs from a series of face-to-face meetings with
government officials, private sector participants, academics, and experts during a technical
visit in Sofia, which was conducted by the World Bank Group team during the period June
15-19, 2015. The team also used additional sources as inputs to the report, including
strategy papers, a number of relevant laws, and diagnostic reports published by The World
Bank Group and WEF. Lastly, the policy recommendations are based on the Doing
Business data and methodology as published in the Doing Business 2015 report.9 The data
refer to the status as of June 2014.
The report, however, does not provide a comprehensive overview of all investment
climate issues in Bulgaria. The recommendations focus on:
     Reduction of the administrative burden to businesses with a focus primarily on
      small and medium size domestic firms;
     Strengthening the regulatory and institutional framework to improve transparency
      and predictability of the policy and its implementation.

Some of the recommendations provided in this document are actionable in the short term,
without major legal changes. Other recommendations are implementable in a longer time
frame. The suggested time frames are based on the experience in other countries, and may
be subject to adjustment based on the particular political economy context of Bulgaria.
Table 1.1 provides a summary of the short- and medium-term reform recommendations
which are described in more detail in this memorandum. All actions require consultations
and coordination with a variety of stakeholders. In this regard, the World Bank Group can
provide assistance to the government of Bulgaria in order to support implementation of
regulatory reforms to facilitate the ease of doing business.
Finally, communicating reforms to beneficiaries and monitoring their
implementation is key to reform success. International best practice suggests that
monitoring the implementation and impact of reforms highlights areas of success as well
as areas where further effort is needed. Communicating reforms effectively to
implementing agencies, the business and legal communities, and the general public ensures
that changes are accepted and put into practice consistently. Therefore, improving the
regulatory environment to facilitate the creation and growth of businesses is a major
undertaking, and requires strong political leadership and accountability mechanisms.
Improvement to the business environment can help build a foundation for the private
sector’s sustainable development, providing businesses in Bulgaria with the opportunity to
operate in a regulatory and institutional environment, conducive to competition, innovation
and a high value economy.

9
     For     more     information  about   the   Doing   Business   report   methodology,   see
http://doingbusiness.org/methodology.


                                                 10
               Table 1.1: Bulgaria’s Performance on the Doing Business Indicators and Suggested Short- and Medium-term
               Recommendations

Topics           Indicators (2015 DB Report)                          Short-term recommendations                                          Medium-term recommendations
Starting a       Procedures: 4                        Remove the requirement to open a bank account and deposit             Decrease the VAT registration time or allow for simultaneous
Business         Days: 18                           the symbolic 1 euro minimum required capital as part of the pre-       business and VAT registration;
                 Cost (% of income per capita):     registration requirements;
                 0.8 per cent                                                                                                Further reduce the business registration fees through the
                 Paid-in min. capita (% of income     Further reduce deadlines for company registration at the            application of a cost recovery principle.
                 per capita): 0 per cent            Commercial Registry.
                 Global rank: 49 out of 189                                                                                  Eliminate the need to physically visit the Commercial Registry
                 DTF (0-100): 91.09                                                                                        to collect the (newly) registered company’s certificates.

Dealing with     Procedures: 16                       Develop clear and actionable guidelines and checklists for            Create a dispute resolution mechanism for compliance issues
Construction     Days: 110                          building sector professionals and investors, and make these            relating to building-code requirements;
Permits          Cost (% of warehouse value): 4.5   available to the public together with agency regulations and
                 per cent                           applicable legislation. Combine this reform with the possibility of      Clarify the roles and responsibilities of supervisory agents vis-
                 Global rank: 101 out of 189        interacting with a single building-permit official for a preliminary   à-vis municipalities and other stakeholders in the building permitting
                 DTF (0-100): 69.85                 project screening;                                                     process;

                                                      Consolidate application forms and streamline requirements             Establish a one-stop shop for all building-related permits and
                                                    for building-related permits;                                          clearances;

                                                      Provide training events and seminars with key stakeholder            Computerize the building permitting process;
                                                    groups – e.g. engineers, architects, building companies and public
                                                    officials – to inform construction sector practitioners on the           Increase collaboration between Geodesic, Cartography and
                                                    novelties introduced by the Euro code and its national annexes;        Cadaster Agency (GCCA) and Sofia Municipality to create robust
                                                                                                                           links between multi-layered Cadaster and Geographic Information
                                                      Consider charging lower fees for small projects presenting no       System (GIS); provide appropriate access to both systems for the
                                                    risk for public health and safety;                                     private sector.

                                                      Eliminate the requirement to obtain an official decision from
                                                    the Director of the Regional Inspectorate of Environment and
                                                    Forestry Protection on whether simpler projects require an
                                                    Environmental Impact Assessment;

                                                      Develop service delivery standards for the agencies involved
                                                    in the building permitting process, as well as systems to track
                                                    compliance to such standards.
Registering      Procedures: 7                        Assess the feasibility of introducing lower fees for property         Increase cadastral coverage by strengthening Geodesy,
Property         Days: 10                           registration;                                                          Cartography and Cadaster Agency (GCCA)’s capacity and
                 Cost (% of property value): 2.9                                                                           responsibilities;
                 per cent                             Eliminate the requirement to obtain a certificate of separate
                 Global rank: 57 out of 189         good standing from the Registration Agency.                              Explore the possibility of making the notary’s signature of the
                 DTF (0-100): 75.36                                                                                        sale agreement optional;

                                                                                             11
Topics         Indicators (2015 DB Report)                          Short-term recommendations                                            Medium-term recommendations

                                                                                                                           Evaluate opportunities to streamline the property registration
                                                                                                                         requirements, for example by improving the exchange of
                                                                                                                         information between the agencies involved in the process;

                                                                                                                           Create an electronic platform offering the possibility of online
                                                                                                                         property transfers;

                                                                                                                           Merge Land Registry and the Cadaster functions into a single
                                                                                                                         administrative agency

Getting        Legal Rights index (0-12): 9          Expand the sources of information to include retailers and          Introduce credit scores;
Credit         Credit Information index (0-8): 5   utility companies.
               Credit registry coverage (% of                                                                             Distribute at least 2 years of historical data;
               adults): 62.9 per cent
               Global rank: 23 out of 189                                                                                  Create an integrated or unified legal framework for secured
               DTF (0-100): 70.00                                                                                        transactions that extends to the creation, publicity and enforcement
                                                                                                                         of 4 functional equivalents to security interests in movable assets:
                                                                                                                         fiduciary transfer of title; financial leases; assignment or transfer of
                                                                                                                         receivables; and sales with retention of title;

                                                                                                                           Create a notice-based collateral registry in which all functional
                                                                                                                         equivalents can be registered;

                                                                                                                           Create a modern collateral registry in which registrations,
                                                                                                                         amendments, renewals, cancellations and searches can be performed
                                                                                                                         online by any interested third party.
Protecting     Extent of conflict of interest        Provide shareholders with rights to hold the interested              Review the provisions of the Commercial Law and the Criminal
Minority       regulation index (0-10): 6.3        director and directors liable for damages resulting from a related-   Code in line with international best practices regarding the rights of
Investors      Extent of shareholder governance    party transaction.                                                    shareholders to hold the interested director and directors liable for
               index (0-10): 7.3                                                                                         damages resulting from a related-party transaction.
               Strength of minority investor                                                                               Allow the plaintiff shareholders (minority shareholders) and/or
               protection index (0-10): 6.8                                                                              their representatives to directly question directors (defendants or
               Global rank: 14 out of 189                                                                                witnesses) during trial
               DTF (0-100): 68.33                                                                                          Prepare the needed legal recommendations
Paying Taxes   Number of payments per year: 13       Continue providing tax outreach – education and training – to
               Time (hours per year): 454          small and medium enterprises to ensure compliance and carry out
               Global rank: 89 out of 189          communications campaigns to further increase the use of
               DTF (0-100): 73.18                  electronic filing;

                                                     Simplify compliance rules for paying and withholding social
                                                   security contributions.
Trading        Documents to export: 4                Improve inter-agency coordination for border management              Establish an electronic single-window system for all trade
across         Days to export: 18                  and clearance processes.                                              related transactions.
Borders

                                                                                           12
Topics           Indicators (2015 DB Report)                                              Short-term recommendations                                                                   Medium-term recommendations
                 Cost to export (USD per
                 container): 1,375
                 Documents to import: 5
                 Days to import: 17
                 Cost to import (USD per
                 container): 1,365
                 Global rank: 57 out of 189
                 DTF (0-100): 78.34
Enforcing        Time (days): 564                                    Assess the effectiveness of court procedures in order to                                    Continue improving the e-courts system by introducing e-filing
Contracts        Cost (% of claim): 23.8 per cent                  identify bottlenecks and formulate solutions, especially for using                           and electronic service of process, including summons (by e-mail,
                 Procedures: 38                                    ICT applications;                                                                            SMS, e-fax, etc.).
                 Global rank: 75 out of 189
                 DTF (0-100) 61.27                                   Assess commercial case data and workload;

                                                                     Consider introducing Pre-trial Conference mechanisms.
Resolving        Time (years): 3.3
insolvency       Cost (% of estate): 9 per cent
                 Outcome (0 as piecemeal sale
                 and 1 as going concern): 0                        The World Bank Group Debt Resolution team is currently working with the Bulgarian authorities in order to improve Bulgaria’s
                 Recovery rate: 33.2 cents on the                  insolvency framework. Upon the conclusion of the Report on the Observance of Standards and Codes (ROSC) in Q4 of 2015, the
                 dollar.                                           government will be presented with detailed recommendations for short, medium and long-term reforms to improve the quality of the
                 Strength of insolvency                            insolvency framework, including – but not limited to – those dimensions of the insolvency framework that are measured by the
                 framework index (0-16): 15                        “Resolving Insolvency” indicator.
                 Global rank: 38 out of 189
                 DTF (0-100): 64.75


             Indicators and suggested reform recommendations in detail:

             Starting a Business ............................................................................................................................................................................................. page 14
             Dealing with Construction Permits ...................................................................................................................................................................... page 21
             Registering Property ............................................................................................................................................................................................ page 31
             Getting Credit....................................................................................................................................................................................................... page 38
             Protecting Minority Investors .............................................................................................................................................................................. page 49
             Paying Taxes ........................................................................................................................................................................................................ page 55
             Trading across Borders ........................................................................................................................................................................................ page 58
             Enforcing Contracts ............................................................................................................................................................................................. page 64
             Resolving Insolvency ........................................................................................................................................................................................... page 71



                                                                                                                         13
Reform memorandum: Bulgaria
Starting a Business

Economies with the most efficient registration systems use simplified and standardized
laws and documents. They operate a single electronic interface between the user and
authorities; use a single central database for all companies and businesses, with
interoperability between all agencies involved; have one single company ID; and charge
one flat fee. In New Zealand, Canada, UK, Singapore and the United States, for example,
an integrated IT system links the databases of relevant agencies (company registry, tax
administration, social security system, statistics institute and related licensing authorities).
The entrepreneur submits information and payment electronically via a website through a
single form, and the company is automatically registered with all agencies. Legal
formalities for company registration are embedded into the electronic system and, if all
requirements are met and the payment is received, the system automatically processes the
information and instantly issues the registration certificate. Companies are issued a single
ID number, which is used across agencies. This facilitates compliance checks throughout
the life of the company, and reduces the administrative burden of submitting information
multiple times with different forms to several agencies. Norway has taken this a step
further: since 2005, all public registers and public authorities have a legal obligation to use
the data registered in the Central Coordinating Register for Legal Entities, instead of
requiring businesses to resubmit this data to the concerned agency.10

Although the government of Bulgaria achieved significant reform success in 2006-7 by
focusing on eliminating outdated requirements through legal amendments, as well as by
merging and streamlining registration processes previously handled by multiple
departments and agencies, there is still room for improvement in both legal and ICT
procedures. These reforms enabled the electronic submission of documents, but failed to
introduce a fully electronic processing for the submitted documents and fees, without the
need for physical paper trails in the back-office or physical visits to the registry to receive
the certificates for newly registered companies.11

The Doing Business ‘Starting a Business’ indicator measures the procedures, cost, time
and the paid-in minimum capital necessary for a domestic entrepreneur to register and
formally operate a new business. Doing Business 2015 reported that entrepreneurs must go
through 4 procedures, which take 18 days and cost on average 0.8 per cent of income per
capita, to start a business in Sofia.

10
   D. Christow, J.Olajsen, Business Registration Reform Case Study Norway, Investment Climate, 2011,
World Bank Group.
11
   Based on IBRA mission findings, the electronic system is a hybrid between e-submission, manual
processing in the back office, and manual receipt of certificates through a physical visit to the registry.


                                                     14
Globally, Bulgaria ranks 49th out of 189 economies in the ease of starting a business –
ahead of Bosnia and Herzegovina (147), yet behind countries like Macedonia (3), Romania
(38) and Armenia (5). While Bulgaria’s cost indicator is way below the average for the
Europe and Central Asia region, its time indicator is way above the regional average (table
2.1), mostly because of the time needed for completion of VAT registration.

Table 2.1: Starting a Business in Bulgaria and best performers
Doing Business       Bulgaria     Regional best        Regional                Global best performer
Indicator                         performer            Average
Procedures           4            Armenia; Georgia; 5                          1 (New Zealand, Canada)
(number)                          Kyrgyz Republic;
                                  Macedonia, FYR;
                                  (2)
Time (days)          18           Georgia;             12.1                    0.5 (New Zealand)
                                  Macedonia, FYR
                                  (2)
Cost (per cent of 0.8             Kazakhstan (0.5)     5.3                     0 (Slovenia)
income per capita)
Paid-in        min. 0.0           19 economies in 5.8                          0 (135 economies)
capital (per cent of              the Europe and
income per capita)                Central Asia region
                                  have zero paid-in
                                  min.         capital
                                  requirement

Significant reform efforts have been underway since 2004, when Bulgaria started preparing
strategies and policies for moving business registration from the judiciary to the executive,
and turning it from a quasi-judicial process under the courts to a purely administrative
service in a special Registration Agency under the Ministry of Justice (MoJ).12 The reform
took a couple of years to materialize and was marked by strong opposition in some circles
of the legal establishment, the executive, and even the Office of the President.13 However,
this major reform step was successfully completed by the end of 2006.

Before 2006, business registration was handled by 28 Regional Courts. Therefore, the
biggest reform challenge was to bring all 28 paper-based company/business archives into


12
   D. Christow, Business Registration Reform Case Study Bulgaria, Investment Climate, 2011, World Bank
Group
13
   S.Jacobs, C.Massinde, Stakeholders’s Management in Business Registration, Case Study Bulgaria, IC,
2011, EBG


                                                 15
one electronic database, while at the same adjusting the underlying legal and institutional
framework, including staffing the newly created Registration Agency with skilled and
motivated staff. The reform was both legal and institutional, in terms of introducing the
new Commercial Registry Law; amending and harmonizing the Commercial Law, the tax
and the statistics laws, and all related secondary legislation; and introducing the new
Registration Agency under the MoJ along with a new ICT system to enable online
registration and electronic storage of documents. With combined efforts from the
executive, the judiciary and the legislature, this reform was completed in late 2006 and the
One-Stop Shop (OSS) under the Registry Agency went fully operational in 2007.14 Under
the new system, the online and physical OSS within the Registry Agency15 is the single
point of contact for starting a business, bringing together the business, tax and statistics
(BULSTAT) registrations together with the applicable fees. This turned the Bulgarian
system into a world-class system as far as best practices of online OSS are concerned.

Other important procedures that were left out of the OSS for business start-up were the
VAT registration (which remained with the Tax Authority under the Ministry of Finance)
and the various permits and licenses for commercial activity (which were left with the
municipalities and the line ministries). In addition to this major reform, which took place
in 2006, in 2009 the government of Bulgaria enhanced the hardware and software system
of the Commercial Registry within the Registry Agency, and in 2010 reduced the minimum
capital requirement for newly registered companies to 1 euro.16 In 2013 and 2015,
registration fees were additionally reduced, and in 2013 the deadlines for registering a new
company were increased from 1 to 3 days to allow third parties to oppose any new entry
against a company file, including new registrations, in an effort to prevent corporate theft.




14
   D. Christow, Business Registration Reform Case Study Bulgaria, Investment Climate, 2011, World Bank
Group.
15
   The online Commercial Registry is available at http://www.brra.bg/
16
   The capital-accruing bank account must be opened either by the company manager or by a person
authorized by a notary-certified power of attorney. Those persons delegated authority over the bank
account must provide a signature specimen in person or a notary-certified specimen. The amount of capital
stays blocked in the bank account until the Registry issues a decision on the company’s registration. The
Commercial Act requires the minimum capital prescribed by law, i.e. BGN 2, to be paid-in prior to
incorporation. After opening the escrow account and depositing the funds therein, the company under
incorporation is issued a certificate evidencing the shareholders' deposit of the capital. The certificate must
be presented before the Registry together with the application for company registration.


                                                      16
Figure 2.1. Starting a Business: Bulgaria compared to other EU member states




Source: Doing Business

Indicators over time

There have been a few significant reforms impacting Starting a Business in Bulgaria over
the past 5 years. In 2015, Bulgaria made starting a business easier by lowering registration
fees. In 2013, the cost of registration was reduced. In 2011, Bulgaria eased business start-
up by reducing the minimum capital requirement from 5,000 leva ($3,250) to 2 leva
($1.30). In 2010, the paid-in minimum capital requirement was reduced and the overall
efficiency at the company registry was improved. In 2009, a centralized electronic database
for commercial registration was created, consolidating registration procedures and
eliminating some registration formalities. It should be noted that, given the sophistication
of the current system, particularly short-term recommendations concern marginal
improvements.




                                            17
Short-term reform recommendations:

Remove the requirement to open a bank account and deposit the 1 euro minimum
required capital as part of the pre-registration requirements. Currently the minimum
capital for a newly registered company is only 1 euro, but Commercial Law still requires
that the company-in-formation opens a bank account, deposits the minimum capital and
attaches the status of the bank account to the initial application for company registration.
This requirement could be additionally streamlined by allowing companies to register by
just declaring the minimum capital, and then depositing it within a month (or longer
deadline) of the initial registration date. The elimination of the current requirement would
remove 1 step and 1 day as well as the 30 BGN fee for the new bank account from the
process of starting a business as measured by Doing Business.17

Further reduce deadlines for company registration at the Commercial Registry. 18
The registration of new companies used to take 1 day until 2013, when the legal framework
was amended to increase the deadline for all new entries into the Commercial Registry up
to 3 days (including for initial company registration) in order to allow interested parties to
familiarize themselves with every new entry made against the company file, and protest it
if necessary. The rationale for this provision was to provide interested parties with enough
time for notification and reaction to every new entry in the Commercial Registry in order
to prevent corporate fraud and corporate theft. Although the provision has merits for post-
registration entries, it is not practical for newly registered companies. It is not possible for
a newly registered company to be “hijacked” at the very moment of initial registration.
Reducing the time of registration from 3 days to 1 day would contribute to streamlining
the procedure, and bring the time needed to register a company at par with top-performing
countries such as New Zealand, Canada and Singapore.

Medium-term reform recommendations:

Decrease the VAT registration time or allow for simultaneous business and VAT
registration. Currently, the VAT registration is a separate procedure from the automatic
tax registration (TIN registration) which takes place simultaneously with company
registration at the online OSS in the Commercial Registry. VAT registration requires a
separate application, followed by a paper-based manual examination, and is processed and

17
   This requires amendment of the Commercial Law and related laws, so it might become a mid-term
reform depending on the depth of the reform.
18
   The reduction of the deadline from 3 to 1 days is currently under review by Parliament as part of the new
amendments of the Tourism Law.



                                                    18
completed by the National Revenue Agency (NRA) under the Ministry of Finance.
Processing time is 14 days according to tax laws; in practice applicants wait an average of
12-14 days before receiving their VAT number. This procedure could be automated and
introduced as an instant notice-based service in parallel with TIN registration. The NRA
could undertake administrative measures to streamline the VAT registration procedure by
developing an electronic process for VAT applications and necessary attachments, which
would allow tax-payers to automatically convert their tax registration number into a VAT
registration number.

The NRA is planning a similar initiative and is currently in the process of developing an
application to introduce electronic VAT registration as a separate procedure with qualified
e-signature (as opposed to just user name and password sign-in, or average e-signature).
This would allow tax-payers to register electronically, and reduce the time and cost of
inspecting whether or not the applicant meets the criteria to be VAT registered. It was also
announced that the NRA had issued guidelines that the procedure should take 3-5 days for
non-risky companies, and that VAT applicants would be allowed to present the necessary
documents on the same day as their application for VAT registration19.

While this approach is likely to reduce time and costs, it would still maintain VAT
registration as a separate procedure from the initial company/TIN registration and thus
would still involve separate steps, procedures, documents and deadlines. Repeating the
current paper-based process with electronic process would not be as effective as
synchronizing and automating TIN and VAT registration as part of the initial company
registration with the Commercial Registry. For instance, the VAT number could be the
same as the TIN/ Business Registration Number, but with the prefix “VAT” or “BG” added
to the already issued TIN number. This approach would eliminate the need for secondary
VAT registration and significantly reduce the time and cost for business registration, as
well as the burden on both the applicants (tax-payers) and the NRA.

Eliminate the need to visit physically the Commercial Registry in order collect the
(newly) registered company’s certificates. The 2007-09 reforms enabled the electronic
submission of documents, but failed to introduce a fully electronic processing of the
submitted documents and fees, without the need for physical paper trails in the back-office
or a physical visit to the registry in order to receive the certificates for newly registered
companies.20 The Bulgarian authorities could further streamline the operation of the back
and the front-offices of the Commercial Registry, so that customers do not need to visit in
person to submit or receive documents, and pay fees. An enhanced ICT system and

19
   Today it is possible for applicants to apply for VAT registration, and then on a later day present the
supporting documents which may further delay the process of final VAT registration.
20
   Based on WBG mission findings, the electronic system is a hybrid between e-submission, manual
processing in the back office, and manual receipt of the certificates through a physical visit to the registry.


                                                      19
appropriate amendments in the legal framework (the Commercial Registry Act and the
Entry Decree21) would allow customers to receive registration certificates, updates and
company status reports online via e-mail or SMS, without the need to physically visit the
Registry.

Consider reducing business registration fees through the application of a cost
recovery principle. It is not clear whether current registration and post-registration fees
are based on a cost-recovery basis, or on subjective criteria, allowing the Registration
Agency to generate significant revenue.22 The electronic application for a new company is
BGN 55, while the paper application is BGN 110. However, applying the cost-recovery
principle should be based on careful analysis, considering the significant workload of the
Registration Agency, including the existing 800 000 companies, and the announced
forthcoming addition of the Non-Profit Registry and the Collateral Registry for Movable
Securities to the Registration Agency in the short run.




21
  In Bulgarian “Naredba po vpisvaniqta”
22
  All fees related to changes in the company file after the initial registration, i.e. any change of
particularities in the file


                                                       20
Dealing with Construction Permits

Reforms that make construction regulations more efficient and transparent can help reduce
corruption and informality, while encouraging construction companies to go through
formal channels and ensuring compliance with important standards, such as those
impacting safety or mitigating climate change. Good regulations, combined with sound
enforcement mechanisms, ensure safety standards that protect the public while making the
permitting process efficient, transparent and affordable for both building authorities and
private professionals who use it. A recent study shows that long delays to obtain permits
could lead to higher transaction costs and fewer transactions.23 However, the payoff of
construction permitting reforms can be significant. In 2005, a PriceWaterhouseCoopers
study found that accelerating permit processes in the United States could permanently
increase government revenues.24 Examining the impact of building permit reforms on new
income generation, for every 10 jobs directly related to a construction project, another 8
jobs are created locally.25 These impacts not only yield additional income for the
community, but also additional investments and tax revenues for the government. Beyond
economic returns and the pay-off in attracting more investment, the most important benefit
of building permit reforms is to protect public safety.

Efficient building permitting systems share key features. Clear building codes written with
a consultative process are at the core of well-designed construction permitting systems, and
countries like Canada and New Zealand are increasingly steering towards performance-
based codes.26 Germany, Singapore and Mauritius have incorporated risk-management
tools to streamline the issuing of permits and optimize the effectiveness of inspections. Up-
to-date land use and zoning plans improve transparency and predictability for developers.27
Establishing sound licensing mechanisms for practitioners, in addition to well-functioning



23
   Sonia Hamman, “Housing matters, Volume 1,” Policy Research Working Paper 6876, 2014. In
particular, the paper mentions that “Mayer and Somerville’s (2000) stud y of U.S. regulations estimates that
a metropolitan area with a 4.5-month delay in approval and two different types of growth-control
restrictions would have about 45 percent less construction than a metropolitan area with a 1.5-month delay
and no growth management policy.”
24
   For a single building project, accelerating permit processes provides a temporary acceleration of property
tax collections. For a representative series of projects, the study shows that these revenue increases could
reach 16 per cent over a period of 5 years. “Economic Impact of Accelerating Permit Processes on Local
Development and Government Revenues” PriceWaterhouseCoopers, December 2005.
25
   PricewaterhouseCoopers. 2005. “Economic Impact of Accelerating Permit Processes on Local
Development and Government Revenues.” Report prepared for the American Institute of Architects,
Washington, DC.
26
   Performance-based codes provide more flexibility and support innovation by focusing on outcomes to be
achieved rather than prescribing how the building must be constructed. The use of performance-based
codes, however, requires a higher level of technical competence to enforce than do other approaches.
27
   World Bank. 2013. “Urbanization beyond Municipal Boundaries: Nurturing Metropolitan Economies and
Connecting Peri-Urban Areas in India.” Directions in Development. Washington, DC: World Bank, p. 44.


                                                     21
liability regimes and compulsory insurance systems, have become pivotal in order to
introduce more efficient regulatory systems.

Many countries are outsourcing building control procedures to the private sector. For
example, France and the UK introduced inspections by accredited bodies, which in turn
required improvements in their private liability and insurance regimes.28

The Doing Business Dealing with Construction Permits indicator records all procedures,
time and cost required to build a warehouse and connect to utilities in Sofia, following all
the official requirements. Currently, Bulgaria ranks 101st out of 189 economies globally,
and 9th out of 26 economies in the Eastern Europe and Central Asia region. Bulgaria
compares favorably with the averages registered in this region but it is far from its best
performing economies (table 3.1).

Table 3.1 Dealing with Construction Permits in Bulgaria and best performers
 Doing Business                    Regional     Regional best       Global Best
                       Bulgaria
 Indicator                          average      performer           Performer
                                                  9 (Cyprus;
 Procedures                                        Georgia;        5 (Hong Kong
                          16          16.1
 (number)                                        Montenegro;        SAR, China)
                                                   Ukraine)

     Time (days)                   110            176.8          64 (Ukraine)          26 (Singapore)

  Cost (per cent of                              5.0 per          0.2 percent         0 percent (Qatar;
                           4.5
  warehouse value)                                cent            (Hungary)              Mongolia)
Source: Doing Business database


Bulgaria ranks 17th among 28 EU member states – ahead of Croatia, Romania, Poland,
and Hungary, but behind Slovenia, Estonia, and Germany (figure 3.1). While the time to
deal with construction permits (110 days) is lower that the EU average (174.4 days) the
number of procedures and costs associated with them are considerably higher (Bulgaria:
16 procedures and costs equal to 4.5 per cent of warehouse value; EU average: 12.6
procedures and costs equal to 2.3 per cent of warehouse value).




28
     For example in France, the Spinetta Act of 1978, required broad-based insurance and warranty coverage.


                                                     22
Figure 3.1. Dealing with construction permits: Bulgaria compared to other EU
member states




Source: Doing Business database

Indicators over time

No business reform impacting the Dealing with Construction Permits indicator has been
registered in Bulgaria for the past 5 years.

Short-term reform recommendations:

Develop clear and actionable guidelines and checklists for building sector
professionals and investors, and make these available to the public together with
agency regulations and applicable legislation. Combine this reform with the
possibility of interacting with a single building-permit official for a preliminary


                                         23
project screening. In Bulgaria, as in many other economies, the building permitting and
land development process is complex and falls under the jurisdiction and purview of
several agencies, the so-called applicable law agencies.29 Although generic information on
these processes is generally available, it is scattered across multiple sources and websites.
As a result, only highly experienced construction consultants or building permit specialists
understand the entire process. Such knowledge should be easily available to all potential
applicants.

In order to further increase transparency and enable developers to be effective “partners in
compliance” with all applicable laws, agency regulations, decision-making criteria,
complete application requirements and approval procedures should be put in plain language
as to be fully transparent and actionable.

While individual applicable law agencies should provide information on their own
requirements and processes, the responsibility for providing information on the entirety of
the process should reside with the authority responsible for issuing building permits (e.g.
Sofia Municipality). Applicable law agencies should be listed in the regulations, in the
guidelines and checklists provided by the above-mentioned authorities, and on the
municipality’s website. These lists should be promptly updated whenever anything
changes.

Economies, such as Norway and Georgia, which successfully reformed in the area of
construction permitting, combined an exhaustive publication of administrative
requirements for construction-permit applications with the possibility of interacting with
one building-permit official for a preliminary project screening. This initial advisory
interaction can be informal and voluntary, so as not to create yet another mandatory
procedure, but should be decisive to determine what specific laws and regulations are
applicable to the project.30

Consolidate application forms and streamline requirements for building-related
permits. Building sector specialists interviewed in June 2015 highlighted how dealing with
construction permits in Bulgaria entails a lot of redundant paperwork. An application for a
building permit for a simple commercial building at the Municipality, for instance, requires
the submission of 15 separate blueprints and design plans. Additional documentation is
often requested as the application is being processed. As a result, applications often become


29
   Applicable law agencies are all those agencies that have a potential role in issuing prior approvals or
clearances - e.g. planning, environment, road, utilities, etc. Because of this, this recommendation applies
not only to the agencies implicitly mentioned by the Doing Business indicators, but also to other agencies
that might be involved in the construction-permitting process, such as the Agency for Cultural Heritage
Sites.
30
   World Bank Group, Investment Climate Department. 2013. Good Practices for Construction Regulation
and Enforcement Reform: Guidelines for Reformers. Washington, DC: World Bank Group.


                                                    24
large files that are burdensome to examine carefully. In order to reduce the amount of red
tape, and thus decrease the amount of time spent on purely administrative matters,
Bulgarian authorities could consider consolidating construction-related requirements.
Consolidation may include eliminating redundant requirements and/or introducing a single
application form to facilitate the process

Provide training events and seminars with key stakeholder groups – e.g. engineers,
architects, building companies and public officials – to inform construction sector
practitioners on the novelties introduced by the Euro code and its national annexes.
The European Building Code and its national annexes introduce important novelties in
terms of technical solutions and building standards that are not yet fully appreciated by all
construction sector practitioners operating in Bulgaria. This results in uncertainty, disputes
on building-code requirements, and delays in the building permitting process. In order to
reduce the problem, key stakeholder groups – such as the professional chambers – could
organize regular training events and seminars for their associates. Chambers should also
consider whether the attendance of some of these training events should be mandatory for
their associates in order to maintain their license. Another policy that could be beneficial
to tackle the problem is to increase the collaboration between professional chambers and
technical universities. Discussions held with private sector practitioners in June 2015
highlighted that currently, architecture and engineering university students in Bulgaria are
often more familiar with building solutions applied in the 1960s than with those used today.

Consider charging lower fees for small projects presenting no risk to public health
and safety. Dealing with construction permits in Bulgaria is a comparatively expensive
endeavor. According to Doing Business 2015, the official costs associated with completing
the procedures to legally build a simple 1,300-square meter commercial warehouse in Sofia
amount to 4.5 per cent of the warehouse value. In Bucharest the same process costs 2.3 per
cent of warehouse value; in Berlin and Vienna just 1.1 per cent. In order to reduce the
burden on small entrepreneurs, Bulgarian authorities should assess the feasibility of
introducing smaller fees for the final construction approval for simpler buildings that
present no risk to public health and safety. Since the cost of providing services is not
directly proportional to the area or cost of the building, larger projects with more substantial
building fees could subsidize smaller ones.

Eliminate the requirement to obtain an official decision from the Director of the
Regional Inspectorate of Environment and Forestry Protection on whether simpler
projects require an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA). The Law on
Environment Protection (Appendix 1 and Appendix 2) clearly defines which investment
projects require an EIA. Simple commercial buildings – such as the warehouse building
for storing books and stationery considered by Doing Business – do not fall among the



                                              25
investment projects listed in the above-mentioned law. Consequentially, an EIA is not
obligatory.

At the moment, however, all building projects – regardless of their size or complexity –
must notify the Regional Inspectorate for Environment and Forestry Protection about the
planned construction. Once the relevant documents have been submitted to the
Inspectorate, its director confirms officially whether the EIA is necessary or not. Once the
first reform recommendation of this section been implemented, such requirement should
be abolished for simpler categories of buildings.

Develop service delivery standards for the agencies involved in the building
permitting process, as well as systems to track compliance to such standards. In
Bulgaria many applicable law agencies do not have timeframes for reviewing building
permit-related applications. When they do, such timeframes are very general or unrealistic
and there are no serious consequences for non-compliance. Private sector professionals
operating in the country report that often they have to wait for several weeks just to know
whether the application they have submitted is complete and can be processed. This is
particularly true for the Sofia Water Authority, which rarely takes less than a month to
verify that an application is complete.

In order to reduce delays, all agencies involved in the building permitting process should
agree to a set of service delivery standards. Delivery standards outline the specific delivery
targets established by each agency, and are composed of a set of commitments that the
agency promises to honor when delivering a service. In doing so, they describe what an
applicant can expect to receive from the agency, together with the manner and timeframe
in which the service will be delivered. In order to make delivery standards more effective,
their implementation could be accompanied by the introduction of systems to track
compliance, for example by monitoring the performance of the officials responsible for
each process.

Medium-term reform recommendations:

Create a dispute resolution mechanism for compliance issues relating to building-
code requirements. In Bulgaria, all disputes relating to building code requirements go to
court regardless of their value or importance. The problem is particularly acute in Sofia,
where judicial proceedings on construction-related matters are lengthy and drain resources
away from the Municipality and businesses alike. Countries that have successfully tackled
this problem in the past, such as Canada, have established specialized bodies with building
code officials and private building practitioners to resolve the disputes that typically arise




                                             26
from rejection of construction permits or stop-orders issued by inspectors.31 This is
important to preserve the rights of applicants, and also provides a tool for dealing with
conflicts, as well as ensuring that the backlog of requests pending at the municipality level
remains as small as possible.

Clarify the roles and responsibilities of supervisory agents vis-à-vis municipalities and
other stakeholders in the building permitting process. In Bulgaria, supervisory agents
– called nadzornik – are legally mandated to collect the necessary documentation and
blueprints, carry out technical reviews, and obtain the relevant permits on behalf of the
investor from the Municipality.32 Once the project is officially approved, the nadzornik
also supervise the construction activities, making sure that they are carried out in
accordance with all rules and regulations. At the moment, however, the role played by the
supervisory agents and their added value is highly contested. This is because the nadzornik
are chosen and paid directly by the investor, and their responsibilities vis-à-vis the
Municipality and investor are not very clear. Both public official and private sector
practitioners interviewed during the World Bank Group mission in June 2015 lamented the
nadzornik’s poor impartiality, highlighting how their reviews and supervision are often
superficial and, in essence, duplicate the work already done by the architects. As a result,
municipalities often end up carrying out additional reviews in order to guarantee public
safety and avoid legal disputes. In order to reduce delays and eliminate the duplication of
tasks between architects and nadzornik, Bulgarian authorities should clarify the roles and
responsibilities of the nadzornik. In order to have a comprehensive view of the problem,
discussions should involve architects, construction sector practitioners, public officials and
the nadzornik themselves.

Establish a one-stop shop for all building-related permits and clearances. Bulgarian
entrepreneurs must undergo 7 different procedures before they can obtain a building permit
from the Municipality. The whole process takes 79 days altogether and involves separate
interactions with the Municipality, the Regional Inspectorate for Environment and Water,
the Electricity Provider, and the Water authorities.33




31
   World Bank Group, Investment Climate Department. 2013. Good Practices for Construction Regulation
and Enforcement Reform: Guidelines for Reformers. Washington, DC: World Bank Group.
32
   The use of supervision companies is mandatory only for certain categories of buildings.
33
   The scenario taken into consideration by the Doing Business case study is relatively simple. During the
fact finding mission of June 2015, private and public sector officials observed that the number of
administrative steps and agencies issuing clearances may grow considerably depending on the specific
location (or complexity) of the construction project. The presence of a few trees on the plot where the building
project is located, for example, may add weeks to the clearance process. Additional interactions and delays
occur if the building is located in specific areas, for instance areas of archeological interest that are under the
jurisdiction of the Agency for Cultural Heritage Sites.


                                                       27
In Dubai, the same process now takes just 2 procedures and 25 days. In the past,
entrepreneurs operating in the Emirate were also required to clear their project designs with
various agencies separately. Since 2012, however, all no objection requests are submitted
through the Dubai Municipality Portal at the time of the building permit application.

A one-stop shop can centralize all building-related clearances in one location and make the
technical approvals an in-house process at the Municipality. Besides easing the
administrative burden on customers, a similar one-stop shop can also help all agencies
involved to improve coordination of their approvals (e.g., zoning, water and sewage,
environment, electricity, etc.). In designing its one-stop shop, Bulgaria could also consider
the example provided by Hong Kong SAR, China – the best performing economy in the
Dealing with Construction Permits indicator (see Box 1).

 Box 1. Creating a single-service window for construction permits in Hong Kong SAR, China

 The One-Stop Centre for Construction Permits (OSC) began operating in Hong Kong SAR, China in
 December 2008. The OSC reengineered and streamlined processes involving 6 government departments
 (the Buildings Department, Lands Department, Fire Services Department, Drainage Services Department,
 Highways Department and Water Supplies Department) and two private utilities (telephone and
 electricity).

 One of the main achievements of the OSC was to combine 5 procedures into 1. At the pre-construction
 stage, property developers use a single application form to obtain the following approvals and consents:

        Building plans approval (Buildings Department);
        Technical audit of water supply connection works (Water Supplies Department);
        Road excavation work (Highways Department);
        Traffic police approval;
        Permission to begin building works (Buildings Department).

 Procedures were streamlined for post-construction approvals as well. At that stage, the developer submits
 one application to the OSC for: (1) a technical audit from the Drainage Services Department; (2) water
 supply certificates from the Water Supplies Department; (3) an occupation permit from the Buildings
 Department; (4) a certificate of compliance from the Lands Department; (5) a certificate for fire service
 installations from the Fire Services Department; and (6) connection to electricity and telephone lines by
 the respective utility companies. This one-stop service eliminates the need for the developer to contact
 individual government departments and private utility companies for reporting completion of works,
 issuance of certificates and inspections.

 Moreover, the OSC reviews the post-construction approval to determine which authorities need to conduct
 inspections, and coordinates among those authorities to conduct a single joint inspection. This has reduced
 the number of inspections and shortened total processing time. In all, the OSC merged 8 procedures and
 cut total processing time by 52 days, making Hong Kong SAR, China, the top reformer in the area of
 Dealing with Construction Permits for Doing Business 2012.




                                                28
Computerize the building permitting process. The building permitting process in
Bulgaria is entirely paper-based. Building companies and construction practitioners
operating in the country need to carry around large amounts of paper in order to obtain the
necessary clearances from the Municipality, applicable law agencies and utility providers
(see second short-term reform recommendation above). In order to reduce processing
times and align themselves with best practice economies in Europe, Bulgarian authorities
should computerize the system so that building information can be submitted and stored in
a manner that is easily accessible, and development requests can be cross-checked for
ownership, compliance, permits and inspections.

In addition to streamlining the building permitting procedures into a one-stop shop (see
previous reform recommendation), a further degree of efficiency would be attained by
creating an e-based platform where building permit applicants can apply for all initial
clearances simultaneously by submitting one online form along with the final drawings.
This form could be accessed by the various applicable law agencies involved in the
building permitting process, who could then review their own maps and approve the
designs electronically.

Several countries already have such computerized systems in place. Developers in Austria,
Denmark, Iceland, Norway and Portugal can complete their building permit applications
online. In Singapore, the data management system, established in 2001, provides online
submission of plans and easy access to the information needed for obtaining a building
permit, which allows for efficient permit processing. Today, builders regularly receive
updates on the status of their application either by e-mail or text messaging. As a result,
the time for dealing with construction permits has been reduced by two-thirds. This reform
saves time for builders and government officials alike.

Increase collaboration between Geodesic, Cartography and Cadaster Agency
(GCCA) and Sofia Municipality to create robust links between multi-layered
Cadaster and Geographic Information System (GIS); provide appropriate access to
both systems for the private sector. GIS is an integrated system of computer hardware,
software, and trained personnel capable of assembling, storing, manipulating, and
displaying topographic, demographic, utility, facility, image and other resource data that is
geographically referenced. To be fully functional, implementation of a robust GIS must be
linked to the appropriate Master Plan. The accessible maps should contain all relevant
zoning, infrastructure and construction information to allow designers to proceed with their
plans without having to contact authorities for further details (Box 2).

The Sofia Municipality is currently creating its own GIS but faces important challenges in
terms collaboration with other applicable law agencies. At the moment, applicable law
agencies have no legal obligation to provide their data to the Municipality. As a result, they


                                             29
often don’t. In order to bridge the gap, Bulgarian authorities could reinforce collaboration
and exchange of information between the Municipality and the GCCA, which is currently
working on a multi-layered cadaster.

The multi-layered cadastral database, which is expected to be complete within 12-18
months, is collecting maps and other relevant geographic information from several
stakeholders, who are mandated by law to participate in the project. The stakeholders
include, among others: utility providers (providing maps with water, sewage and electricity
networks that are fundamental in project design); the Ministry of Environment (who
provides geographic information on protected areas, quarries, etc.); the Ministry of
Agriculture (who provides information on agricultural lands, composition of soils, etc.);
Telecommunication Companies (providing information on positioning of cables and other
infrastructure); Property Registry; Road Agency; and municipalities. Once finalized, the
database will contain much of the necessary information for the creation of a robust GIS.

If the Bulgarian authorities were able to introduce a robust and detailed GIS, applicants
who produced their conceptual drawings electronically with a computer-aided design
(CAD) system may be in a position to overlay these plans with the zoning, planning and
utility requirements captured in the GIS. In certain circumstances (mainly low risk
applications) this may be able to have the effect of pre-approving some elements before
being checked by Sofia Municipality, applicable law agencies and utility companies in
order to make savings in processing time.

 Box 2. An example of the GIS in North Shore City Council (NSCC), Auckland New
 Zealand

 Key to the success of the NSCC GIS program has been its commitment to distribute access to
 map data and associated council information to various stakeholders. The online ‘GIS Viewer’
 initiative has been especially well-received. Anyone with access to a standard web browser can
 create their own maps from available data including color aerial images, boundary lines, water
 pipes, manholes, hydrants and even property values and zoning information. NSCC can have
 anywhere from 500 up to 10,000 maps being produced in a single day, typically from house
 hunters. Real estate agents, surveyors, designers, architects and lawyers are also high users.

 Source: North Shore City Council.




                                              30
Registering Property

Registered property rights are important to support investment, productivity and growth.34
Research suggests that property owners with secure ownership are more likely to invest in
private enterprises and transfer land to more efficient users. The ability to easily access
authoritative information on land ownership also reduces the transaction cost in financial
markets, making it easier to use property as collateral. 35 Land registries, together with
cadasters that identify the location of a property, are institutions used around the world to
map, prove and secure property rights. These institutions are part of the land information
system of an economy. With land and buildings accounting for between half and three-
quarters of the wealth in most economies, having an up-to-date land information system
matters.36 The benefits of land registration go beyond the private sector. For governments,
having reliable, up-to-date information in cadasters and land registries is essential to
correctly assess and collect tax revenues. With up-to-date land information, governments
can map out the varying requirements of their cities and strategically plan the provision of
services and infrastructure in the areas of each city where they are most needed.37

Doing Business records the full sequence of procedures necessary for a business (the buyer)
to purchase a property from another business (the seller) and to transfer the property title
to the buyer’s name so that the buyer can use the property for expanding its business, use
the property as collateral in taking new loans or, if necessary, sell the property to another
business. Bulgaria – represented by Sofia – ranks 57 out of 189 economies in the ease of
registering property and 14 out of 26 economies in the Eastern Europe and Central Asia
region. The time needed to register property in Bulgaria is significantly shorter than the
average time recorded in Eastern Europe and Central Asia, but the process requires a
greater number of procedures (table 4.1).




34
   Claessens, Stijn and Luc Laeven, Financial Development, Property Rights, and Growth, Journal of
Finance, 58 (6): 2401–36, 2003.
35
   Simon Johnson, John McMillan, and Christopher Woodruff, Property Rights and Finance, The American
Economic Review, Volume 92, Issue 5, Pages 1335-1356, December 2002.
36
   World Bank. 1989. World Development Report 1989. New York: Oxford University Press.
37
   Property information held in cadasters and land registries is part of the land information available to
governments. Land information also includes other geographic, environmental and socioeconomic data
related to land that are useful for urban planning and development.


                                                   31
Table 4.1 Registering Property in Bulgaria and best performers
 Doing Business                       Regional best      Regional        Global best
                        Bulgaria
 Indicator                             performer         Average         performer
 Procedures                                                         1 (Georgia; Norway;
                           7           Georgia (1)         5.4
 (number)                                                            Sweden; Portugal)
                                                                      1 (Georgia; New
  Time (days)             10          Georgia (1)         23.1
                                                                     Zealand; Portugal)
                                                                    0 (Belarus; Kiribati;
  Cost (per cent of
                          2.9         Belarus (0.0)        2.7          Saudi Arabia;
  property value)
                                                                      Slovak Republic)
Source: Doing Business database

Compared to the other 27 EU member economies, Bulgaria performs better than its
neighbors – Romania and Greece – but there is room for improvement (figure 4.1).




                                            32
Figure 4.1 Registering Property: Bulgaria compared to the other EU members




Source: Doing Business database

Reform efforts

In 2010, Bulgaria introduced an online procedure to obtain the certificate of good standing
for firms. This led to a decrease of 3 days in the time needed for property registration. Fast
track procedures were also introduced, allowing entrepreneurs to save additional time for
an extra fee. In the same year, Bulgaria started unifying the data kept by the Cadaster
Agency and the Registry Agency. An integrated web-based register was subsequently
launched (www.icadastre.bg) providing online access to the ownership and cadaster status



                                             33
of the properties. The project is not finished yet, as the cadastral data does not yet cover
the entire country's territory.

Short-term reform recommendations:

Assess the feasibility of introducing lower fees for property registration. In Bulgaria,
the (local) tax for acquisition of real estate varies from 0.1 per cent to 3 per cent of the
purchase price (or of the tax evaluation of the real estate, in case the latter is higher). This
tax is determined by each municipality on a yearly basis. In Sofia, it currently amounts to
2.5 per cent of property value, which must be added to the 0.1 per cent of property price
charged as registration fee and to other payments due during the property registration
process.38

Over the past 10 years, 77 economies worldwide lowered transfer taxes and other
government fees related to property registration – reducing the global average cost of
registering property by 4.2 percentage points of property value.39 In 2012, Ireland reduced
its transfer tax from 6 per cent to 2 per cent of property value. In Central Europe, the Slovak
Republic charges a flat registration fee of EUR 66 for paper-based transfers and EUR 33
for electronic transfers. Analysis and tax simulations should be conducted to assess if a
reduction of the property transfer tax rate could be introduced, in a revenue-neutral or
revenue-increasing way, by reducing the distortive effect of such tax in the property
market.

Eliminate the requirement to obtain a certificate of good standing from the
Registration Agency. Prior to executing the transfer of title before a notary, the seller and
the buyer are required to obtain a certificate from the Registration Agency (i.e., the
Commercial Registry). Such certificates show that each company is registered and existing,
and that the person who signs on behalf of the company is authorized to do so. Since 2009,
this certificate can be obtained online. However, in the vast majority of countries, the
property deed is sufficient for parties to engage in a property transfer. At the moment, only
6 OECD countries – Denmark, Hungary, Poland, Korea, Italy and Japan – require parties
to confirm their legal status. In other OECD countries, the check for the legal status of the
parties is either performed by notaries online or not required at all because the property
registration system is integrated with the company registration system.




38
   The list of fees and charges considered by Doing Business when benchmarking the cost of registering
property in Bulgaria can be found at:
http://www.doingbusiness.org/data/exploreeconomies/bulgaria/registering-property/
39
   More information on: http://www.doingbusiness.org/data/exploretopics/registering-property/good-
practices


                                                   34
Medium-term reform recommendations:

Increase cadastral coverage by strengthening Geodesy, Cartography and Cadaster
Agency (GCCA)’s capacity and responsibilities. The utility of even the most reliable and
transparent land administration system is undermined if it covers only a limited area of the
economy. Where land registries and cadasters do not provide complete geographic
coverage, companies and individuals cannot be sure whether areas not covered at the
registry might be relevant to their interests. For maximum effectiveness, the registry and
cadaster should make records of all registered private land readily available, and should
also have records covering the entire economy. Around the world, only 27 per cent of
economies have a registry with full coverage of private land – and only 34 per cent have a
cadaster with complete coverage.40

Currently, the Bulgarian Cadaster – maintained by the GCCA – covers only 18 per cent of
the country’s territory. While part of the uncovered territory is not yet mapped, another,
more substantial part, has been mapped by the Ministry of Agriculture. A bill of law –
currently being examined by the Council of Ministers – would allow all cadastral maps to
fall under the responsibility of the Cadaster, thus increasing its territorial coverage to 88
per cent. Such reform presents an important step in the right direction and should be fully
implemented. In order to achieve its desired effect, however, legislative changes are not
enough. To achieve results in a reasonable amount of time, Bulgarian authorities should
also strengthen the GCCA’s capacity by introducing necessary upgrades in ICT
infrastructure and human resources.

Explore the possibility of making the notary’s signature of sale agreement optional.
Bulgaria is among less than 40 countries that require a double verification of property
transfers – one by a public notary and one by the Land Registry. Doing Business records
that three out of four countries manage property registration without mandating the use of
notaries or lawyers, including Portugal, Sweden and Denmark. Portugal successfully made
notary involvement optional for companies wishing to transfer property: parties only need
to sign the agreement in person at the registry. As a result, registering property in Lisbon
only takes 1 day and 1 procedure. In order to implement this reform recommendation,
several laws and regulations will need to be amended, including the Civil Code, the
Property Registry Law, and the Notary Public and Notarial Activity Law. To ensure the
success of this reform, amendments to the legislation should be accompanied by the
introduction of standard sale-purchase contracts and the implementation of public
awareness campaigns.



40
     Doing Business 2015.


                                             35
Evaluate opportunities to streamline the property registration requirements, for
example by improving the exchange of information between the agencies involved in
the process. At the moment, registering property in Bulgaria requires interactions with
several agencies and stakeholders. These agencies include: the Municipalities, who are
responsible for issuing the tax valuation of the property; Local Tax Departments, who issue
a certificate attesting that the seller has no tax arrears; the Commercial Agency, in charge
of certifying the legal status of the companies involved in the transaction; the GCCA, in
charge issuing the map of the property that has to be attached to the deed; Notaries, who
execute the transfer deed; and the Property Registry, in charge of issuing certificates of
non-encumbrance and registering the transfer of property after the execution of the deed.

Over the past 10 years, 46 economies worldwide streamlined requirements and linked (or
improved) agencies’ systems to simplify property registration. These measures reduced
interactions between entrepreneurs and agencies – saving between 1 and 2 procedures on
average – while maintaining security and controls.41 A number of European countries –
including Denmark, Latvia, and Portugal – effectively reduced the number of procedures
by connecting electronically different agencies’ databases. When the Latvian land registry
gained access to municipal tax information, for instance, entrepreneurs operating in Riga
were freed from having to provide this information in paper format, thus saving them time
and money associated with the paperwork. Bulgaria could follow suit.

Create an electronic platform offering the possibility of online property transfers. In
order to facilitate and increase the security of the process of transferring land, a nation-
wide electronic system could enable purchasers to complete all necessary requirements for
transferring property online. Such a platform would save resources for businesses and
increase transparency.

At the moment, the core processes related to property registration in Bulgaria are still
paper-based and manual. In spite of this, important reforms have been implemented over
the past years, contributing to a considerable level of transparency of both Land Registry
and Cadaster. Additional improvements are underway. The Cadaster Agency, for instance,
is planning to introduce the possibility of obtaining property maps online. Applications
submitted to the Land Registry are entered into an electronic database and their main details
are publicly available online. In order to move to full e-filing, Bulgarian authorities would
need to amend several laws, including the Cadaster and Property Registry Act of 2000, the
Geodesy and Cartography Act of 2006, the Property Law, the Civil Procedure Code, the
Law on Local Taxes and Fees, as well as internal Regulations on Entries for Filing of
Property Registration. The EU “Good Governance” project could provide the resources
needed to implement necessary ICT updates.

41
     Ibid.


                                             36
Countries with fully electronic systems progressively worked towards that goal over
several years. As an example, in 2009 the Danish government began modernizing its land
registry by digitizing and automating property registration. Processes had to be streamlined
and reorganized. The centralized land registry initiated its computerization, and records
were progressively digitized. Once digitization was complete, the land registry introduced
electronic lodgment of property transfers. By 2011, property transfer applications were
only accepted online and the information technology system started screening applications
in a fast and efficient way. As a result, over 5 years the time to transfer a property was
reduced from 42 days to 4 days. With online access to a single source of land registration
data, citizens and businesses can transfer property on their own, with no need for a third
party. They can also obtain information on any property. Additionally, to facilitate access
to credit as well as to information, the Danish financial sector created a central hub allowing
banks and the land registry to share land registration data.

New Zealand digitized its property records between 1997 and 2002 and subsequently
introduced electronic registration. However, by 2005 only about half of property
transactions were being submitted electronically. A final push was needed. In 2008,
electronic registration was made mandatory by law. Registration can now be completed in
just 2 steps, at a cost of 0.1 per cent of the property value.

Merge Land Registry and Cadaster into a single administrative agency. In the longer
term, Bulgarian authorities could consider merging the Land Registry and Cadaster
functions into a single administrative agency, which should be operationally independent,
government supervised, and partially or fully fee-financed.




                                              37
Getting Credit
Doing Business covers two aspects of the regulatory framework and infrastructure that
affect the availability of credit: the depth of credit information and the strength of the legal
rights of borrowers and lenders. The first aspect, measured by the depth of credit
information index, includes the coverage, scope and accessibility of credit information
available either through credit bureaus or registries. The second, measured by the strength
of legal rights index, evaluates the degree to which collateral and bankruptcy laws protect
the rights of borrowers and lenders and thus facilitate lending.

Both sets of measures have recently been expanded to cover more good practices. The
strength of legal rights index has been expanded from 10 points to 12. One of the new
points is awarded for having an integrated secured transactions system. Modern secured
transactions systems are aiming at ensuring that a prospective creditor can easily determine
not only whether an asset has already been pledged as collateral but also whether there is
some other type of right over that asset. Such rights might be established by legal
instruments that are functional equivalents to security interests. In an integrated secured
transactions system these instruments are regulated under the same law as traditional
security interests, an approach that provides greater transparency and predictability. Points
are also awarded for having a well-functioning collateral registry, defined by several
characteristics. One of them is that the registry must cover all types of secured transaction,
regardless of the type of debtor, creditor or assets. Another is that the registry must be a
notice-based registry, a type of registry that has lower running costs than a document-based
registry, as no underlying documents are required to be filed nor are reviewed by a registry
clerk. Finally, the registry must offer modern features. For example, secured creditors (or
their representatives) should be able to register, search, amend and cancel security interests
online.

The depth of credit information index has been expanded from 6 points to 8. One of the
new points is awarded to economies where credit information can be accessed through an
online platform or through a system-to-system connection between financial institutions
and the credit information system. Online access can improve data quality and security,
increase efficiency and transparency and ensure a high standard of service for users – and
thus might increase the number of reporting institutions that share credit information.

With the methodological improvements introduced by Doing Business 2015, Bulgaria
scored overall 23rd on the Getting Credit indicator among the 189 countries measured by
the report, and 6th out of 26 in Europe and Central Asia region.




                                              38
A. Credit Information

A credit reporting system is an integral part of a well-functioning credit market. Credit
reporting systems help satisfy lenders’ need for accurate, credible information that reduces
the risk of lending and the cost of loan losses by providing a reliable indication of whether
an applicant will repay a loan. A lack of credit information makes checking borrowers’
credit history an onerous and uncertain process. This raises transaction costs for banks and,
ultimately, increases the cost of credit to borrowers. Loans are made based on personal
connections, not necessarily the likelihood of repayment.

Research suggests that bank risk is lower, while profitability is higher, in countries where
lenders share borrowers’ information through credit bureaus and registries.42 Well-
functioning credit reporting systems can help to reduce adverse selection and moral hazard,
and contribute to both an expansion of credit and a reduction in lending costs by facilitating
the adoption of lending technologies based on credit scoring models. The development of
credit registries and bureaus is particularly important for smaller firms, given the more
severe problems of information opacity and asymmetry in these cases.

In the Doing Business report, Getting Credit – Depth of Credit Information index, Bulgaria
scores 5 out of 8 (8 = highest availability of credit information). Worldwide, 23 economies
score 8 points out of 8 in this index (table 5.5). In the EU, Bulgaria fares better than
Luxemburg, Malta, and Slovenia but worse than other 19 economies (figure 5.1).

Table 5.1 Credit information ranking and best performers
                                           Regional    Regional best
 Doing Business Indicator      Bulgaria                                                Best global performer
                                            Average       performer
                                                               8
 Depth of credit information                              (Armenia;                               8
                                   5            6
 index (0-8)                                               Georgia;                        (26 economies)
                                                          Lithuania)
                                                         100 per cent
 Private credit bureau                      33.7 per                                         100 per cent
                                   0                       (Serbia;
 coverage (per cent of adults)                 cent                                         (26 countries)
                                                           Croatia)
 Public registry coverage (per              19.3 per     76.8 per cent
                                 62.9                                                  100 per cent (Portugal)
 cent of adults)                               cent        (Latvia)
Source: Doing Business database




42
   Joel Houston, Chen Lin, Ping Lin, and Yue Ma, 2010. “Cre ditor rights, information sharing, and bank
risk taking,” Journal of Financial Economics, Volume 96, Issue 3, Pages 485–512, June.


                                                   39
     Table 5.3 Depth of credit information index
                                                                       Private credit              Public credit             Bulgaria’s
Depth of credit information index (0–8)
                                                                          bureau                     registry                 score:
Are data on both firms and individuals distributed?                            No                        Yes                           1
Are both positive and negative credit data                                     No                        Yes                           1
distributed?
Are data from retailers or utility companies – in
addition to data from banks and financial                                      No                         No                           0
institutions – distributed?
Are at least 2 years of historical data distributed?
(Credit bureaus and registries that distribute more
than 10 years of negative data or erase data on                                No                         No                           0
defaults as soon as they are repaid obtain a score
of 0 for this component.)
Are data on loan amounts below 1 per cent of
                                                                               No                        Yes                           1
income per capita distributed?
By law, do borrowers have the right to access their
data in the credit bureau or credit registry? (Credit
bureaus and registries that charge more than 1 per                             No                        Yes                           1
cent of income per capita for borrowers to inspect
their data obtain a score of 0 for this component.)
Can banks and financial institutions access
borrowers’ credit information online (for example,                             No                        Yes                           1
through an online platform, a system-to-system
connection or both)?
Are bureau or registry credit scores offered as a
value-added service to help banks and financial                                No                         No                           0
institutions assess the creditworthiness of
borrowers?

                                                                          Score (Number of “Yes” answers)                          5


     Note: Prior to Doing Business 2015, the depth of credit information index covered only the first 6 features listed above. An
     economy receives a score of 1 if there is a "yes" to either bureau or registry. If the credit bureau or registry is not operational,
     or covers less than 5 per cent of the adult population, the total score on the depth of credit information index is 0.




                                                                     40
Figure 5.1 Depth of credit information index: Bulgaria compared to other EU
economies




Note: Higher scores indicate the availability of more credit information, from either a credit registry or a credit bureau, to
facilitate lending decisions. If the credit bureau or registry is not operational, or covers less than 5 per cent of the adult
population, the total score on the depth of credit information index is 0. Source: Doing Business database.


Indicators over time

The Central Credit Registry (CCR), administered by the Central Bank of Bulgaria, was
created in July 1998 and started its operations in 2000. On 1 July 2004, the Central Bank
of Bulgaria lifted the minimum requirement for monitored loans. As a result, the number
of borrowers has increased nine fold. In the same year, a Credit Bureau – Experian – was
created. The bureau started its operations in March 2005. On November 2008, the CCR
further extended its coverage with additional financial institutions and data fields. New
participants to the CCR, such as payment institutions and electronic money companies
granting loans, were included thanks to the amendments to the Law on Credit Institutions
and related ordinances that came into effect in 2012.
Since April 2011, however, Experian stopped collecting and distributing historical credit
data from banks and telecommunication companies, as it was no longer profitable to stay
in the market.


                                                             41
Short-term reform recommendations:

Expand the sources of information to include retailers and utility companies. The
Bulgarian Central Credit Registry’s sources of data currently include public and private
commercial banks as well as finance corporations and leasing companies. In addition to
the data provided by financial institutions, such as the ones described above, more
advanced credit reporting systems also collect credit information from retailers or utility
companies (electricity, water, and mobile phone providers) and include such data in their
credit reports. This is the case in 58 of 189 economies covered by Doing Business,
including Denmark, Germany, and the United Kingdom. Doing so is an effective way of
expanding coverage by credit bureaus.

Collecting and distributing information on the payment of electricity and phone bills, for
example, can help establish good credit histories for people without previous bank loans
and credit cards. A study in Italy found that more than 83% of water customers, who lacked
a credit history before the inclusion of repayment information from the utility provider,
were able to have a positive history after the inclusion, solely by paying their utility bills.43

Utility companies may also benefit. For example, in August 2006, the United States-based
DTE Energy, an electricity and natural gas company, began full reporting of customer
payment data to credit bureaus. DTE customers with no prior credit history – 8.1% of the
total – gained either a credit file or a credit score. And customers began to make payments
to DTE a priority. Within 6 months DTE had 80,000 fewer accounts in arrears.44

Expanding the sources of information to incorporate non-regulated financial institutions,
however, can be challenging. For example, it may be necessary to amend the existing legal
and regulatory framework concerning consumer and data protection so that retailers and
utility companies may share consumer data with credit reporting service providers.
Measures should also be taken to ensure the quality of data submitted by retailers and utility
providers. Such companies may use different the consumer identification systems: both
system and human errors are possible when data are transmitted for the first time.




43
     Preliminary findings of ongoing internal study at CRIF SpA, Italy.
44
     World Bank Conference. Financial Infrastructure Week. Brazil, March 15-17, 2010.


                                                    42
Medium-term reform recommendations:

Introduce credit scores. Another important tool in expanding access to finance is credit
scoring, a statistical method of evaluating the probability that a prospective borrower will
fulfill the financial obligations associated with a loan. Credit scores, based on credit bureau
or credit registry data, pool information across many creditors as well as some public
information sources. They therefore include characteristics otherwise unavailable to any
individual creditor, such as total exposure, number of outstanding loans and previous
defaults within the system. Credit scoring models typically incorporate historical data such
as defaults, positive payment behavior and previous inquiries. To sharpen the predictive
value of credit scores, credit bureaus and registries are also increasingly collecting data
from a wider range of sources (such as bankruptcies and court judgments). As a result,
credit scores generally have a higher predictive value than assessments derived from credit
histories alone.45

Credit scores may improve market efficiency and provide borrowers with more
opportunities to obtain credit. The availability of credit scores allows lenders that would
otherwise not be capable of analyzing the raw credit data to extend credit to underserved
markets at lower cost. This value added product is most widely available in Latin America
and the Caribbean and the OECD high-income group, offered in 80 per cent of economies
with a credit bureau or registry covering at least 5 per cent of the adult population –
compared with 40 per cent in Europe and Central Asia, 38 per cent in the Middle East and
North Africa, 25 per cent in East Asia and the Pacific and 24 per cent in Sub-Saharan
Africa.

Distribute at least 2 years of historical data. When credit reporting agencies do not
preserve historical information or erase negative data upon repayment, assessing credit
risks becomes more challenging for lenders. In Bulgaria historical data are distributed for
5 years only when loans are active. As a result, once the borrower finishes repaying a loan,
the credit report does not show the historical behavior of this loan and no positive historical
credit data is distributed to the reporting entities/participants in the Central Credit
Register.46

Sharing information on reliable repayment allows customers to establish a positive credit
history and improves lenders’ ability to distinguish good borrowers from bad ones. In Italy,
the private bureau distributes information on active loans plus 3 years of historical data

45
  World Bank 2011a.
46
  According to art. 19, paragraph 2, of BNB Ordinance 22 on the Central Credit Register, the information
on customer credit indebtedness that the CCR distributes to the reporting entities includes: a) data on the
current status of loans (as of the last reporting month: both regular and overdue) and b) data on overdue
active and repaid loans over a 5-year historical period (the historical data is only on loan arrears).


                                                     43
after the last update of closing date of the loan. Information on defaults is distributed for
24 months (if they are repaid) or 3 years (if not repaid and the loan has been closed). If
arrears are of less than 2 months/2 consecutive late payments, the information is distributed
for 12 months after repayment. If arrears are of a longer duration, the information is
distributed for 24 months after repayment on the condition that during the last 12/24
months no other late payments occur.

B. Legal Rights of Creditors and Borrowers in Secured Transactions

This section focuses on secured transactions and creditors’ rights. In many developing
countries, small and medium enterprises do not have access to land to use as collateral.
However, they do have moveable assets – such as machinery, inventory, accounts
receivable, and equipment. The legal and institutional framework plays an important role
in facilitating the use of such movable assets as collateral. Having to give up the possession
of the asset pledged to a creditor would disable the debtor from using such asset, which
could hamper the business’s productivity and ability to operate. It is therefore important to
develop a legal system that allows businesses to use their moveable assets as collateral to
secure loans, without having to give up possession of those assets. This in turn may increase
firms’ likelihood of accessing credit and improve the terms of the credit.

Research suggests that an improved legal framework for collateral could contribute to:

        Increasing the level of credit availability: In countries where security interests
         over collateral are enforceable against third-parties based on a predictable priority
         system in cases of loan default, credit to the private sector as a percentage of GDP
         averages 60 per cent, compared with only 30-32 per cent on average for countries
         without these creditor protections.47

        Decreasing the cost of credit: In industrial countries, borrowers with collateral get
         9 times the level of credit given their cash flow compared to borrowers without
         collateral. They also benefit from longer repayment periods (11 times longer) and
         significantly lower interest rates (50 per cent lower).48

        Increased access to finance: Research found that in countries with registries for
         movable collaterals, the number of firms with access to bank finance increased on
         average by 8 per cent, and access to bank loans on average by 7 per cent. These
         countries also showed lower interest rates and extension in loan maturity. The

47
   Investment Climate Advisory Services, Secured Transactions Systems and Collateral Registries, World
Bank Group, January 2010.
48
   Ibid.


                                                  44
        increase was even stronger for small firms, which often find it more difficult than
        larger firms to access credit, due to lack of fixed assets to be used as collateral.49

In the Doing Business report, Getting Credit – Legal Rights indicator, Bulgaria scores 9
out of 12 (12 = highest score for strongest protections) on the strength of legal right index.
Another economy in Southeast Europe, Montenegro, is one of the 3 economies around the
world that score 12 out of 12 in this index (table 5.5). In the EU, only Romania and Hungary
score better than Bulgaria (figure 5.2).

Table 5.5 Legal Rights of Creditors and Borrowers in Secured Transactions ranking and best
performers

                                                 Regional      Regional best
 Doing Business Indicator         Bulgaria                                           Best global performer
                                                 Average        performer
 Strength of Legal Rights                                           12                12 (Colombia; New
                                      9               6
 Index (0-12)                                                  (Montenegro)          Zealand; Montenegro)

Table 5.6 Legal Rights of Creditors and Borrowers in Secured Transactions score

                                                                                       Bulgaria’s
 Strength of legal rights index (0-12)
                                                                                         score
 Does an integrated or unified legal framework for secured transactions that
 extends to the creation, publicity and enforcement of functional equivalents to           No
 security interests in movable assets exist in the economy?
 Does the law allow businesses to grant a non possessory security right in a
 single category of movable assets, without requiring a specific description of           Yes
 collateral?
 Does the law allow businesses to grant a non possessory security right in
 substantially all of its assets, without requiring a specific description of             Yes
 collateral?
 May a security right extend to future or after-acquired assets, and may it extend
                                                                                          Yes
 automatically to the products, proceeds or replacements of the original assets?
 Is a general description of debts and obligations permitted in collateral
 agreements; can all types of debts and obligations be secured between parties;
                                                                                          Yes
 and can the collateral agreement include a maximum amount for which the
 assets are encumbered?
 Is a collateral registry in operation for both incorporated and non-incorporated
 entities, that is unified geographically and by asset type, with an electronic           Yes
 database indexed by debtor's name?
 Does a notice-based collateral registry exist in which all functional equivalents
                                                                                           No
 can be registered?



49
  Love, Inessa, María Soledad Martínez Pería and Sandeep Singh, 2013. “Collateral Registries for
Movable Assets. Does Their Introduction Spur Firms’ Access to Ba nk Finance? Policy Research Working
Paper n. 6477, The World Bank, June.


                                                 45
                                                                                     Bulgaria’s
 Strength of legal rights index (0-12)
                                                                                       score
 Does a modern collateral registry exist in which registrations, amendments,
 cancellations and searches can be performed online by any interested third             No
 party?
 Are secured creditors paid first (i.e. before tax claims and employee claims)
                                                                                        Yes
 when a debtor defaults outside an insolvency procedure?
 Are secured creditors paid first (i.e. before tax claims and employee claims)
                                                                                        Yes
 when a business is liquidated?
 Are secured creditors subject to an automatic stay on enforcement when a
 debtor enters a court-supervised reorganization procedure? Does the law
                                                                                        Yes
 protect secured creditors’ rights by providing clear grounds for relief from the
 stay and/or sets a time limit for it?
 Does the law allow parties to agree on out of court enforcement at the time a
 security interest is created? Does the law allow the secured creditor to sell the
                                                                                        Yes
 collateral through public auction and private tender, as well as, for the secured
 creditor to keep the asset in satisfaction of the debt?
                                              Score (Number of “Yes” answers)            9
Source: Doing Business database




                                                 46
Figure 5.1 Legal Rights of Creditors and Borrowers: Bulgaria compared to other EU
economies




Note: Higher scores indicate that collateral and bankruptcy laws are better designed to facilitate access to credit.
Source: Doing Business database


Indicators over time

No business reform impacting the Getting Credit – Legal Rights indicator has been
registered in Bulgaria for the past 5 years.

Medium-reform recommendations:

Create an integrated or unified legal framework for secured transactions that extends
to the creation, publicity and enforcement of 4 functional equivalents to security
interests in movable assets: fiduciary transfer of title; financial leases; assignment or
transfer of receivables; and sales with retention of title. Such unified legal framework
may consist either of one law covering all types of security interest, including functional
equivalents (ideal scenario). Alternatively, it may encompass amendments to relevant laws
by linking them through the same requirement of registration of all type security interests
(including functional equivalents) in a central, geographically unified, collateral registry
which would be noticed-based (no underlying security documents need to be provided for



                                                            47
registration) and accessible online for registration, searches and modifications by interested
parties.

Create a notice-based collateral registry in which all functional equivalents can be
registered. While traditional registries usually require a copy of the loan agreement or
other documents, notice-based registries require no documentation other than a simple
generic financing statement online form that records the existence of a security interest,
providing the names of the creditor and the debtor as well as a general description of the
collateral asset and the obligation secured. This avoids the need for a specialist to review
lengthy documents, which can be costly and time-consuming. It also improves the quality
of registration by transferring the responsibility to the registrant: with less documentation,
the potential for errors is minimized. Notice-based registration has also been successfully
adopted for other registration systems, such as patent and trademark registries.

Create a modern collateral registry in which registrations, amendments, renewals,
cancellations and searches can be performed online by any interested third party.
Online systems allow users to perform searches and register security interests from
anywhere and at any time. Unlike paper-based systems, there is no need for users to appear
before the registrar and wait their turn to enter information in the registry index. Online
registration also transfers the burden of preventing errors to the interested party




                                             48
Protecting Minority Investors
Corporate governance matters in all types of economies. Its ability to build trust and raise
the attractiveness of firms to potential investors, whether domestic or foreign, is crucial in
both established and developing economies. In established economies, ill-conceived
corporate regulations can hamper the growth of the private sector. In developing
economies, confidence in institutions is sorely needed to encourage the creation of a strong
flow of flourishing corporations.

Corporate governance is first and foremost an act of balancing. The immediate interests of
4 parties are at play: company managers, company directors, shareholders and public
authorities. In an ideal setting, the seemingly contrary interests of 1 party become beneficial
in the long run to that of another. For instance, empowering shareholders by granting them
more control over major transactions and/or transactions with a potentially harmful conflict
of interest reduces the risk on their investment and may allow managers and company
directors to more easily raise the capital needed to grow, innovate, diversify and compete
on the market.

Without investor protections, equity markets fail to develop and banks become the only
source of finance. Economies that have dynamic capital markets tend to effectively protect
investors. In these economies investors receive financial information they can trust, they
participate in major decisions of the company, and directors are accountable for their
managerial decisions. If the laws do not provide such protections, investors may be
reluctant to invest, unless they become controlling shareholders.

This indicator has different subsets of indicators. It measures the strength of minority
shareholder protections against directors’ misuse of corporate assets for personal gain
through one set of indicators50 and the strength of shareholders’ rights in corporate
governance51 through another set of indicators.52




50
   The company that is measured by Doing Business ‘Protecting minority investors’ indicators is a publicly
traded corporation on the economy’s most important stock exchange. If the n umber of publicly traded
companies listed on that exchange is less than 10, or if there is no stock exchange in the economy, it is
assumed that the company is a large private corporation with multiple shareholders.
51
   Doing Business 2015 measures corporate governance for listed companies and privately held joint stock
companies. There will be change in the methodology of Doing Business 2016 to measure corporate
governance for listed companies and limited liability companies. When the Doing Business report is
prepared, not all questions are asked for both types of companies.
52
   The strength of shareholders’ rights index measures corporate governance in listed companies and
limited liability companies. If the number of publicly traded companies listed on that exchange is less than
10, or if there is no stock exchange in the economy, it is assumed that the company is a large private
corporation with multiple shareholders.


                                                    49
The minority shareholder protections against directors’ misuse of corporate assets for
personal gain are important because gaps in legislation may allow company owners and
directors to enter into transactions that are lawful and involve no fraud or deceit, but that
nevertheless are unfair to minority shareholders. The existence of disclosure, director
liability and shareholder suit provisions that prevent such unfair transactions is of concern
both to foreign and domestic shareholders, and would help companies in Bulgaria to raise
capital.

Protecting Minority Investors also measures the strength of shareholders’ rights in
corporate governance through another set of indicators.53 Sound corporate rules can reduce
the cost of equity by mitigating the agency divide between minority shareholders and
managers in relation to diverging interests in the allocation of company resources. The
“protecting minority investors” overall index is computed by averaging two indices related
to protecting minority investors: extent of conflict of interest regulation and the extent of
shareholder governance. Each of these indices is comprised of an average of three more
relevant sub-indices (table 6.1). On an index range of 0-10, Bulgaria scores 6.8, ranking 14
out of 189 worldwide and 3 out of 26 economies in the Europe and Central Asia region.

Table 6.1: Protecting minority investors in Bulgaria and best performers
Doing           Bulgaria         Regional         Region’s best Global        best
Business                         average          performer        performer
Indicator
Minority        6.8              5.9              7.3 (Albania)    8.2
Investor                                                            (New Zealand)
Protection
(0-10)
Conflict of     6.3              6                7.3              9.3
Interest                                          (Albania;        (New Zealand;
Regulation                                        Georgia)         Singapore)
(0-10)




53
  The strength of shareholders’ rights index measures corporate governance in listed compan ies and
limited liability companies. If the number of publicly traded companies listed on that exchange is less than
10, or if there is no stock exchange in the economy, it is assumed that the company is a large private
corporation with multiple shareholders.


                                                     50
Disclosure          10                   6.4                 10 (Bulgaria)        10
Index (0-10)                                                                      (15 economies)
Director            2                    4.8                 8                    10 (Cambodia)
Liability Index                                              (Albania; FYR;
(0-10)                                                       Macedonia;
                                                             Montenegro)
Shareholder         7                    6.7                 8              10
Suits Index                                                  (9 economies)  (Mozambique)
(0-10)
Extent of           7.3                  5.9                 7.3 (Bulgaria)       7.8
Shareholder                                                                       (France; India)
Governance
(0-10)
Shareholder         7.5                  7.8                 10.5                 10.5
Rights Index54                                               (Armenia;            (8 economies)
(0-10.5)                                                     Romania)
Strength of         6                    4.4                 8 (Serbia)           8 (Serbia;
Governance                                                                        France)
Structure
(0-10.5) 55
Corporate           8.5                  5.4                 8.5                  8.5
Transparency                                                 (Bulgaria;           (4 economies)
Index (0-9) 56                                               Kyrgyz
                                                             Republic)

Bulgaria ranks 14th globally on the Protecting Minority Investors indicator as measured by
Doing Business. Bulgaria scores high on all sub-indicators, with the exception of the
Director Liability sub-index where the economy scores only 2 out of 10 possible points
(note: only 1 economy scores 10 and it is Cambodia). The regional leaders are Slovenia
with 9 points, while Albania, Macedonia and Montenegro have a score of 8 on this
indicator. 11 other economies have a score of 9 and they include Canada, Israel, Kuwait,
Malaysia New Zealand, Rwanda, Singapore, Trinidad and Tobago, UAE and USA. 15
economies scored 10 on the disclosure index.

The reason behind this lagging performance is that Bulgarian legislation (the Commercial
Law, the Public Offering of Securities Act, the Criminal Code, etc.) provides for a liberal



54
   Score (0-10.5) might change in Doing Business 2016 + questions included might change
55
   Score (0-10.5) might change in Doing Business 2016 + questions included might change
56
   Score (0-10.5) might change in Doing Business 2016 + questions included might change


                                                 51
regime for the liability of company directors compared to other economies, and particularly
compared to international best practices in corporate governance.

For example, in Bulgaria, the legal framework does not allow the interested director to be
held liable by shareholders for damages caused to the company as a result of a transaction
approved by the general meeting of shareholders. The same principle applies to members
of the board of directors: shareholders cannot hold them liable for damages caused to the
company by transactions the shareholders approved. In addition, the concept of “piercing
the corporate veil” has a very limited application – i.e. only in cases of related-party
transactions to detriment inflicted on the company willfully or by gross negligence, through
acts or omissions, by any member of the management bodies and supervisory bodies, or by
any managerial agent of the company.

Another characteristic of the Bulgarian legislation is that it does not allow for the court to
simultaneously apply fines and imprisonment against interested directors for the same
transaction (or alleged criminal act). Imprisonment is strictly a Criminal Law sanction,
subject to a separate criminal trial, and cannot be a part of civil/commercial litigation based
on commercial transactions disputes. In addition, the court is not allowed to void related-
party transactions upon a successful claim by shareholders, apart from in exceptional cases
of fraud or bad faith. Such a corporate regime, favorable to directors, hinders the corporate
governance framework in Bulgaria, and also facilitates corruption and misuse of the
corporate vehicle by interested directors.

In sum, the director liability in Bulgaria is very limited, except in cases where interested
directors are found guilty in a court of law, and have to pay damages to shareholders.




                                              52
Figure 6.1 – Protecting Minority Shareholders: Bulgaria compared to other EU
member states




Source: Doing Business


Indicators over time

No business reform impacting the Protecting Minority Shareholders indicator has been
registered in Bulgaria for the past 5 years.

Short-term reform recommendation:

Provide shareholders with rights to hold the interested director and directors liable
for damages resulting from a related-party transaction. Currently, minority
shareholders have to prove the interested director and directors’ gross negligence in a court
of law. This demanding standard requires shareholders to prove – in addition to material
damages – willful misconduct, an intent to cause harm, or knowledge that one’s conduct
would be prejudicial. It should be complemented so that shareholders can hold the
interested director and directors liable for unfair or prejudicial related-party transactions
solely because of the presence of a conflict of interest, as long as the transaction at issue
has caused damages. In this case, the law would require minority shareholders only to
prove material damages and not the intention to cause damages, thus increasing the
likelihood of recovery and consequently the level of protection.


                                             53
In addition, in the case of a related-party transaction that is unfair, oppressive or prejudicial
to minority shareholders, or entails a conflict of interest (i.e. not only in cases of fraud or
bad faith), the law could offer the possibility of rescission of the transaction, and require
the interested director to repay profits made from the related-party transaction.

More than 30 economies have implemented rules which hold both the interested director
and the board of directors liable when the transaction is unfair or prejudicial to other
shareholders, even if the transaction is not fraudulent. 45 economies hold only the board of
directors liable in such cases. 57 economies hold interested directors liable when there is a
conflict of interest.

Economies as diverse as, Macedonia, FYR, Malta, Montenegro, Hong Kong SAR,
Hungary, Japan, Singapore, United States and New Zealand hold both interested directors
and the board of directors liable for the damage caused by the related-party transaction if
the company's affairs are being, or have been, conducted in a manner which is unfairly
prejudicial or oppressive to the interests of its shareholders.


Medium-term reform recommendation:

Allow the plaintiff shareholders (minority shareholders) and/or their
representatives57 to directly question directors (defendants or witnesses) during trial.
Currently Bulgaria scores 0 out of 2 on the Shareholders Suits index. This index is based
on the question of whether or not the plaintiff can directly question the defendant and
witnesses during trial. In Bulgaria, this is not possible under the litigation rules of the Civil
Procedure Code. Due consideration should be given to the issue that allowing the plaintiff
or their lawyer to directly question defendants and witnesses during a civil trial would most
probably be considered a major change in the way a trial is conducted in Bulgaria. Such
reform would probably be classified as a long term one, as it might need time to be
implemented and adopted in practice.




57
     Lawyers with power of attorney to represent shareholders


                                                     54
Paying Taxes

Efficient tax administration can help encourage businesses to become formally registered
and the economy to grow – thus expanding the tax base, decreasing evasion and increasing
tax revenues. High tax compliance costs are associated with larger informal sectors, more
corruption and less investment. In contrast, economies with well-designed tax regimes are
able to help the creation and growth of businesses and, ultimately, the growth of overall
investment and employment.58

The Doing Business “Paying taxes” indicator records the taxes and mandatory
contributions that a medium-size company must pay in a given year, as well as the time it
takes to meet the tax obligations of the 3 main taxes: corporate income tax, VAT or sales
tax, and labor taxes and mandatory contributions. Bulgaria ranks 89 globally out of 189
economies on the ease of paying taxes, and is 18 out of 26 in Europe and Central Asia.
Although the number of payments and total tax rate are well below the regional average,
the number of hours spent to prepare, file returns and pay taxes is almost double (table 7.1).

Table 7.1 Paying Taxes in Bulgaria and best performers
 Doing     Business                Regional      Regional best                         Global best
                     Bulgaria
 Indicator                          average       performer                             performer
                                                                                      2 (Hong Kong
     Payments (number                                           5 (Georgia;
                                 13             20.5                                   SAR; Saudi
     per year)                                                   Ukraine)
                                                                                         Arabia)
  Time (hours per
                         454                   234.3          52 (San Marino)       55 (Luxembourg)
  year)
  Total tax rate
                        27 per
  (percentage     of                       34.9 per cent            N/A                    N/A
                         cent
  commercial profit)
Source: Doing Business database

Paying taxes in Bulgaria is a lengthy process. In the rest of the EU, paying taxes requires
an average of 11.2 payments and 189 hours each year; in Bulgaria it requires 13 payments
and as much as 454 hours, most of which are spent on filing social security contributions.
As a result, although the total tax rate is relatively low – only Denmark, Ireland, Cyprus,
Luxemburg, and Croatia register lower values – Bulgaria ranks 23 out of 28 EU economies
on this indicator. Only Italy, Czech Republic, Slovak Republic, and France perform worse
(figure 7.1).



58
     Bird, Richard. 2010. “Smart Tax Administration.” Economic Premise (World Bank) 36: 1–5.


                                                   55
Figure 7.1. Paying Taxes: Bulgaria compared to other EU member states.




Source: Doing Business database

Indicators over time
In 2007, Bulgaria made paying taxes easier and less costly for companies by encouraging
electronic filing and payment, and by reducing the corporate income tax rate and
employers’ social security contribution rate. The following year, authorities in Sofia further
improved the ease of paying taxes by introducing new corporate income and value added
tax laws, abolishing the requirement for an additional annual value added tax return, and
reducing the employer share of social security contributions. Starting from January 2009,
the country reduced employer contribution rates for social security: the reform was
captured by the 2011 Doing Business report. No major reform in this area has been
registered since.

Short-term reform recommendations:

Continue providing tax outreach – education and training – to small and medium
enterprises to ensure compliance, and carry out communications campaigns to


                                             56
further increase the use of electronic filing. Often, the biggest obstacle in paying taxes
for small businesses is the lack of basic accounting skills. The government can fill this gap
by providing capacity building and training for small businesses. The benefits should be
mutual: if well-trained entrepreneurs are able to prepare and file tax returns and pay taxes
more efficiently, the government can ensure better compliance with tax regulation. Tax
education is particularly important following significant reforms of the tax system (that is,
the improvements of electronic filing and payment systems, and required software; and
increased rates of some taxes/contributions).

Simplify compliance rules for paying and withholding social security contributions.
In Bulgaria, taxpayers need 256 hours per year to prepare, file and remit social security
contributions. Although no returns are required per se, every month employers are obliged
to file statutory reporting forms for the amount of the contributions – both the employer’s
and employee’s portions – of each employee, plus one summary form for all employees.
In order to reduce the burden on entrepreneurs, Bulgarian authorities should consider
measures aimed at simplifying the administrative requirements on this area of tax
regulation.




                                             57
 Trading across Borders
In recent years, the operating environment of the international trade community has
significantly changed due to increased trade volumes and complexity. These changes
highlight how inefficient border procedures may have a negative impact on governments,
businesses and, ultimately, on the economy as a whole. Governments have to face problems
such as smuggling and fraud, which have a negative impact on public finances.
Entrepreneurs pay the price of slow and unpredictable goods delivery and cumbersome
border procedures, often losing business opportunities. Directly incurred costs, such as
those relating to supplying the relevant authorities with information and documents, and
indirectly occurred costs, such as those caused by procedural delays, may in some cases
reach as much as 15% of the value of the traded goods.59

Customs performance, other trade-related technical control regulations, the quality of
infrastructure for trade, and the existence of trade barriers all impact the ease of trading
among countries. Bulgaria has been a member of the EU since January 2007. As such, it
applies the same EU tariffs to goods imported from the rest of the world and has no tariffs
on goods from other member countries. The EU customs union is highly sophisticated:
Bulgaria already applies a wide set of common rules to imports and exports, and has
completely removed all controls towards other EU members. As such, its efforts on trade
facilitations should be directed towards partners outside of the EU.

At the global level, economies with the most efficient trade logistics share common
features. First, they allow electronic exchange of information with customs and other
control agencies. The use of electronic systems for transferring and processing customs
information has become widespread. Currently, 88 per cent of economies around the world
allow traders to submit at least some export and imports declarations, manifests or other
trade-related documents to custom authorities electronically. Over the past 10 years, 127
economies – including Bulgaria – have introduced or improved such systems. Increasingly,
countries are introducing electronic single windows that connect traders not only to
customs, but also to other agencies involved in the import and export processes. The most
sophisticated of these systems are moving to ‘paperless’ trade. Traders can electronically
file information through a single entry point, to fulfill all import and export requirements
and share it with all involved parties, including customs and other government agencies,
banks, freight forwarders, and insurance companies. Secondly, economies with efficient
trading environments use risk-based assessments which limit physical inspection to a small
percentage of cargo, thus reducing customs clearance delays.




59
     OECD 2009. Overcoming Border Bottlenecks. Paris: OECD.


                                                 58
The Doing Business60 report measures the time, cost (excluding tariffs), and the number of
documents required to export and import a standardized cargo of goods by sea transport,
while the Logistics Performance Index61 (LPI), the Enterprise Survey62 (ES) and the Global
Competitiveness Index63 (GCI) report business leaders’ perceptions about trade logistics,
as well indicators on experience of firms while importing and exporting (table 8.2).
Recommendations in this section are based on the results for Bulgaria in the Doing
Business report, taking into account the results from other indices where applicable.

Table 8.1 Trading across Borders in Bulgaria and best performers
                                                             Regional
                                                Regional                                            Global best
 Report Indicator          Unit      Bulgaria                   best
                                                average                                             performer
                                                            performer
           Ease of                                               21
                          Rank (1-
           Trading                      57          –       (Lithuania)                              Singapore
           Across          189)
           Borders                                                4
                                                            (Lithuania;
           Documents to                                                                              2 (France;
                          Number         4          7        Georgia;
           export                                                                                     Ireland)
                                                             Bulgaria;
                                                           San Marino)
           Time to                                                                                      6
                           Days         18         24       7 (Cyprus)
           export                                                                                 (5 economies)
              Cost to               USD/                                                              410
                                                    1,375          2,154        600 (Latvia)
              export              container                                                       (Timor Leste)

              Documents to                                                      4 (Georgia;          2 (France;
                                   Number             5               8
              import                                                            San Marino)           Ireland)
              Time to
                                     Days             17             26          5 (Cyprus)        4 (Singapore)
              import
              Cost to               USD/                                           730              415 (Timor
                                                    1,365          2,436
              import              container                                      (Albania)            Leste)




60
   http://www.doingbusiness.org/data/exploreeconomies/bulgaria/#trading-across-borders
61
   The International LPI provides qualitative evaluations of a country in six areas by its trading partners –
logistics professionals working outside the country. See http://d21a6b425f3bbaf58824-
9ec594b5f9dc5376fe36450505ae1164.r12.cf2.rackcdn.com/LPI_Report_2014.pdf
62
   http://www.enterprisesurveys.org/data/exploreeconomies/2013/bulgaria
63
   http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GlobalCompetitivenessReport_2014-15.pdf


                                                      59
 Table 8.2 Other trade indicators

                                                                            Rank/Score
Report                   Indicator                      Unit
                                                                              Bulgaria
            Logistics    Performance      Index
                                                    Rank (1-160)                 47
            (general)
LPI
            Logistics    Performance      Index
                                                    Rank (1-160)                 64
            (customs)
            Customs & trade regulations              per cent of
ES                                                                               3.1
            identified as major constraint          firms trading
GCI         Burden of customs procedures            Rank (1-144)                 67


 The Doing Business Trading across Borders indicator looks at the entire process for import
 or export, from contractual agreement to getting the letter of credit to arrival/departure of
 the goods from the port of entry/exit. On average, in Bulgaria it takes 18 days to export and
 17 to import, with an associated cost of $1,375 to export and $1,365 to import. At present,
 4 documents are required for exports and 5 for imports While Bulgaria’s performance on
 this indicator is above the regional average in Europe and Central Asia, there is still
 considerable room for improvement in order to reach both regional and international best
 practices (table 8.1). Among EU countries, Bulgaria ranks better than Croatia, Hungary,
 Slovak Republic, Romania and Czech Republic but worse than other 22 economies,
 including Greece, Spain, Estonia and Sweden (figure 8.1.).




                                              60
Figure 8.1. Trading Across Borders: Bulgaria compared to other EU member
countries.




Source: Doing Business database.

Indicators over time

Electronic submission of customs export declarations was introduced in July 2009 while
electronic submission of customs import declarations started on January 2011. As a result,
by 2012, exporters and importers reported a reduction of the time they spent on document
preparation. Now, neither exporters nor importers need to submit the declarations in
person, but can start the customs clearance process through the new EDI system.

Short-term reform recommendation:

Improve inter-agency coordination for border management and clearance processes.
Cross border trade involves controls by many agencies. A coordinated border management
and clearance process is therefore an essential element of trade facilitation and may result


                                            61
in a sensible reduction in time and cost to trade across borders. In Bulgaria, coordination
among border agencies could be significantly improved. According to OECD, the
country’s performance in border agency cooperation is below average for Europe and
Central Asian countries as well as OECD countries.64 These findings are confirmed by
WEF, which identifies burdensome procedures as major obstacles for importing in the
country.65

Improved sharing of information among border agencies, streamlined processes for
customs and non-customs controls, joint controls, establishment or improvement of the
links and interoperability between customs and non-customs electronic systems may all
contribute to the reduction of time spent in clearance procedures.

Small steps can have important repercussions, even in the short term. The government of
Mali, for instance, has very recently implemented an interconnection system between two
agencies – the Customs Agency and the Direction Nationale du Commerce et de la
Concurrence (DNCC). The new system allows for electronic preparation and submission
of certain export and import documents, and has resulted in a significant reduction in time
dedicated to document compliance. Thanks to this reform, Malian traders do not need to
go to the DNCC office anymore, only to the customs office, thus saving them a full business
day.

Medium-term reform recommendation:

Establish an electronic single-window platform for trade-related transactions.
Currently Bulgaria has no fully functioning system that allows importers, exporters and
custom brokers to make all the necessary applications for licenses or permissions
electronically. An electronic single-window system would allow trade professionals to
carry out all their transactions through a single portal. The results of such applications could
be fed automatically into the clearance system to inform the control authorities, and also
advise the applicant. This would significantly speed up import and export processes,
improve accuracy, and reduce opportunities for corruption.66 Reaching higher levels of
automation of the clearance procedures of import/export should also be taken into
consideration, as it would provide better linkages with non-customs agencies, electronic
processing of various customs and non-customs procedures.




64
   The scores of Bulgaria on the OECD trade facilitation indicators can be found at:
http://www.oecd.org/tad/facilitation/Bulgaria_OECD-Trade-Facilitation-Indicators.pdf
65
   WEF 2014. The Global Enabling Trade Report 2014. Geneva: WEF.
66
   It must be noted that – according to WEF - corruption at the border is the third most problematic factor
when importing goods in Bulgaria. Ibid.


                                                     62
Although electronic single window systems vary in their functionality and complexity, the
best single windows systems will link banks, licensing agencies and trade clearance
agencies into a unique platform, and allow exchange of information in real time, speeding
up approvals. Best practices require a paperless customs clearance system, which should
accompany the electronic data interchange system. The electronic single-window system
would allow traders to upload all documentation and receive approvals online. Finally, the
introduction of online payment systems would limit the number of physical interactions
and time spent at the border.

Singapore, through its TradeNet system, has been a global leader in the implementation of
such a platform/single window. TradeNet handles 20-30,000 trade declarations per day and
links 35 government controlling units. Several economies have reported positive results
from the implementation of single-window systems. The Korea Customs Service estimates
that the introduction of its single-window system brought some $18 million in benefits in
2010, part of the overall economic benefits that year of up to $3.47 billion from the
agency’s trade facilitation efforts.67

Good practices abound in Europe as well. The computerization of the German port of
Hamburg, for instance, started in 1983, when the first harbor order was sent electronically
from a haulage company through its port community system (DAKOSY). Today, the Port
of Hamburg is a 100% “paperless port” and DAKOSY has become its single window
platform. All logistics companies and authorities involved in the export, import and transit
processes communicate their business data through its data center. Transport orders,
customs applications, hazardous goods notifications, harbor orders, bills of lading and
manifests are all transferred electronically through DAKOSY, which currently has more
than 2000 customers including haulage companies, shipping lines, rail transport
companies, trucking companies, feeders, international trade firms and industrial
enterprises.68




67
   Korea Customs Service. 2011. The Embodiment of Business-Friendly Environment by KCS Challenges.
Seoul.
68
   For more information, please visit: http://www.dakosy.de


                                                63
Enforcing Contracts
Research in various countries around the world suggests that, in the absence of efficient
courts, firms make fewer investments and business transactions while informal transactions
become more attractive. A study of 27 economies found that the informal sector’s share in
overall economic activity decreased with better contract enforcement quality, evaluated by
a country-wide measure of rule of law, as well as by the firm’s perception of the fairness
of courts.69 Improvements in court efficiency are associated with a lower share of the
informal sector in the overall economic activity, increased investor confidence and
increased bank financing of firms for new investment.70 For example, reforms in other
areas, such as creditors’ rights, can increase bank lending only if contracts can be enforced
before the courts.

Doing Business measures the efficiency (number of procedures, time and cost) of the
judicial system in resolving a standardized commercial dispute before the Sofia City Court.
Globally, Bulgaria ranks 75th in the ease of enforcing contracts among 189 economies, and
18th out of 26 in the Europe and Central Asia region. On average, entrepreneurs in Bulgaria
pay 23.8 per cent of the claim value in attorneys, court and enforcement fees and need 564
days to resolve a commercial dispute through the courts. In Singapore, entrepreneurs need
only 150 days to resolve the same dispute, while in Sofia the trial alone takes 334 days,
and the enforcement of the judgment takes a further 125. The whole procedure according
to Doing Business 2015 takes 38 separate steps.

Table 9.1: Enforcing Contracts in Bulgaria and best performers

Doing       Business        Bulgar      Regional            Regional best        Global best performer
Indicator                   ia          average             performer
Procedures (number )        38          37.2                7 (Belarus)          21 (Ireland, Singapore)
Time (calendar days)        564         448.1               195                  150 (Singapore)
                                                            (Uzbekistan)
Cost (percent          of 23.8          25.2 percent        12.7 percent         9.0 percent (Iceland)
claim)                    percent                           (Slovenia)




69
  Dabla-Norris and Inchauste Comboni 2008.
70
  Among other papers, see G.B. Ramello and S. Voigt, 2012. “The economics of efficiency and the judicial
system,” International Review of Law and Economics; Mehnaz Safavian and Siddharth Sharma, 2007.
“When Do Creditor Rights Work?” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 4296; John Ahlquist
and Aseem Prakash, 2010. “FDI and the costs of contract enforcement in developing countries,” Policy
Sciences, Springer, vol. 43(2), pages 181-200, June; Inessa Love, 2011. “Settling Out of Court: How
Effective is Alternative Dispute Resolution,” Viewpoint Note No. 329, The World Bank Group, October.



                                                  64
Reform efforts

The Doing Business methodology measures the performance of the commercial court in
the biggest city of a given country. In Bulgaria, it is the Sofia City Court (SCC). Therefore,
the assumptions, data, and recommendations, outlined in this chapter relate to SCC, which
handles the vast majority (around 80 per cent) of the caseload of commercial disputes in
Bulgaria. Other courts, not benchmarked by the Doing Business report could have shorter
deadlines or offer more time- and cost-effective resolutions of commercial disputes and
enforcement of commercial contracts, than SCC.

A major reform related to commercial dispute resolution was introduced in 2005 whereby
private bailiffs were allowed to practice, with the aim of improving enforcement and
collection of debts. In 2007, the Civil Procedure Code introduced a new rule limiting the
ability of the Supreme Court to return cases to lower courts only once on the merits. This
was a significant reform, considering that prior to 2007 there was a procedural possibility
for the Supreme Court to return cases multiple times to the lower courts on different
grounds.

According to Doing Business, however, there have been no significant reform efforts that
affect this indicator during the past 10 years, excluding some piece-meal reforms related
to the Civil Procedure Code and the Law on the Judiciary, which had more to do with the
governance of the judiciary system than with particular targeted interventions aiming to
reduce time, costs and procedures in commercial litigation and enforcement of contracts.

Table 9.2: Information on the number of commercial cases for 2014, broken down by
courts

 In 2014, 15 commercial divisions functioned in a total of 28 district courts within the
 country. 13 district courts had no commercial divisions.

 The total number of judges hearing commercial cases in 2014 was 205. Although
 commercial departments are not present in 13 district courts, all 28 district courts hear
 commercial cases.

 The total number of the commercial cases heard in 2014 was 31,075. The largest number
 of cases was in SCC (19 211), followed by Varna, Plovdiv, Stara Zagora and Burgas
 with more than 1000 cases each.

In July 2014, the Cabinet adopted a Strategy for the Introduction of E-governance in the
Judiciary Sector (E-Justice) for the period 2014–2020. Its main objective is to increase
efficiency through the use of electronic transactions not only by the judicial authorities, but
also by other stakeholders, including government agencies, organizations, citizens and


                                              65
businesses. The aim of the strategy is to expand E-Justice services to the public, enhance
transparency, allow tracking of cases in real time, use data already collected by other
administrative authorities, improve the speed and quality of administrative services, and
give overall easier access to public information.71 The Ministry of Justice is coordinating
the E-Justice reform through its E-Justice Department.

In January 2015 the National Assembly adopted an Updated Strategy for Continuing the
Reform in the Judiciary, which will serve as the basis for future legislative amendments
and analysis of the constitutional framework of the judiciary.72 A very important aspect of
the Strategy and the Action Plan is the mandate to adopt criteria for assessing the workload
in the judicial system at the level of individuals and institutions, which is a particular
concern in SCC.

Figure 9.1 Enforcing contracts: Bulgaria compared to other EU member states




Source: Doing Business




71
   Europe 2020, National Reform Program, Ministry of Finance, April 2015, available at
http://ec.europa.eu/europe2020/pdf/csr2015/nrp2015_bulgaria_bg.pdf
72
   Europe 2020, National Reform Program, Ministry of Finance, April 2015, available at
http://ec.europa.eu/europe2020/pdf/csr2015/nrp2015_bulgaria_bg.pdf


                                                   66
Indicators over time

No business reform impacting the Enforcing Contracts indicator has been registered in
Bulgaria for the past 5 years. However, 2 significant reforms were implemented in 2008
and 2009. In 2009, Bulgaria improved its contract enforcement system by amending rules
for evidence and default judgment, raising the minimum threshold value for the lower
jurisdiction and giving the civil court of last instance the power to select which cases to
hear so as to limit abuse of the appeals process. In 2008, Bulgaria made enforcing contracts
easier by introducing changes to its judicial system, increasing transparency in the system
and appointing private bailiffs.

Short-term reform recommendations:

Assess the effectiveness of court procedures in order to identify bottlenecks and
formulate solutions, especially for using ICT applications. In SCC, commercial
litigation is a complex, paper-based process, characterized by multiple physical
interactions between the court, the parties and their lawyers, the court administration73, the
court appointed experts74, private bailiffs and the private bailiffs’ officers who serve
summons. Despite the fact that SCC and other courts have websites and semi-automated
back-office case workflow and databases, the external communication between the court,
the parties and the experts is an exclusively manual and paper-based interaction, with little
attempt to introduce ICT applications which would streamline the process and save time
and costs. For example, summons are still a physical process where the court officer has to
physically serve summons to the parties; the same applies to other notifications and
exchanges between the court, the experts and the parties. The reported huge workload of
the commercial judges in SCC only adds to this problem. Although there is a special
Commercial Department in SCC, there is no Specialized Commercial Court and no Small
Claims Court, as in other countries.

In Sofia, it takes an average of almost 20 months to resolve a commercial dispute. During
this time, plaintiffs have to wait more than a month between filing a complaint and serving
notice to the defendant. Allegedly, as reported by some stakeholders, sometimes the
serving alone can take between 6-12 months, despite the well-developed address
registration system in Bulgaria and the broad use of landlines and cell phones, e-mails and
all other ICT applications that allow for quick physical location of individuals. Going
through the trial and obtaining a judgment takes an average of around one year, a large part
of which is spent waiting for the first hearing and the subsequent adjournments. All this
could be streamlined through process streamlining and the introduction of ICT applications

73
     Summon officers – “prizovkari” and court clerks “delovoditeli”
74
     Court appointed experts - “veshti lica”


                                                     67
to connect the court to the parties/experts. Once a judgment has been issued, it takes over
6 additional months for the judgment to be enforced through the public auction of the losing
party’s assets, including the involvement of private bailiffs and private serving officers
who allegedly serve summons more quickly than the court officers.

It is recommended that both the procedures required by law, and the steps required in
practice by SCC to take a case from filing through enforcement, should be mapped out.
This exercise would help identify unnecessary administrative tasks required by court staff,
judges, the parties and the experts, as well as opportunities for improvement with (and
without) legislative changes. It could also help identify needs for adjustments to the laws
and court rules, and for changes in resource allocation to enhance efficiency and cost
effectiveness. Such an assessment can be conducted upon the government’s request and
may foster the ongoing efforts to simplify court proceedings undertaken by the Ministry of
Justice and their E-Justice initiatives.

Assess commercial case data and workload. In order to get a better understanding of
processing and resource requirements and bottlenecks, commercial case data from the
different courts across the country, and especially from SCC, should be analyzed. Since
different types of commercial cases require different effort and time, such workload and
disposition assessment by case type is essential to developing targeted case management
techniques, informing the potential need for a specialized court and small claims court, and
planning for adequate resource allocations. Such assessment is also helpful for establishing
processing standards and related performance indicators that reflect case complexity and
special conditions.

Consider Introducing a Pre-trial Conference. Currently, the Civil Procedure Code does
not allow parties to commercial disputes to participate in pre-trial conference before the
competent court. A pre-trial conference is a meeting designed to narrow down contentious
issues and evidentiary questions before the trial. Its purpose is to expedite the trial process
while discouraging unnecessary pretrial motions or other delay tactics by the parties.

Medium-term reform recommendation:

Continue improving the e-courts system by introducing e-filing and electronic service
of process, including summons (by e-mail, SMS, e-fax, etc.) Since early 2000, Bulgaria
has achieved important progress towards the establishment of an e-court system. Over the
past 10-15 years, all courts, including the two supreme courts, the 28 district courts, the
municipal courts and the specialized courts have websites, digitized files, and use different




                                              68
types of case management systems. Since 2012 SCC offers comprehensive information
services through its website75.

In spite of these efforts, the process of computerization is not yet complete. The two main
issues are that every court uses a different ICT vendor and therefore a different case-
management system, and there are a limited number of transactional e-services that the
courts offer to the public. The most common service is online publications of court
decisions and tracking of cases and deadlines, but fully transactional services, such as
online payment of fees, online admission of evidence, online hearings and overall online
dispute resolution are unknown for the Bulgarian judiciary. Furthermore, electronic
communication between the parties and the court, particularly e-filing and electronic
summons are not yet available. Similarly, the submission of evidence by the parties (as
well as witnesses’ opinions) must be carried out in paper format. Because of this, court
staff, judges and users have to cope with a dual system where only a part of the information
– such as minutes of the hearings and past court decisions – can be found online. As a
result, the courts’ premises are often cluttered with paperwork and files, court clerks are
swamped with work, and delays ensue.

Adequate measures should be taken to gradually introduce a paperless e-court system. In
Europe, countries have employed a range of e-solutions in order to improve their e-court
systems. Such countries are Austria, Denmark, Finland, Norway, the Netherlands, UK, and
Portugal. In Austria, all filings from lawyers in civil litigation and enforcement proceedings
now go through an electronic data channel operated by the Ministry of Justice. Judgments
are delivered by e-mail rather than by the old hard-copy notification process. Another
country that successfully implemented an efficient case management system is Korea. The
introduction of a comprehensive e-court system enables Korean judges to adjudicate up to
3,000 cases a year, manage up to 400 a month and hear up to 100 pleas a month (box 2).




75
     http://scc.bg


                                             69
Box 2: Improving court efficiency: the Republic of Korea’s e-court experience

Approaches to e-courts vary by economy depending on the capacities and priorities of the judiciary and the
ability of court users to use such solutions. The tools available to court users in Korea have gradually expanded
over time. Currently, the country ranks first in the world on the E-Government Readiness Index, a composite
measure of the capacity and willingness of economies to use e-government for development.

The first case management system, launched in the mid-1980s, enabled internal court users to search for civil
cases in the database. Now the system encompasses many features, most of which are dedicated to help judges
(case management system and judge support system), facilitate the filing of cases for litigants (e-filing) and
inform the public (publication of cases).

To further streamline procedures, a system facilitates payment of all submission fees electronically using credit
card or wire transfers at the time of filing. In addition, users are notified by e-mail or text message of any
submission of additional documents by the opposing party. After the case allocation system assigns cases, the
designated judge and the attorneys can view all their cases online, including PDFs of all documents filed in a
given lawsuit.

For judges, the support system includes 4 main features:
     • The case management system, which allows judges to organize their work based on the status of
        procedures and to separately manage cases for which special measures are needed.
     • “My case history,” which allows judges to track cases they have disposed and the final determination
        of these cases.
     • A scheduling system to organize cases by day, week or month that is integrated with the court registry.
     • A writing support system with features such as automatic document formatting, multiple judgment
        editing in small cases and collaborative decision writing in panel cases. This system automatically
        creates a draft of the final judgment after the relevant case and desired template have been selected.
        Once completed, judges enter a digital signature and register the decision in a searchable database of
        judgments

Online help centers featuring frequently asked questions and tools for pro se litigants were also created to allow
the public to get fast answers on questions about the Supreme Court and its processes. One of the most important
components of these help centers is the self-represented litigants webpage, which provides information and
templates needed to file a case and respond to claims of counterparties without the help of a certified lawyer.

In the first two months after the launch of the e-filing system for civil cases, approximately 5% were filed
electronically. This number almost decupled in 18 months. In fact, two years later, in June 2013, that share had
soared to more than 45%.

According to Doing Business, in Seoul resolving a standard contract enforcement dispute takes 230 days, 32
procedures and costs 10.3 per cent of the claim – making Korea the runner-up in Doing Business’s ease of
enforcing contracts ranking. In many countries, concerns about budget and technology limitations are among
the most common reasons for not implementing e-court features. That should not prevent less developed
economies from looking into e-court options. E-court options may provide for cost savings in the long run, and
up-front costs for developing such options can be implemented with donor assistance, supported by peer learning
from courts in leading economies such as Korea.

If implemented carefully, e-courts can improve court document security and decision making transparency. In
the long run, they also help countries save money. The implementation of Korea’s e -court system, for example,
resulted in savings of $221 per e-filing. These savings result from a reduction in the use of paper, the time spent
in court, cheaper service of process, lower transportation costs, easier archiving of documents, and easier
payment of fees.

Source: Doing Business 2014.




                                                    70
Resolving Insolvency
The efficient regulation of business insolvency relates to the broader topic of access to
credit. Studies suggest that where insolvency regimes are most effective, creditors –
confident that they will be able to collect on loans – are more likely to lend, including to
borrowers with whom they have not had a long-standing relationship. A well-balanced
insolvency system also functions as a filter, separating companies that are financially
distressed but economically viable from inefficient companies that should be liquidated.
By giving viable companies a chance at a fresh start to reorganize and continue as going
concerns, insolvency law may also help sustain a higher overall level of entrepreneurship
in a country, protect jobs and maintain suppliers’ networks, among other benefits for the
economy. Moreover, by facilitating the efficient business exit and liquidation of unviable
companies, a beneficial insolvency framework supports the efficient reallocation of
resources across the economy.76

The Doing Business report’s ‘Resolving insolvency’ indicators is composed of two
measures: the debt recovery in insolvency and the strength of insolvency framework index.
The first measures the time, cost and outcome of insolvency proceedings for domestic
companies. The indicator does not deal with situations where a business owner voluntarily
winds up a company but, rather, where businesses become “insolvent”, typically under one
of two definitions: (1) the business is unable to pay its debts as these become due; or (2)
the business has more liabilities than assets. The second index, introduced by Doing
Business this year, evaluates the adequacy and integrity of the legal framework applicable
to insolvency proceedings. Good practices are measured in accordance to the World Bank’s
Principle of Effective Insolvency and Creditor/Debtor Regimes and the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law’s (UNCITRAL) Legislative Guide on Insolvency
Law.77

The data for the resolving insolvency indicators are derived from questionnaire responses
by local insolvency practitioners and verified through the study of laws and regulations as
well as public information on bankruptcy systems.

Bulgaria currently ranks 38 out of 189 economies in the Resolving Insolvency indicator,
as measured by Doing Business. A secured creditor in Bulgaria – most typically a bank

76
   See Djankov, Simeon. 2009. “Bankruptcy Regimes during Financial Distress.” Mimeo, World Bank
Group; Funchal, Bruno. 2008. “The Effects of the 2005 Bankruptcy Reform in Brazil.” Economics Letters ,
101: 84–86; Klapper, Leora 2011. “Saving Viable Businesses.” Viewpoint 328, September 2011, The
World Bank Group; Visaria, Sujata. 2009. “Legal Reform and Loan Repayment: The Microeconomic
Impact of Debt Recovery; Tribunals in India.” American Economic J ournal: Applied Economics, 1(3): 59-
81.
77
   World Bank 2011b; UNCITRAL 2004.



                                                  71
that accepts real estate as collateral – will follow an individual enforcement procedure
(foreclosure) to collect on his debt upon default of the debtor. A foreclosure would be
applicable to the case study assumed by the indicator, since neither the Commercial Law
nor the Civil Procedure Code impose a moratorium on secured creditors (see below), who
are entitled to proceed separately against the assets of the debtor. According to Doing
Business, an average foreclosure procedure in Bulgaria takes more than 3 years and costs
9 percent of the insolvency estate, with the company being sold piecemeal as a result of
the procedure. Creditors recover on average 33.2 cents on the dollar through the
foreclosure. The process is longer, but less expensive than the average for the Europe and
Central Asia region and the OECD, while the amount of the recovery from the insolvency
estate is lower than the regional average. It is worth noting that the recovery rate is more
than 2 times lower than in OECD economies, where the average recovery rate is 71.9 per
cent per dollar.

The picture varies by sub-indicators, but it is worth noting that Bulgaria is a regional and
world best performer in the strength of insolvency framework index, where the country is
one of the 5 countries in the world to score 15 out of 16 points.

Bulgaria scores the highest in the management of debtor’s assets sub-index (6 points out
of 6) and in the creditor participation sub-index (4 out of 4 points). The country also scores
pretty highly in the commencement of proceedings sub-index (2.5 out of 3 points which is
slightly above the average of 2.4 for the ECA region) and in the reorganization proceedings
sub-index (2.5 points out of 3). However, there is still room for improvement in these two
indices.

Table 10.1 – Resolving insolvency ranking and best performers
Doing      Business Bulgaria Regional           Regional         best           Global           best
Indicator                        Average        performer                       performer
Time (years)         3.3         2.3            1.4 (Montenegro)                0.4 (Ireland)
Cost (per cent of 9.0            13.3           5 (San Marino)                  1 (Norway)
estate)
Recovery rate (cents 33.2        37.7           70.5 (Cyprus)                   92.9 (Japan)
on the dollar)
Strength          of 15          9.2            15.0 (Bulgaria)                 15.0 (5 economies)
insolvency
framework index (0-
16)

Overall the Bulgarian insolvency framework follows the Germanic/Central European
tradition where the creditors and the courts are provided with greater power over the
insolvency estate and the debtor’s actions, compared to the Anglo-American system,
particularly Canada and the US, where Chapter 11 of the Uniform Commercial Code


                                             72
(UCC) provides a more flexible regime for debtors, particularly in procedures related to
restructuring and workouts.

Reform efforts

The Insolvency regime in Bulgaria is almost exclusively arranged in Chapter IV of the
Commercial Law. It is interesting to note that while the other 3 chapters of the Companies
Law were enacted in 1991, it took the legal establishment and the parliament 3 additional
years to agree on and adopt Chapter IV with the insolvency framework in late 1994. The
tendency of delaying the enactment of the insolvency frameworks was somewhat common
for other Europe and Central Asia economies in transition, particularly for the former
Soviet republics, including Russia.

In addition to the Commercial Law, some general provisions of the Civil Procedure Code
are also applicable in the judicial phase of the insolvency. Other legal sources are also
important for the Bulgarian insolvency framework – the most important are the Accounting
Law, which refers to special reporting standards for insolvent companies78; the Law on
Public Accounts Receivables, which arranges the regime of public receivables 79 of
insolvent companies; and the List of Insolvency Practitioners (Syndics) approved and
maintained by the Minister of Justice. Currently Bulgaria and Romania are the only two
EU members who don’t have specialized personal insolvency legislation, and apply the
generic provisions of the Civil Procedure Code, the so called “universal personal
insolvency”.

The reform of the modern insolvency regime of Bulgaria has a long history despite its short
existence since 1994. Chapter IV of the Commercial Law is one of the most reviewed and
amended pieces of legislation in Bulgaria, and has often been supported by technical
assistance programs provided by the IMF, EU and USAID.

Currently the Bulgarian Government is undertaking another round of reforms aiming to
further improve the pre-insolvency proceedings, corporate work-outs, and the
administration and regulation of the insolvency administrators (syndics).

The newest Insolvency Reform Working Group is set up by the Minister of Finance and
includes members from the Ministries of Economy, Justice, Finance and other related
stakeholders such as courts, banks and the legal academia. Its mandate is to elaborate on
draft proposals for amendment of Chapter IV of the Commercial Law. The proposed

78
   See article 22b, para 5 of the Accounting Law which states that the Council of Ministers should adopt a
special amounting standard for insolvent companies
79
   Taxes, custom duties, social, medical and pension deductibles, and other receivables due to the
Government by the insolvent company.


                                                    73
amendments are not aimed at improving the judicial phase of insolvency but, rather, solely
on the Pre-Bankruptcy Settlement Procedure (PBS).80 The mandate of the working group
is to focus on:81
 1. Introduction of preventive procedures that will allow a debtor to continue his activity
     (as a going concern), while at the same time negotiate with creditors in order to avoid
     the start of insolvency proceedings and declaration of insolvency;
 2. Introduction of expedited restructuring proceedings through a fast-track court
     approved procedure of pre-agreed agreements within the preventive procedure. The
     idea is to use commercial departments of the courts taking over such cases, subject to
     discussions with the Supreme Judicial Council;
 3. Introduction of a sound legal framework providing guidance for out-of-court debt
     restructuring, which will provide opportunities to use mediators in out-of-court
     restructurings, and will guarantee a better balance between process simplification,
     reduction of time and cost, and the need to ensure legal protection of the rights of
     creditors and other relevant stakeholders.


In addition, by the end of the third quarter of 2015 the government is aiming to adopt a
road map for implementation of the Strategy for the Introduction of E-Governance and E-
Justice in the Justice Sector (2014 – 2020). This will ensure the required interconnectivity
between the courts with respect to the insolvency register and the registration of
insolvency. The implementation of the road map will start at the beginning of 2016.

The government is considering measures for improving the quality of insolvency-related
data contained in the Commercial Registry by the end of 2015. A functioning system for
exchange of data between the Bankruptcy Proceeding Information System (BPIS), the four
court case management systems and the Commercial Registry has been built under a
project entitled “Improvement of the service to the citizens and the business through
development of the information system of the Registry Agency Commercial Register.”
There appears to be insufficient data and a lack of sufficiently reliable information for
insolvency that could allow a proper evaluation of the effectiveness of the legislative and
application measures taken.

Finally, the government has formally requested that the World Bank Group prepare a
Report on the Observance of Standards and Codes (ROSC) on the insolvency system of
Bulgaria. The ROSC is a formal benchmarking that will measure the consistency of both

80
   It is important to mention that in the case of Bulgaria the procedure analyzed under this Doing Business
index is not the Pre-Bankruptcy Settlement Procedure (PBS) but the judicial bankruptcy procedure
regulated in Chapter IV of the Commercial Law (1991).
81
   Europe 2020, National Reform Program, Ministry of Finance, April 2015, available at
http://ec.europa.eu/europe2020/pdf/csr2015/nrp2015_bulgaria_bg.pdf


                                                     74
the law and practice in Bulgaria against internationally accepted best practice, as captured
in the World Bank Principles for Effective Insolvency and Creditor/Debtor Rights and the
UNCITRAL82 Legislative Guide on Insolvency. Upon the conclusion of the ROSC in Q4
of 2015, the government will be presented with detailed recommendations for short-,
medium- and long-term reforms to improve the quality of the insolvency framework,
including – but not limited to – those dimensions of the insolvency framework that are
measured by the “Resolving Insolvency” indicator. We look forward to continuing the
dialogue with the government following the issuance of the ROSC.

Figure 10.1 – Resolving Insolvency: Bulgaria compared to other EU member states




Source: Doing Business




82
     United Nations Commission on International Trade Law.


                                                   75
Indicators over time

There were only 2 Doing Business reforms impacting the Resolving Insolvency indicator
registered in Bulgaria for the past 5 years. In 2012, Bulgaria amended its commerce act to
extend further rights to secured creditors and increase the transparency of insolvency
proceedings. In 2009, Bulgaria adopted a new civil procedure code and a new law for the
commercial registry, introducing changes expected to reduce delays and allow for faster
resolution of bankruptcy. Among other things, the commercial registry law requires that
major decisions and rulings of the bankruptcy court be posted on the commercial registry’s
website.




                                           76
                                             ANNEX
 Methodological updates and extensions in the indicators measured by the
Reform Memorandum expected in the upcoming Doing Business 2016 report.

In addition to the methodological updates introduced by the 2015 report – revision or
ranking calculation; expansion of city sample in large economies; broadening of the scope
of the Getting Credit; Protecting Minority Investors; and Resolving Insolvency indicator
sets – Doing Business is planning additional improvements for the upcoming 2016 report.
Most of these improvements were inspired by the recommendations of the Independent
Panel on Doing Business, and by broader consultations that have taken place over the years
with World Bank Group staff, country governments and the private sector.83 The
improvements for the Doing Business 2016 include significant methodology changes in
the Trading Across Borders indicator as well as methodology expansions of 3 other
indicators covered by this Reform Memorandum. Please find them summarized below:

     1. Trading Across Borders: Doing Business currently measures the time, cost and
        documentation requirements associated with imports into, and exports from, each
        economy. Several important methodological updates (e.g. changes in the
        assumptions concerning the traded product, trading partner, mode and route of
        transportation, method of payment, as well as the methodology for inclusion of
        documents and calculation of time) are underway and will be reflected in Doing
        Business 2016. For each 189 economies, it is now assumed that a shipment travels
        from the warehouse in the main business city of the exporting economy to a
        warehouse in the main business city of the importing economy. Import and export
        case studies assume different traded products. It will be assumed that each economy
        imports a standardized shipment of 15 metric tons of containerized auto parts (HS
        8708) from its natural import partner (i.e. the economy from which it imports the
        largest value – price times quantity – of auto parts). It will be assumed that each
        economy exports the product of its comparative advantage (defined by the largest
        export value) to its natural export partner (i.e. the economy that is the largest
        purchaser of this product). Minerals, ores, live animals, and pharmaceuticals are
        excluded from the list of possible export products and, as needed, the second largest
        product category is then considered. To identify the trading partners and export
        product for each economy, data on trade flows for the most recent 4-year period
        were collected from international databases like UN COMTRADE. For certain
        cases where economies trade flow data are not available, ancillary governmental
        sources (various ministries and departments, World Bank Group’s country offices)

83
  For more information on the Independent Panel on Doing Business and its work, see its website at
http://www.dbrpanel.org.


                                                   77
   were used to identify the export product and natural trading partner. An implication
   of the above is that natural trading partners may be neighboring economies that can
   be accessed via land. Thus trade conducted via the most widely used mode of
   transport (which could be sea, land, air or some combination of these) will be
   considered when calculating time and cost. Starting in Doing Business 2016, any
   time and costs that is attributed to an economy will be those incurred while the
   shipment is within the geographic borders of that economy. That is, the new
   methodology will separate out time and costs incurred while the shipment is in
   transit. The calculation of time spent on document preparation; customs and
   inspections; port/border handling; and domestic and international transport will
   take into account simultaneity of various processes. The definition of documents
   will be expanded to include all electronic submissions of information requested by
   any government agency during the import and export processes. It will no longer
   be assumed that payment is made through a letter of credit, hence all documents
   that are required solely for the processing of the letter of credit by banks or
   government agencies will be excluded. All documents required by the government
   agencies through the entire export/import process, regardless of frequency of
   obtaining the document (e.g. if export license could be obtained once in 5 years but
   is required to be submitted/shown to the government agency during export process)
   will be considered.

2. Registering Property: since 2014, the indicator set has measured the procedures,
   time and cost to transfer a property from one company to another. Starting in Doing
   Business 2016, the indicator set will be expanded to cover the reliability,
   transparency and geographic coverage of land administration systems as well as
   dispute resolution for land issues.

3. Dealing with Construction Permits: the existing indicator set measures the
   procedures, time and cost to comply with the formalities to build a warehouse –
   including obtaining necessary licenses and permits, completing required
   notifications and inspections, and obtaining utility connections. The indicator set
   will be expanded in Doing Business 2016 to measure good practices in construction
   regulation. To assess these characteristics, a new indicator on regulatory quality
   will examine how clearly the building code or building regulations specify the
   requirements for obtaining a building permit and how easily accessible the
   regulations are. Another indicator will assess the effectiveness of the inspection
   systems, covering quality control before, during and after construction. Finally, a
   specific indicator will cover the qualification systems of the professionals
   responsible in plan verification and construction supervision, as well as the liability
   and insurance structures to cover losses resulting from any structural faults.



                                         78
4. Enforcing Contracts: Doing Business currently measures the procedures, time and
   cost to resolve a commercial dispute between 2 firms. The indicators have focused
   on the efficiency of the commercial court system without directly addressing the
   quality of the judiciary or the judicial infrastructure. Starting from Doing Business
   2016, the Enforcing Contracts indicator set will be expanded to cover aspects of
   judicial quality and court infrastructure, focusing on well-established good
   practices that promote quality and eﬃciency in the commercial court system. Once
   these new data are collected and presented, the indicator on the number of
   procedures to enforce a contract will be dropped.




                                        79
Acknowledgments

This memorandum was prepared by a team led by Iva Hamel, TTL (Senior Private Sector
Development Specialist, World Bank Group), and consisting of Alessio Zanelli (Private
Sector Development Specialist, World Bank Group), Dobromir Christow (Senior Private
Sector Development Specialist, World Bank Group), Evgeni Evgeniev (Consultant) and
under the general supervision of Sylvia Solf (Global Product Specialist, Trade and
Competitiveness, World Bank Group) and Christine Zhenwei Qiang (Manager, Trade and
Competitiveness, World Bank Group).

Input was received from Erica Bosio, Maika Chiquier, Fernando Dancausa, Baria Nabil
Daye, Marie Delion, Heike Gramckow, Joyce Antone Ibrahim, Violane Konar-Leacy, Jean
Michel Lobet, Nan Jiang, Olivera Jordanovic, Herve Kaddoura, Olena Koltko, Elaine
MacEachern, Frederic Meunier, Joanna Nasr, Madalina Pruna, Valentina Saltane, Gunjan
Sharma, Victoria Stanley, Richard Stern, and Mahesh Uttamchandani.


For questions or comments, please contact Iva Hamel:
ihamel@ifc.org
tel: + 39 333 4602506
Via Labicana 110
Rome, Italy 00184




                                         80
