                                103151



A Practical Handbook

for Environmental
Regulators and Legislators
working in situations affected
by Fragility, Conflict and
Extreme Violence (FCV)
Wolfhart Pohl & Ella Humphry,
FCV Group, The World Bank
This handbook belongs to




© 2015 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org




This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions.
The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily
reflect the views of The World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the
governments they represent.

The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The
boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this
work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal
status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.



Rights and Permissions
The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages
dissemination of its knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for
noncommercial purposes as long as full attribution to this work is given.

Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed
to the Publishing and Knowledge Division, The World Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW,
Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2625; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.




Cover photo: © Curt Carnemark / World Bank. Further permission required for reuse.
Cover design: büro svenja
A Practical Handbook

for Environmental
Regulators and Legislators
working in situations affected
by Fragility, Conflict and
Extreme Violence (FCV)
Wolfhart Pohl & Ella Humphry,
FCV Group, The World Bank
Contents




           Introduction	8
           	    Background and Context	                 10
           	    Purpose and Structure of this Handbook	 12

           0.	 The FCV Context.	                          18
           0.1 	 Fragility	                               20
           0.2 	 Violence	                                22
           0.3	Conflict	                                  23
           0.4 	 FCV’s Impact on a Country or Society 	   25
           0.5 	What FCV Means For the 	                 25
                 Environmental Regulator	



           1.	Shaping and creating legal 	               32
               frameworks and management
               approaches for
               environmental regulation.

                Legal and Institutional Infrastructure	
           1.1 	                                         34
           		1.1.1 	 Legal Foundations	                   34
           	    1.1.2	 Administrative Functions	          40
           	    1.1.3 	 Process / Procedures	             47
           	   1.1.4 	Practical Approach and 	          50
                        Behavioral Factors




2
1.2 	 Management Approaches and Tools	        60
	     1.2.1 	Development of Technical 	      60
              Standards and Guidelines
	     1.2.2 	 Mitigation hierarchy	           64
	     1.2.3 	 Incentives and deterrents	      67
	     1.2.4 	 Practical Approach	             76



2.	Applying frameworks, mechanisms 	        88
    and tools for achieving effective
    regulatory compliance

2.1 	 Environmental Regulatory Frameworks	    90
	    2.1.1	 Processes, instruments and 	    90
              documentation
	    2.1.2 	Oversight and reporting 	       94
              arrangements
	2.1.3	 Practical approach	                  98

2.2 	 Management Approaches and Tools	       106
	     2.2.1 	 Project-related solutions	     106
	     2.2.2 	 Scope of remedies	             112

Epilogue		                                   126




                                                   3
Acknowledgements




Acknowledgements The idea for this training and the resulting
handbook was originally initiated by a request for proposals
by the Korean Trust Fund’s (KTF) window for Supporting Economic
and Peacebuilding Transitions. We are grateful to the KTF for
the generous funding for this activity, which - combined with a
light administrative burden - allowed us to dive in and focus on
the substance.

The activities leading up to this handbook could not have been
carried out in the same quality and spirit without the engaged
contributions of a number of colleagues and organizations from
our host country Kenya: Gerphas Opondo from the Environmental
Compliance Institute, and Wilson Busienei, National Environmental
Management Agency (NEMA) have not only provided invaluable
insights from their professional experience, but also helped with
organizing the training event, especially the field trips to regulated
entities as diverse as sewage plants and flower farms, national
parks and geothermal power plants. In this context a special thank
you goes to the Naivasha Water and Sewage Corporation,
Nini Flowers Ltd., The Hell’s Gate Park management from Kenya
Wildlife Service, and the Geothermal Division from KenGen.

We also want to express our gratefulness and appreciation for
our Colleagues from the World Bank, Alexandra Bezeredi, Amos
Abu, and Stephen Ling, who made time in their busy schedules
to join the training workshop in Kenya and share their knowledge
as trainers. A special thank you goes to Andy Huckbody, who
sacrificed a week of home leave, joining us from his posting at




4                                 Introduction
a remote mine in Mali to share his experience and perspective of
a regulated entity.

Mike Eldon deserves special thanks and recognition for working
his magic as a facilitator during the workshop. Under his regimen
the mood was - from the very first minute - relaxed, open and
collegial, and charged with energy and creativity. Mike was a key
factor in getting the participants to work and think hard, discuss
and argue, investigate and analyze, network and communicate,
and all that in good spirits, with mutual trust, respect and humor,
and a firm belief that “win-win” is a real possibility.

In this context we thank all participants for bringing such
enthusiasm and positive energy to the workshop! Without their
engagement and participation this handbook could not have
been developed in its current form: Zinnah S. Mulbah, Pélagie-
Angèle Damino Nee Yangoi, Marc Mbetessinga, Augustin
Dongba-Potchozo, Mashood Aliyu, Peter Mulbah, Malami
Muhammad, Andriamampianina Harizo Rasolomanana,
Mohyeldeen Eltohami Taha, Helena Gorpu Hallowanger, Saah
Augustine David, Jr, Ephraim Sneh Swen, Serge-Maxime Kolika,
Olayiwola Shuaib Baker, Oladunni Fatimat Oke, Lovetta Yatta
Juanah, Patricia Gibril Wachata Ali, Rosana Luis Francisco,
Abdul Akeem Olawuyi, Korotoumou Mariko, Abbas Abdul Rafiu,
Reagan Opondo, Cicilia Githaiga, and Moumoni Sawadogo,
thank you for bringing your experience and enthusiasm.




                        Introduction                                  5
Amos Abu we also thank for his extensive review of draft versions
of this handbook, and his helpful and collegial comments.

Last not least we are very grateful to Nicholas Mbocha for his
tireless support and engagement with the workshop’s logistics
and the project’s overall administrative processes. His excellent
help with bureaucratic obstacles and bottlenecks gave us much
more time to focus on substance!

Nairobi, December 2015

Wolfhart Pohl & Ella Humphry
 




6                                 Introduction
Notes




        Introduction   7
Introduction




               Dominic Chavez/World Bank




8               Introduction
                                        Dominic Chavez/World Bank




Masaru Goto/World Bank

                         Introduction                           9
Background and Context                            FCV affected countries
                                                  often are affected by
                                                  multiplying environ-
                                                  mental problems,
                                                  while the capacity
                                                  to deal with them is
                                                  severely reduced.


The job of an environmental regulator is generally a difficult
one under the best of conditions: the real value of environmental
components (such as water, air, soils, biodiversity) and ecosystem
services (e.g. climatic regeneration, flood retention / prevention,
health and recreation) is often poorly understood, not quantified
in monetary terms and overlooked especially on a project-level
feasibility studies and revenue calculation. The regulator is frequently
seen and/or depicted as an obstacle to entrepreneurship, a
hindrance to economic development and to the building of a
modern system / society. Sometimes environmental concerns
are associated with extremist political views (e.g. Greenpeace’s
militant wing) or outdated nostalgia, and their proponents portray
social misfits and agitators.

Added to this general perception are the conditions prevailing in
situations of fragility, conflict and violence (FCV), such as tangible
risks for health and safety, uncertain supply and access to food,
water, utilities, reduced or non-existent public services, breakdown
of government and administration, and often forced displacement,
famine, disease and the significant probability of a violent death.
Such FCV situations often are accompanied by inherent, diffuse
environmental impacts, relating e.g. to the overuse of natural
resources (deforestation for firewood), biodiversity degradation
(poaching, encroachment on remote areas, deforestation),
pollution (unmanaged waste and sewage, destructions from acts
or war, ambient pollution from open fires) etc.




10                                 Introduction
                                              The regulator in FCV
                                              situations: Do more
                                              with less, and accept
                                              a high personal risk…




Imagine being a regulator in this type of environment: In the
hierarchy of peoples’ worries environmental concerns will be
close to the bottom, even though the need for environmental
protection and the management of natural resources actually
increases during situations of FCV. Moreover, many regulated
entities will already struggle for survival, probably suffering
shortages of energy, fuels, consumables, raw materials, skilled
staff, transport and financial resources. Having just the most
basic survival strategy will probably be the theme foremost on
everyone’s minds. In such conditions any attempt to review
and / or enforce environmental performance is likely to be
shrugged off or ignored as one of the least pressing problems
that an industrial sector, or large energy, transport or
infrastructure project encounters.




                        Introduction                              11
Purpose and Structure
of this Handbook




This handbook is the product of a workshop held in June 2014
with about 25 environmental regulators from over 10 FCV-affected
countries (Burkina Faso, Central African Republic, Kenya, Liberia,
Madagascar, Mali, Mozambique, Nigeria, Sierra Leone, South
Sudan, and Sudan) that was financed by the Korean Trust Fund
(KTF) and organized and hosted by the World Bank Group
(WBG). Over the course of one week the participants went
through a dense program consisting of presentations, discussions,
participatory exercises, field trips and the preparation and
presentation of case studies from their own countries. The
materials processed and harvested during the workshop were
extremely rich, and it seemed logical to capture them in a form
that would be of continued practical use for the participants.
This handbook is intended as a handy toolkit with practical tips
that is borne out of experiences garnered from years of working
in FCS, including post conflict situations.

The structure of this handbook was conceived during extensive
discussions towards the end of the workshop and seen as a
“road map” towards the best chance for Environmental Regulators
to make a difference in practice.

                                                This handbook is
                                                the product of a
                                                workshop held in
                                                June 2014 with about
                                                25 environmental
                                                regulators from over
                                                10 FCV-affected
                                                countries




12                               Introduction
                                              Figure 1:
                                              Road Map to
                                              Regalutory Practice




              1. shape/create            2. implement/apply


                	legal                      	documentation
process-
                	administrative            	oversight
oriented
                  process/procedures      	 & reporting
              	 (Chapter 1.1)             	 (Chapter 2.1)


                	technical standards       	project-related
action
                  and guidelines          	solutions
oriented
                	mitigation hierarchy      	scope of remedies
                	incentives and              realism of regulatory
                                            	
              	deterrents                    approach
              	 (Chapter 1.2)             	 (Chapter 2.2)




Figure 1 above depicts the original idea of the handbook’s
contents and structure as a simple graph.

The regulator’s practical challenges were seen as four quadrants
by the participants: under the two broad activities of shaping /
creating regulations, and applying / implementing them, there is
in each case a subdivision between a more legal, administrative,
process-oriented perspective, and a more technical, practicall,
action oriented approach.


                        Introduction                                 13
Purpose and Structure                             Translating theory of
of this Handbook                                  regulatory oversight
                                                  into the realities faced
                                                  in FCV situations




The organization of the handbook is deliberate. It is intended to
gently introduce the reader to the core principles and key
messages in environmental regulation and compliance enforcement
in FCS. The approach of the handbook, which is summarized in
the below graphic, aims to translate theoretical foundations of
regulation into the practical realities of operating in a situations of
FCV. This is achieved through the articulation of pragmatic skills
and case studies.

This handbook does not claim to be an exhaustive treatise of
environmental regulatory work in FCV. Rather, it is a collection,
however incomplete and subjective it may be, of principles,
approaches, methods, skills and experiences that 25 regulators
with real exposure to FCV deemed noteworthy and useful, and
that have their origin in the reality of being an environmental
due diligence professional in a FCV affected country or situation.
For the workshop participants it is meant to be a reminder of
the knowledge acquired, for the newcomer to regulatory
professional challenges it may prove very helpful as a compact
collation of information vetted by experienced practitioners. For
both the veteran and the newcomer to regulatory work in FCV
it will hopefully be a “vade mecum” type of pocket book that
will grow into a constant companion for their challenging jobs.

We wish the users of this handbook much success and look
forward to any feedback, positive or negative, be it quick and
dirty, or elaborate and exhaustive, on its value in the field.

Best wishes from the authors,
Ella Humphry (Consultant) & Wolf Pohl (Adviser, Team Leader)


14                                 Introduction
                                                        Figure 2:
                                                        Approach of
                                                        the handbook




Provides some theoretical foundations of regulation
   Legislative and institutional infrastructure and management approaches are
   
   set out, albeit not as an exhaustive treatise




Acknowledges                 Emphasizes                    Uses case
Limitations                  Soft Skills                   Examples

Given the significant        Successful regulation        Participants of the
challenges in FCV            entails achieving a          workshop submitted
situations, practical        solution that is             case examples on
limitations to effective     technically sound and        regulatory challenges
regulations are              benefits both                they had to overcome
discussed throughout         partners, or is win-win      in their work
Attempts to achieve          This is particularly
                                                          Experiences and
the perfect outcome          pertinent in situations
                                                          approaches of the
can lead to not              of FCV
                                                          participants were
achieving anything
                             The importance of            extensively discussed
at all
                             emotional intelligence       during the workshop
The importance of            to guide thinking and
                                                          The case examples
trade-offs and win-win       behavior to get to
                                                          and experiences were
situations are               win-win is stressed
                                                          captured in the
emphasized
                                                          handbook to illustrate
                                                          the practical realities
                                                          of regulatory work



A practical toolkit for both veterans and newcomers
            to environmental regulation




                            Introduction                                            15
Notes




The handbook is intended to be a living document. The printed version
contains plenty of blank pages for notes, and the Bank team is
committed to continue receiving suggestions for changes and
updates from the field, and incorporating them into future (at least
electronic) versions.




16                              Introduction
Introduction   17
Chapter 0
The FCV Context


Chapter 0




Natalia Cieslik/World Bank




18                           Chapter 0
Dominic Chavez/World Bank




                            Natalia Cieslik/World Bank




 Chapter 0                                         19
0.1 	 Fragility                                   What is fragility?
                                                  How can it be defined
                                                  and recognized?




Fragility The World Bank’s World Development Report for 2011
(WDR11) defined Fragility and Fragile Situations as periods when
states or institutions lack the capacity, accountability or legitimacy
to mediate relations between citizens and the state, making
them vulnerable to violence. Thus states become fragile when
governments and state structures lack capacity — or in some
cases, political will — to deliver public safety and security, good
governance and poverty reduction to their citizens. Other
definitions follow similar lines:

	      ragility is a period of time during nationhood when
     	F
      sustainable socio-economic development requires greater
      emphasis on complementary peacebuilding and state-
      building activities, such as building inclusive political
      settlements, security, justice, jobs, good management of
      resources and accountable and fair delivery.

	     Fragility is a condition of elevated risk of institutional
     	
      breakdown, societal collapse or violent conflict. Fragility is an
      imbalance between the strains and challenges (internal and
      external) faced by a state and their ability to manage them.
      At the extreme, fragility is expressed as conflict or collapse
      of state institutions.

	     And conversely: Resilience: the ability of social institutions
     	
      to absorb and adapt to the internal and external shocks and
      setbacks they are likely to face. The risk is gradually reduced
      as the institutions develop the necessary ability to cope with
      the types of threats they are exposed to.




20                                    Chapter 0
Fragility and Conflict have a profound impact on a country’s
development perspectives: While the bulk of the developing world
is expected to progress, by 2030 half of extreme poor will live in
countries that are on today’s harmonized list of FCS. By OECD’s
definition of FCV affected states, poverty is already concentrated
mostly in FCSs, and almost the totality of extreme poverty will be
in FCV affected countries by 2030.

The World Bank has identified FCS as those ranking 3.2 or lower
in the annual Country Policy and Institutional Assessments
(CPIA), and have other features, such as the presence of a UN
peacekeeping or political mission. The OECD’s fragile states
list is useful since it combines those designated as such by the
World Bank, the Asian Development Bank, and the African
Development Bank, and includes countries that score 90 or above
on the Fragile States Index produced by the Fund for Peace.
It is currently moving toward a more inclusive definition that takes
into account countries experiencing FCV.




                        Fragility and Conflict
                        have a profound
                        impact on a country’s
                        development
                        perspectives



                        Chapter 0                                  21
0.2	 Violence                                  What is extreme
0.3	 Conflict                                  violence in the
                                               FCV context?




Violence The most commonly accepted definition of violence
is “the intentional use of physical force or power, threatened
or actual, against oneself, another person, or against a group or
community that either results in or has a high likelihood of
resulting in injury, death, psychological harm, maldevelopment,
or deprivation.”(WHO, 2002). There are two important categories
of violence, based upon the perpetrator:




(i)	Interpersonal:               (ii) 	Collective: organized
  perpetrated by an individual         in order to advance a
  or small group (such as a            particular social, economic,
  youth gang) against a family         or political agenda,
  member, community                    including organized
  member, or stranger; and             crime, terrorism, war,
                                       and civil conflict.


There are of course overlaps between the two. For example, the
WDR 2011 highlighted the fact that as many armed conflicts
cease, homicide rates can increase, which indicates a perpetuation
of violence at the interpersonal level. Another example is from
the literature on gender-based violence in conflict zones, which
highlights that the majority of rape is committed by intimate
partners (interpersonal violence) as opposed to by combatants as



22                                 Chapter 0
                                                   What is
                                                   armed conflict?




a tactic of war (collective). While strictly criminal justice definitions
limit violence to physical behaviors that cause harm to a
person and can therefore be considered crimes, more extensive
definitions make distinctions based on the type of harm intended
or caused, such as psychological, symbolic, financial, and
economic. Others define forms of violence according to spatial
characteristics (as in domestic or urban violence), context
(war or election-related violence), intensity (acute, chronic, or petty
violence), or relationships between the actors (as in child abuse).
Still others differentiate forms of violence by the motivation
driving the behavior, for example social, economic, institutional,
and political violence.



       fragility
                               There are overlaps
                               and interactions
                               between fragility,
violence      conflict         conflict and violence.




Conflict Collective violence is more commonly known in its form
of armed conflict, defined as a “contested incompatibility with
the use of organized armed force between two or more parties”.
In making such a definition, the following should be noted:

(i) 	There is a typology of conflict that comprises interstate
     conflict; intrastate conflict/civil war or subnational conflict;
     genocide; politicide; and intercommunal violence.


                          Chapter 0                                     23
0.3	 Conflict
     FCV’s Impact on a Country
0.4	 
     or Society
0.5	What FCV Means For the
     Environmental Regulator




       One armed conflict may involve a number of different
(ii) 	 
       conflicts; for example Afghanistan, Iraq, Somalia, or Syria
       are frequently cited as examples of sectarian or local
       intercommunal violence, civil conflict against the present
       government as well as contests in the global war on terror.

        Although a country may be engaged in armed conflict, there
(iii) 	 
       may not necessarily be violence (for example, the conflict
       between North and South Korea).

Armed conflict may have significant temporal and spatial
variations in the levels of violence, and so explanations of armed
conflict between two or more belligerent parties may not be
adequate to understand why violence occurs at the local level
or at different periods of time.

                                                 “New threats such
                                                 as organized crime
                                                 and trafficking, civil
                                                 unrest due to global
                                                 economic shocks,
                                                 terrorism, have
                                                 supplemented [and
                                                 often replaced]
                                                 continued preoccupa-
                                                 tions with conventional
                                                 war between and
                                                 within countries.”
                                                 [WDR 2011]
John Donnelly/World Bank




24                                   Chapter 0
                                                 There are complex
                                                 and multi-faceted
                                                 relationships
                                                 between FCV and
                                                 the environment.




FCV’s Impact on a Country or Society Fragility, conflict, and
violence (FCV) is the unified conceptualization of the challenges
described above, which includes a spectrum of different types of
violence and conflict. However, it also alludes to the importance
of institutions as mediators between the state and society, and
highlights societal dynamics among different groups. It does not
only apply to states traditionally considered fragile or in conflict,
and can therefore be applied to situations devoid of active conflict
but where there may be issues of criminal violence and terrorism,
among others. As the WDR 2011 highlights: “new threats
such as organized crime and trafficking, civil unrest due to global
economic shocks, terrorism, have supplemented [and often
replaced] continued preoccupations with conventional war
between and within countries.” [WDR 2011]

What FCV Means For the Environmental Regulator The
relationship between the environment and FCV is complex and
multifaceted. Active conflict can deplete natural resources,
generate pollution and destroy biodiversity, as environmental
assets are often overexploited in the context of FCV for both
survival and profit. The misuse of environmental assets can actually
drive conflict. For example, in Pakistan, the activities of militant
groups in tribal areas are funded in part by profits from the
illegal timber industry. Competition or grievances related to natural
resources can also be among the causes of FCV. Environmental
regulation efforts, if ill-conceived or poorly handled, can also drive
conflict by unintentionally reinforcing or magnifying existing social
and economic grievances at the root of the conflict. At the same
time, regulatory efforts can contribute to peace building efforts.



                         Chapter 0                                   25
    What FCV Means For the
0.5	                                            Environmental assets
    Environmental Regulator                      and services can be
                                                 both causes for, and
                                                 victims of FCV




For example, by focusing on efforts to sustainably manage
ecosystems linked to livelihoods, environmental regulation may
contribute to addressing scarcity of natural resources that can
drive conflict.

The political economy of FCV adds to the challenges for
environmental regulators. Governance in FCV often comes with
multiple symptoms of competing interests for power and resources,
often characterized by a unilateral view of development and
economic profit. Both in fragile, but also post conflict situations
the drive for attracting foreign investors (and some sectors, e.g.
extractive industries, are particularly notorious) can compromise
environmental and social concerns. Where a newly established
Government seeks to secure state legitimacy through the rapid
provision of basic service delivery, this is often done at the expense
of good environmental and social practices. In most FCV contexts
Governments have a multipolar role to play (e.g. both as promoter
of investment and steward of natural resources and environmental
services) and need to balance policy priorities to promote
and regulate investments and developments. Often the ability to
balance interests and find compromises can go beyond a Govern-
ment’s capacity (or willingness) and pose significant obstacles to
the implementation of environmental and social standards.

n order to operate effectively in such a complex and challenging
I
context, the regulator must adapt to the prevailing conditions.
This handbook will explore some of the practices that can aid
environmental regulatory work in FCV and have been briefly
summarized below:



26                                  Chapter 0
                                               Practices that can
                                               aid environmental
                                               regulatory work




	     ave a flexible approach: Conditions can change
    	H
     quickly during conflict, and regulators must develop new
     and flexible strategies to keep functioning effectively.
     Information is key and it is important to continuously monitor
     the situation in order to ensure that chosen approaches fit
     current circumstances.

	    Keep a ‘foot in the door’: Poor security can make it
    	
     difficult to maintain a presence in the field. However, a
     continued presence – even one that is considerably scaled
     back – allows for a swift response at critical moments,
     some monitoring of changing conditions on the ground and
     relationships to be maintained. It is more challenging to
     re-enter and reengage in an area after completely pulling
     out regulatory presence and efforts.

	    Collaborate where possible: In situations of FCV,
    	
     shifts in needs, interests and capacity require regulators to
     leverage partnerships — whether it be with the private sector
     or communities dependent on natural resources — that are
     based on a common interest. Such partnerships create
     opportunities for exchanging information, increased support
     for mutually beneficial initiatives and leveraging expertise.

	    Doing what you can with what you’ve got: As will
    	
     be discussed in this handbook, the range of options an
     environmental regulator can pursue to ensure environmental
     protection is wide. However, the range that one can pursue
     in practical terms in FCV-affected situations is often much



                        Chapter 0                                   27
      hat FCV Means For the
0.5	 W                                              Governments in
     Environmental Regulator                        FCV often have an
                                                    unilateral view of
                                                    development as
                                                    economic profit




      more narrow. Pursuing the ‘perfect’ outcome can fall short
      of achieving anything at all. Accordingly, the environmental
      regulator in FCV must be more willing to compromise on
      regulatory standards and adapt their management approach
      accordingly. However, as will be discussed, a lot can still be
      done with less.

	    	Pursuing win-win solutions: Achieving regulation
        requires a solution that is technically sound but also benefits
        both parties. In other words, solutions — to some extent —
        need to be win-win. This is particularly pertinent in situations
        of FCV where, as already discussed, environmental concerns
        are lower on the hierarchy of people’s concerns and regulated
        entities are already facing significant challenges.
 




    Useful Links:

    World Bank’s FCV Group:
    http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/fragilityconflictviolence/overview#1




28                                      Chapter 0
Notes




         Chapter 0   29
Notes




30       Chapter 0
Chapter 0   31
Chapter 1
Shaping and creating
legal frameworks
and management
approaches for
environmental regulation




     Curt Carnemark/World Bank




32                               Chapter 1
                        Oxana Michenko/World Bank




Lauren Day/World Bank




         Chapter 1                            33
1.1	 Legal and Institutional                  An enabling legal
        Infrastructure                          environment is
1.1.1	 Legal Foundations                        necessary to achieve
                                                environmental goals.




Legal and Institutional Infrastructure — Legal Foundations —
Law is the foundation of any regulatory framework. An enabling
legal environment is necessary to achieve environmental goals.
It levels the playing field for those regulated and establishes
and upholds the legitimacy and integrity of institutions.

Through laws, regulations, permits, and/or licenses the
government defines the environmental objectives or
requirements (including changes to a prevailing situation)
and then promotes and enforces compliance. Environmental
requirements can apply to just about any activity, including
construction, land management, energy production, use of
natural and mineral resources, manufacturing, distribution,
and environmental testing, reporting, and monitoring. Laws
also are needed to govern the management and remediation
of pollution, including ambient, accidental (e.g. spills of
hazardous substances) and legacy pollution.

The mandatory management approach commonly used to
establish and enforce environmental compliance requires
specific laws or regulations, which in turn need to include
“requirements” that clearly define, or refer to specific practices
and procedures to directly or indirectly reduce or prevent
negative environmental impacts (e.g. pollution). Effective
requirements define that specific things be done or outcomes
reached, as well as measurable criteria and indicators to
monitor status and change. Once requirements have been
set, the next step is compliance and enforcement.




34                                  Chapter 1
                                               Legal cornerstones
                                               of an effective
                                               regulatory system




The main legal cornerstones for comprehensive coverage
by an effective environmental regulatory system are the
following laws:

	    Environmental Assessment (EA), sometimes referred to as
    	
     Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) or Environmental
     and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)

	    Protection of natural resources (parks, protected areas,
    	
     wildlife, fisheries, watersheds, coastal areas, forests,
     natural habitats)

	     Land management, acquisition and involuntary
    	
      resettlement

	    Occupational health and safety
    	

	    Pollution (solid waste management, hazardous chemicals
    	
     and wastes, water and air, legacy pollution)

	    Stakeholder / community environmental health and
    	
     safety regulations



	




                        Chapter 1                                   35
1.1.1	 Legal Foundations                          Sources of
                                                   environmental law




S
 ources of environmental law that typically govern a given
country’s regulatory framework are:

	      Environmental Treaties/ Multilateral Agreements
     	

	    	Constitution

	      Framework Environmental Legislation (e.g. a national
     	
       environmental policy or strategy)

	     Specific Environmental Legislation, e.g. for sectors (mining,
     	
      transport, waste management) , or specific components or
      compartments (air, water, soils, natural habitats, wildlife)

	     Subsidiary Legislation (e.g. for new or emerging
     	
      technologies — e.g. fuel efficiency in cars, pollution control
      in emissions from thermal power plants)

	      Regulations (containing technical information required for
     	
       compliance such as acceptable limit levels, target values
       and acceptable processes, practices and technologies,
       monitoring and reporting arrangements)

	      By-Laws, which are rules and regulations enacted by an
     	
       association or a corporation to provide a framework for
       its operation and management. E.g. local councils may
       have by-laws, which sometimes overlap and can be used
       interchangeably with regulations.




36                                    Chapter 1
                                               Specific challenges in
                                               FCV affected countries




	     Common Law (Case Law/Judicial Precedent)
    	

	     Customary Laws (especially important in Africa, where tribal
    	
      lands and their traditional use often intersect with more
      modern concepts — e.g. cattle grazing in national parks)

Some of the problems with institutions and effectiveness of
environmental regulation in FCV can be traced back to issues
with the legal foundation. Specific challenges in FCV affected
countries include gaps, legal loopholes and overlap in existing
laws and the influence of informal rules in shaping the process.
For example while laws on EA are almost universal, there are
sometimes no legal requirements for environmental management
plans (EMP) to be prepared, or for monitoring or compliance
assurance to be carried out, which severely curtails the regulator
to enforce environmental good practice towards a given project
or entity.




                        Chapter 1                                    37
1.1.1	 Legal Foundations




                                       Simone D. McCourtie / World Bank


38                         Chapter 1
                                              Strengthening
                                              environmental
                                              legislation — how?




When working to the strengthen laws and regulations, a starting
point of analysis often would be to examine existing laws (national
and provincial) and — best from a bottom up perspective — check
to see if policies are clear on incorporating environmental and
social dimensions into development planning and decision
making? Are they strong enough to commit all parties to perform
according to the same standards? A good way could be to find
answers to the below questions:
	
	 ?	Are they up-to-date and effective, given technological
     changes or advances?
	 ?	Are there applicable environmental criteria and quality
     standards (e.g., for atmospheric emissions, effluents or
     noise levels)?




  Tip:

  A good test for the actual clout of the legal and regulatory
  framework is e.g. to “hypothetically” apply for a license
  for a substantial civil construction, exploration, land
  conversion or industrial development, and check which
  scope and detail of environmental requirements and
  obligations the license actually contains, and how they
  are proposed to be monitored and enforced.




                        Chapter 1                                  39
1.1.1	 Legal Foundations                        Ideally there is a
1.1.2	 Administrative Functions                 feedback loop from
                                                enforcer to legislator
                                                and judiciary.




It is important for the regulator (in an ideal system) to detect,
analyze and report gaps and loopholes in the legal and regulatory
framework. In most functioning systems there should be some
sort of feedback loop from the regulator / enforcer (part of the
executive branch) to the legislator (to add, delete or change
unproductive laws) and the judiciary branch (to interpret existing
legislation in an enabling manner). It is important to also establish
whether the policy maker is the same as the enforcer. Practical
experience has shown that that in contexts where these two
functions resides in one agency or entity, both falter. While this
theoretical statement holds true in stable countries, it is
particularly prominent in FCV affected situations.

— Administrative Functions — The administrative and
institutional framework is an inherent and indispensable part
of the environmental management system. It facilitates and
supports the environmental policymaking process, and ensures
the implementation and enforcement of policies. Government
agencies appointed and authorized by elected officials to carry out
these tasks are the main pillars of environmental administration.

In Kenya for example, the administrative arrangements for
environmental management is as follows (and also set out in
figure 3), largely corresponding to international good practice:

	    	 Ministry of Environment, Water and Natural
      Resources

	     National Environment Council (NEC) — reports to the
     	



40                                  Chapter 1
                                                          Figure 3: The
                                                          administrative
                                                          arrangements for
                                                          environmental
                                                          management
                                                          in Kenya




Ministry of Water, Environment and                   Board of Management
        Natural Resources



      National Environment                            National Environment
              Council                                       Tribunal




                              Board of Management
   Public
 Complaints
 Committee
                              National Environment
                             Management Authority
                                      (NEMA)



                                Director General




        National                       National               Standards and

   Environmental Trust               Environmental          Enforcement Review

            Fund                 Reservation Fund               Committee




                         Principal Environment Committee



                         District Environment Committee




                             Chapter 1                                           41
1.1.2	 Administrative Functions




      Ministry of Environment and is the highest policy making
      body under the Environment Management and Coordination
      Act of 1999 (EMCA). It is chaired by the Minister in charge of
      the environment. It is responsible for policy formulation and
      directions for purposes of EMCA. NEC sets national goals
      and objectives and promotes cooperation among both
      public and private organisations engaged in environmental
      protection programmes.

	      ational Environment Management Authority
     	N
      (NEMA) — is the principal government institution charged with
      the overall supervision and co-ordination of all environmental
      management activities. NEMA is responsible to the NEC
      for dealing with EIA. It helps coordinate the environmental
      management activities of Lead Agencies.

	     Lead Agencies — government agencies in which any law
     	
      vests functions of control or management of any element of
      the environment or natural resources. Examples include: Ke-
      nya Wildlife Service (KWS), Kenya Forest Service (KFS), Energy
      Regulatory Commission (ERC), etc.

	    	
      Provincial Environment Committees (PECs) and
      District Environment Committees (DECs) — are the local
      representations of NEMA and existed in the old constitutional
      dispensation to deliberate on environmental matters at
      the provincial and district levels. Currently they are operating
      as County Environment Committees (CECs) pending
      amendment of the law to conform with the Constitution.



42                                   Chapter 1
	    National Environment Trust Fund (NETFUND) —
    	
     responsible for mobilizing resources for environmental
     research, capacity building, environmental awards,
     publications, scholarships and grants.

	    Public Complaints Committee (PCC) — receives and
    	
     investigates complaints in respect to the condition of the
     environment or any suspected cases of environmental
     degradation. The PCC has powers to investigate complaints
     against any person or even NEMA or on its own motion
     investigate any suspected case of environmental degradation.
     The PCC is required by law to submit reports of its findings
     and recommendations to NEC. However, the law does not
     provide the PCC with the mandate to see its recommendations
     carried through. Further NEC is not required to do anything
     with regard to the reports submitted by the PCC.

	    National Environment Tribunal (NET) — entertains
    	
     appeals with regard to decisions of NEMA. May also
     entertain a referral from NEMA on any point of law of
     unusual importance or complexity.

	    Environment and Land Court (ELC) — hears and
    	
     determines disputes relating to the environment and the
     use and occupation of, and title to, land.




                       Chapter 1                               43
1.1.2	 Administrative Functions                Environmental legislation
                                               is often housed
                                               several within tiers
                                               of government with
                                               unclear, fragmented,
                                               conflicting and
                                               overlapping mandates.


However, ideal institutional arrangements providing complete
coverage of all aspects and levels of environmental regulatory
oversight are rarely in place. Case in point, Nigeria. The
institutional framework for environmental compliance is fraught
with unwieldy institutional arrangements — specifically, several
tiers of government with unclear, fragmented, conflicting and
overlapping mandates amongst government agencies; on the
other hand gaps where no clear responsibility as been assigned;
and weak capacity (both legal and technical) to supervise and
enforce existent laws. Other issues that frequently constrain
institutional capacity to regulate effectively include issues with
budget (which affects staffing, mobility, training), constrained
regional and local level presence and engagement (which means
noncompliance often goes entirely unnoticed); inexperienced
staff and significant staff turnover (preventing correct technical
evaluations and balanced enforcement approach).

When seeking to enhance administrative arrangements, it is
often best to work with what already exists and aim to improve
capacity over time, rather than attempt sudden wholesale
institutional change. Much of what is needed may already exist
(e.g. effective laws and regulations may be in place, but not
enforcement capacity) and thus working from the bottom (i.e.
the regulatory field agents) upwards may yield the most immediate
and tangible improvements. Institutional changes should be
implemented with moderate pace, and costly and difficult
institutional reorganizations only undertaken as a last resort.
Often supplying simple things such as transport, cameras and
computers to regulators has an immediate positive impact on



44                                 Chapter 1
Poor enforcement                               How to go about
is often the real                              institutional analysis
impediment, rather
than poor legislation.




enforcement effectiveness. Change processes need to ensure the
sustainability of institutional components and recognize limitations
of agency budgets and staffing when undertaking reorganization.
Avoid introducing overly ambitious reforms that exceed budget
and capacity, and create more confusion than simplification
and efficiency.

As a starting point, it might make sense to begin with an
institutional analysis or conduct inventory of all institutions
responsible for EA and environmental regulation at relevant
levels of government and private sector, covering the
following key questions and topics:

	    Which institutions have the mandate for making of
    	
     environmental policy, laws and regulations?

	    Which environmental management procedures and
    	
     instruments (e.g. EA, ESIA, ESMP ) exist?

	    Are they actually used when and where intended by the law?
    	

	    Availability, quality and accessibility of data and information?
    	

	    Organizational structure / functions?
    	

	    Human resources capacity (number and qualifications)?
    	

	    Financial resources (budget process? how are expenditures
    	
     managed / monitored?)

	    Relationship to regional / municipal counterparts?
    	

	    Cooperation and networking between the various entities
    	
     and agencies involved in environmental regulation?


                         Chapter 1                                      45
1.1.2	 Administrative Functions
1.1.3 	 Process / Procedures




Some entry points for enhancing institutional development include:

	     Building capacity in major line agencies (such as, e.g. an
     	
      EPA’s pollution management group in anticipation of a major
      investment in the extractives sector)

	     Strengthening capacity of local governments at provincial
     	
      and local levels (e.g. by holding “enforcement clinics” with
      external advisers, either international peers or regulators
      from larger / central entities

	     Building capacity of academic institutions to train effective
     	
      EA professionals

	     Building capacity of NGOs, research institutions and
     	
      consultants as monitoring agents, watchdogs and consultants




                                                 In a functioning
                                                 regulatory system,
                                                 hazards to
                                                 environment, health
                                                 and safety trigger
                                                 immediate enforcement
                                                 action, such as fees,
                                                 fines or the suspension
                                                 of the activities.

Lundrim Aliu/World Bank




46                                   Chapter 1
                                                Table 1: effective
                                                process/procedures




— Process / Procedures — Administrative procedures are
tools and instruments that administrative agencies can utilize
to perform their administrative duties. This includes the legal
powers to receive access to locations, data and information, the
right to inspect, to levy fees and fines for non-compliance and
to order immediate measures to avert immediate hazards to
environment, health and safety (e.g. by ordering a plant to stop
certain production processes, or suspend a construction project,
until EHS regulations are met). Disclosure of information to, and
consulting with the public and engaging with other agencies
(e.g. the police to enforce executive orders given by the regula-
tor) are also important administrative tools. Elements of effective
process/procedures are summarized in the table below.




Elements of effective Explanation
process/procedures

Clear descriptions      Clarity in objectives, technical context,
of regulatory core      background and data, rights, roles and
competencies            responsibilities, timelines, monitoring
                        arrangements, compliance criteria, remedies
                        for noncompliance and enforcement tools




                        Chapter 1                                     47
1.1.3 	 Process / Procedures




 Elements of effective Explanation
 process/procedures

 Engagement with               This is particularly important in the context of
 the public and                FCV, where shifts in needs and interests away
 other important               from environmental conservation often occurs
 stakeholders                  and capacity is reduced. Through effective
                               alliance with the private sector and independent
                               organizations it is possible to collect data,
                               monitor, and use it to inform policy making,
                               planning and priority setting; public disclosure
                               of information and mechanisms of public
                               participation; and assessment of demand for
                               effective management of environmental
                               priorities (e.g. transparency of regulatory
                               procedures and public naming and shaming
                               of non-compliance increase pressure on
                               both regulator and regulated entity, and thus
                               increase scope and effectiveness of
                               regulatory work).

 Balanced interests            This is a mapping of the main interests and
                               their potential influence on the project, through
                               identification of key stakeholders, mandates,
                               functions and goals and aspirations. This would
                               best be presented in diagram showing the
                               entities, their relationships, and interacting
                               processes. Explanatory notes could include the
                               rules shaping inter-sectoral coordination, and
                               a description of environmental management
                               at all relevant levels, including links between
                               national and sub-national organizations.




48                                          Chapter 1
                                                Table 1: effective
                                                process/procedures




Elements of effective Explanation
process/procedures

Follow through       The effectiveness of formal rules may be
on mandates and      impeded through the functioning of informal
commitments          relations by institutions, which could e.g. cause
to improve           two government agencies, one in the role as
environmental        project proponent, the other as regulator, to
outcomes.            enter a collusive relationship and not deploy
                     the full scale of regulatory action. This can be
                     prevented by e.g. the existence of independent
                     auditing and accountability mechanisms (e.g.
                     a National Environmental Tribunal, see section
                     1.1.2) or by transparency, public scrutiny and
                     accountability to the public

Compliance with      Especially in export-oriented sectors,
industry standards   industrial enterprises often seek to improve
and certifications   their market positions by signing up to
                     voluntary certification programs that include
                     environmental and social sustainability
                     criteria. This can influence the types and quality
                     of technologies and approaches and help to
                     set standards for future legal and regulatory
                     updates. Also, such voluntary compliance can
                     be used as model for other sectors, in terms
                     of demonstrating the feasibility of
                     environmental compliance while remaining
                     competitive or even increasing economic
                     viability, e.g. by being able to charge higher
                     prices for certified products, or by
                     accessing markets that require certification.




                     Chapter 1                                           49
1.1.3 	 Process / Procedures
1.1.4 	Practical Approach and
        Behavioral Factors




In practice there is a host of common challenges and problems with
the practical application of EA process and procedures in FCV
(with many examples reported from sub-Saharan Africa). Some of
the most prominent types are listed below:

	     EA clearance processes can be a heavy and lengthy
     	
      administrative burden (especially when decision-making is
      hampered by lack of data and lack of capacity for professional
      evaluation and judgment), both on regulator and regulated
      entity, and cause substantial delays in project development;

	     Effectiveness of the EA process can be undermined by lack
     	
      of uniform approach; for example, several line ministries may
      define differing regulations for EA, including types of EA
      documents, EA scope and content, timing for review, and
      approval and means of public consultation;

	     Ambiguity in environmental assessment and management
     	
      instruments contributes to wide variations across sectors with
      regards to development and application of environmental
      regulations, resulting in a huge challenge for regulators to
      identify and formulate the legally correct approach;

	     Business and project proponents often rely on a number
     	
      of intermediaries or service providers to obtain clearances
      from the Ministry of the Environment; the regular process
      is often intentionally complicated and lengthy to create
      business opportunity for such informal sectors, often at the
      cost of professionalism and the intended purpose behind



50                                  Chapter 1
                                                Possible reasons
                                                for institutional
                                                dysfunction




     regulations to introduce and foster better quality and
     environmental performance;

	    Existence of rent-seeking schemes from officials entrusted
    	
     with review and clearance tasks, resulting in unofficial
     payments made to obtain environmental clearances. The
     quality of the documents thus often becomes secondary or
     even irrelevant, as approvals are only obtained through the
     payment of bribes.



— Practical Approach and Behavioral Factors —

Technical skills

Boiled down to the bare essentials the prerequisites for effective
environmental regulation appear simple enough: “So, what
does it really take to establish good environmental and social
management? A cadre of well-trained, properly certified
professionals. It’s dedicated and competent people who make
laws and regulations function, or not!”

Consequently, if environmental institutions are not functioning
effectively, it might be worthwhile considering whether the following
factors are driving the deficits in the system:
	 	 Shortages of qualified staff
	 	 Deficiencies in managerial capacity, job descriptions, budget
     (including salaries/per diem), career prospects and training
	 	 Low (perceived) status/professional regard



                         Chapter 1                                   51
       Practical Approach and
1.1.4 	
       Behavioral Factors




	     Technical deficiencies? Need for specific strengthening
     	
      capacity (including for specific projects / sectors)

	     Lack of exposure to, and experience with good practice
     	
      and modern standards; insufficient access of local experts
      to international best available techniques (BAT)

“Soft skills” and results-mindfulness

Key to sound environmental management is the degree of
importance that the public and its representatives assign to
environmental matters. Without the political and societal
consensus that environmental resources, components and
services are worth preserving and protecting, the problem of
proper management and care will persist and it will be very
difficult, if not impossible to achieve any changes (the often
futile fight against poaching of Elephant and Rhino in many
African countries is a highly visible example). Once there is
general awareness and support for action, program proponents
must begin strategic planning and setting goals. Mechanisms
and skills for interpersonal and institutional interaction and
consensus building among all affected parties therefore become
important elements of environmental policymaking . The common
vision should be an achievable win-win outcome. The timeframe
of expected benefits to precipitate for the various parties to the
vision also needs to be discussed openly and transparently, as often
much persuasion will be needed to convince stakeholders to give
up short term gains (e.g. villagers selling Ivory to middlemen) versus
a longer term sustainable perspective (e.g. tourism development).




52                                   Chapter 1
                                                How can I communi-
                                                cate that regulatory
                                                oversight can promote
                                                win-win situations?




The often futile fight
against poaching of
Elephant in many
African countries is a
highly visible example
that political and soci-
etal backing is crucial.




                                                     Curt Carnemark/World Bank




Communicating a vision of an outcome that is a win-win for all
to the affected stakeholders can be one of the most daunting
and challenging tasks for regulators. As noted from the outset of
this handbook, governments have an often conflicting role to
play and need to balance policy priorities to promote and regulate
investments and developments, deliver services in an efficient
and effective manner, and at the same time protect public
interests. More often than not, situations of FCV encourage short-
term thinking, as the immediate concern is survival, or short term
profit, or remaining in power. Convincing people to give up short
term benefits, change established practices that cause negative
impacts, or to argue against vested interests, requires very specific
skills, e.g. diplomacy, intuition, behavioral psychology, persuasion,
and persistence / tenacity. It also may require a good amount
of courage, and taking risks affecting personal health and safety.




                           Chapter 1                                       53
       Practical Approach and
1.1.4 	                                         Developing and
       Behavioral Factors                        applying legislation
                                                 that works




Environmental legislation cannot be enforced unless it is
compatible with existing administrative, technical and economic
capabilities, and unless its broad directions and principles are
supported by leaders and decision-makers on all administrative
levels, as well as by a significant majority of stakeholders. To forge
such consensus between parties and interests goes well beyond
the standard terms of reference of a regulator, but s/he will in
many situations be faced with this demand as one of the key
ingredients of regulatory work.

Context consideration

As a regulator the recognition of the political, economic and
socio-cultural context is an important factor to consider in
developing and applying legislation that actually works.

Policymakers are expected to prioritize environmental measures
relying on tools and mechanisms that rank environmental
problems according to the risks they pose to human health and
environment. In practice, however, decisions on environmental
issues are not simply technical or economic, but also depend on
value judgment and political and equity considerations. Often
the social standing of groups affected most by environmental
problems is a key factor in either accelerating, or delaying the
drafting and deployment of legislation. Often only a vocal
champion or prominent figure, or strong external drivers (e.g.
international development organizations) can break the
cycle of complacency and political disinterest in environmental
problems, and it may sometimes help to search for such



54                                   Chapter 1
                                                Engagement with
                                                the public is crucial
                                                to the success of
                                                policymaking and
                                                shaping of legislation.




champions to unblock entrenched problems. Additionally,
even sound technical knowledge leaves significant room for
interpretation and subsequent political bargaining. Often
tradeoffs between various conflicting interests and objectives
will have to be accepted in order to produce legislation that
may not reach the ideal of best practice quality, but in the end
proves enforceable in practice.

Consultation and participation

The availability of systematic public information on the environment
is a powerful tool and driver to facilitate the interaction of policy
making with the general public, and shape legislation that is in
the interest of the general public (as opposed to e.g. elites
and lobbies).

Engagement with the public, either through key actors, or an
effective alliance with the private sector, or broad based
community engagement is crucial to the success of policymaking
and shaping of legislation. The mandating of independent
organizations to collect data, monitor, and use it to inform policy
making, planning and priority setting can be a way to maneuver
through opposed political interests and create a balanced
platform of baseline information. Sometimes such baseline studies
can be attached to externally financed projects or initiatives
(e.g. an aquatic ecology study or cumulative impact assessment as
part of a feasibility study for a hydropower project), providing both
a financing source and a degree of independence and objectivity.




                        Chapter 1                                     55
       Practical Approach and
1.1.4 	
       Behavioral Factors




Public disclosure of information and mechanisms of public
participation, as well as the unbiased assessment of, and effective
management of environmental priorities are also key ingredients.

Formally engaging communities dependent on access to natural
resources can also help with engendering public awareness of,
and support for, environmental priorities. Communities who require
access to natural resources for livelihoods are particularly vulnerable
to changes in the availability and quality of these resources
during and after conflict. Accordingly, they could be natural allies
of environmental conservation.




56                                   Chapter 1
Food for thought:




                                               Caroline Suzman/World Bank


The women from communities could be particularly powerful as
environmental advocates. Women, as primary providers of water,
food and energy at the household and community levels, are
dependent on natural resources and most vulnerable to changes
in access and availability during conflict. Moreover, periods of
FCV are often accompanied by shifts in gender norms as
women seek to fill the economic gap left by the male members
of the household who may have left to engage in the conflict.
To compensate for this loss of revenue, women sometimes
assume greater natural resource management roles by taking up
alternative income-generating activities. Formally engaging and
empowering these women in the process of shaping of policy
and legislation could result in an environmental regulatory
framework that better reflects the public interest. Carefully
targeted support might be necessary to overcome the cultural
and social boundaries to formally involving them.




                       Chapter 1                                      57
Notes




58       Chapter 1
Chapter 1   59
1.2	 Management Approaches                       To translate the legal
         and Tools                                 and regulatory base
1.2.1	 
       Development of Technical                    into effective versight,
       Standards and Guidelines                    management tools
                                                   are required.




Management Approaches and Tools A strong legal base, an
operative institutional framework and clear process and procedures
are merely the foundations of effective environmental regulation.
Management tools and approaches that are sensitive to the
motivations of regulated entities and the promotion of best
practice are also required. This section will discuss the use of
three ‘tools of the trade’, namely; technical standards and
guidelines; the mitigation hierarchy; and incentives and deterrents.

— Development of Technical Standards and Guidelines —
Technical standards and guidelines provide detailed interpretation
and clarity regarding the environmental legal landscape. If used
properly, they can channel the discretion of environmental agency
employees, increase efficiency, health and safety and enhance
fairness by providing regulated entities, and the public more
generally, a clear notice of the line between permissible and
impermissible conduct while ensuring equal treatment of similarly
situated parties (“level playing field”).

For example, in the US, the Clean Water Act mandates the
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to develop water quality
standards and guidance that define the goals for a water body
by designating its uses and establishing policies to protect water
quality from pollutants. Moreover, the EPA is required to develop
criteria for water quality that accurately reflect the latest scientific
knowledge. These criteria must be based on data and scientific
judgments on pollutant concentrations and environmental or
human health effects. The EPA has also created a handbook to
guide state governments through the requirements and



60                                     Chapter 1
                                               Technical standards
                                               and guidelines
                                               provide clarity in
                                               the implementation
                                               of regulations.




expectations that the EPA has of water quality standards. The
development of standards and guidance not only provide clear
instructions to the public and regulated entities regarding per-
missible standards, they also function to protect the health of the
public and prevent water pollutants. The significance of guidelines
in effective environmental regulation in FCV is captured well in the
case study in box 1. It outlines the example of South Sudan where,
in the absence of any legislation, guidelines were the only tool
available to direct regulators when overseeing the environmental
performance of a road construction project.

However, the development and implementation of effective
standards and guidelines can be challenging, particularly in
FCV contexts. Environmental regulators have to be mindful of
practicalities and limitations and adapt guidelines and standards
accordingly. Using the example of water quality standards,
environmental regulators may simply not have access to com-
prehensive national data or the scientific specialists needed to
establish water quality standards. Moreover, regulated entities may
not have access to reliable, let alone accredited or internationally
certified laboratories to test water quality, or lack budget to
meet standards. In such situations, environmental regulators may
wish to pursue an outcome that isn’t technically perfect but robust
to circumstances. For example, in the absence comprehensive
national data, environmental regulators may begin developing
their own standards by reviewing water quality guidelines and
standards from developed and developing countries as well as from
international organizations and, subsequently, by comparing them
with data available on their own water quality. They also may want



                        Chapter 1                                    61
       Development of Technical
1.2.1	 
       Standards and Guidelines




                                               When South Sudan
                                               achieved independence
                                               in 2011, laws and
                                               institutions had to be built
                                               from scratch. At the same
                                               time, the South Sudanese
                                               government was under
                                               high pressure to develop
                                               infrastructure and deliver
                                               services quickly to help the
                                               new nation recover from a
                                               protracted civil war.
     Arne Hoel/World Bank

     The roads sector was no exception. South Sudan has only a few
     all-weather roads, meaning that vast tracts of a country are only
     accessible during the dry season. This is considered one of the most
     critical factors hindering development, making roads construction
     one of the highest national priorities. However, the Ministry of
     Transport Roads and Bridges (MTRB) was expected to implement
     large projects in the absence of institutional structures, policies or
     Acts of Laws including a National Environmental Policy. The only
     guidance available were the Ministry’s Standard Specifications,
     which included generic provisions for design, environmental / social
     assessments, tendering and supervision / monitoring of the imple-
     mentation of Environmental Social Management Plans (ESMPs) and
     general issues on proposed roads construction /maintenance. These
     were not comprehensive enough to ensure a minimum of good
     environmental and social practice, thus donors suggested that the
     Ministry develop detailed technical guidelines for the entire
     Transport Sector.




62                                      Chapter 1
                        Box 1: Case Study on     Policy or Laws on
                        Applying Environmental   Transport (Roads
                        Regulations in the       Construction /
                        Absence of National      Maintenance Works)




In this context KTF workshop participant Patricia Gibril participated
in the preparation of an Environmental Social and Safeguard
Assessment Framework (ESSAF). The ESSAF, a specific safeguards
instrument developed by the World Bank, aimed to ensure that in
implementing road projects an uniform level of due diligence was
exercised, harm or exacerbating social tensions avoided, and social
and environmental issues treated in a consistent manner by
domestic agencies and contractors, as well as Donors and the
Government of Republic of South Sudan (GRoSS). The ESSAF
helped the Project Management Team (PMT) under the MTRB in
screening all the project components for potential environmental
and social impacts, and mainstreaming environmental and social
requirements into detailed design and tender documents. Such
requirements included adequate mitigation, management and
monitoring measures to comply with World Bank safeguard policies
(seen as representative of best practice).

For example, the ESSAF forms Appendix 1 of the Project
Implementation Manual (PIM) of South Sudan Rural Roads Project.
It has ensured that general policies, guidelines, codes of practice
and safeguard procedures are integrated into the implementation
of this World Bank-financed project. It has become an integral
part of bidding documents for roads construction and rehabilita-
tion works, and environmental social management measures were
included as quotable items in the bills of quantities with a minimum
percentage (15% of contract value), with an additional penalty of
withholding the retention payment (usually 10% of contract value).
Also well performing Contractors were issued with “environmental
diligence certificates” which are valuable references for bids on
subsequent projects.




                         Chapter 1                                      63
1.2.1	 Development of Technical                 Avoidance has the
        Standards and Guidelines                 best prospects of
1.2.2	 Mitigation hierarchy                     success and is the
                                                 most desirable way
                                                 of reducing potential
                                                 negative impacts.



to focus quality management on potential pollutants that have the
highest environment / health risk or relevance under given country
context and circumstances.

— Mitigation hierarchy — The mitigation hierarchy is a tool that
guides users (e.g. legislators or regulators) towards limiting as
far as possible negative environmental impacts from development
projects, and is commonly applied in Environmental Impact
Assessments (EIAs). Illustrated in figure 4, the mitigation hierarchy
or “pyramid” encourages avoidance and minimization as best
practice, which is critical given high cost, complexities and the
feasibility question associated with compensation and offsets.

The steps of the mitigation hierarchy are as follows:

	     Avoidance: The first step of the mitigation hierarchy
     	
      comprises measures taken to avoid causing impacts from the
      outset, for example, placing a road outside a key species’
      breeding ground, or away from sensitive receptors such as
      schools or hospitals. As indicated in figure 4, avoidance has
      the best prospects of success and is the most desirable
      way of reducing potential negative impacts. Also it frequently
      is the cheapest and most effective strategy available to address
      the impact on sensitive receptors, biodiversity, or valued
      environmental components (VEC). However, it requires an
      analysis and assessment to be conducted in the early stages of
      a project, at the very least during project conception.
      Taking the road the example again, it could be feasible and
      even more cost efficient (depending on the mitigation /
      remediation cost) to bypass sensitive areas or even consider


64                                   Chapter 1
                                                 Figure 4: The
                                                 Mitigation Hierarchy




PROSPECTS OF SUCCESS / DESIRABILITY

highest / most    >>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>           lowest / least




          Avoid      Minimize             Rectify       Compensate




Alternative        Actions to        Actions to         Used as last
technologies       minimize          rehabilitate       resort to
or sites to        Impacts during    or restore         compensate
avoid impacts      design and        affected           impacts
                   implementation    biodiversity




                    Source: Adapted from ICMM Good Practice Guidance 2006



                                         Source: Adapted from ICMM Good
                                         Practice Guidance 2006
                      Chapter 1                                         65
1.2.2	 Mitigation hierarchy                      The use of offsets
1.2.3 	 Incentives and deterrents                 should normally be
                                                  viewed as the option
                                                  of “last resort”.




      optional tunnels or bridges to shorten the alignment and avoid
      impacts. In order for this to be a realistic option, environmental
      regulators have to be involved in the project from the
      earliest stages.

	     Minimization: Measures taken to reduce the duration,
     	
      intensity and/or extent of impacts that cannot be completely
      avoided. Examples include measures such as reducing noise
      and pollution by engineered barriers, or building wildlife
      crossings on roads. However, similar to avoidance, in order for
      minimization to be an option, measures should be built into
      the project and its financing from the very early stages.

	     Rectify: Measures taken to improve degraded or destroyed
     	
      ecosystems or environmental assets following exposure to
      impacts that cannot be completely avoided or minimized.
      Restoration tries to return an area to the original ecosystem
      that occurred before impacts, whereas rehabilitation only aims
      to restore basic ecological functions and/or ecosystem
      services (e.g. through planting trees to stabilize bare soil).

	     Compensate/Offset: Measures taken to compensate for
     	
      any residual, adverse impacts after full implementation of
      the previous three steps of the mitigation hierarchy. These
      measures usually are applied to a location other than the area
      of impact / influence, with the philosophy that degrading one
      area can be compensated by upgrading the ecological value
      of another (e.g. the destruction of natural growth forest could
      be compensated by improving management of, or expanding
      a protected area, or reforesting degraded land). The use of
      offsets should however be viewed as a ‘last resort.’


66                                    Chapter 1
                                                In practice regulation
                                                relies on a double
                                                motivation of “sticks”
                                                and “carrots”.




— Incentives and deterrents — The willingness of an entity to
comply with environmental regulations can vary widely. Thus
effective environmental management approaches demand a
combination of incentives and deterrents which are sensitive to
the interests and motivations of the regulated entity and effectively
result in a win-win situation whereby both the regulated entity and
the environment stand to benefit.

The deterrents or “sticks” usually entail mandatory requirements
that are established under the legal infrastructure and allow
environmental regulators to enforce compliance through, for
example, revoking a license, fines or (criminal) prosecution.

Positive incentives or “carrots” include voluntary approaches which
encourage and assist change through such means as education,
technical assistance, and economic incentives. Examples of voluntary
approaches include:




  Public education             Awards                 Subsidies




                        		

Technical assistance        Tax incentives




                         Chapter 1                                   67
1.2.3 	 Incentives and deterrents                Market-based
                                                 regulatory approaches
                                                 can be highly effective,
                                                 but require a high
                                                 level of sophistication
                                                 on the regulator’s side.



Moreover, economic/market-based approaches use market forces
which include both incentives and deterrents to achieve desired
behavior changes. Economic approaches generally involve a
combination of marketing advantages and financial incentives, and
of legal / regulatory requirements. Examples include:

	    	Fees for waste generation and disposal (solid, atmospheric
       emissions and effluents) which—when avoided—yield savings
	    	 Tax incentives for good environmental performance
	    	Subsidies, e.g. for innovative technologies helping to reduce
       environmental impacts and natural resource consumption
	    	Marketable / tradable permits, e.g. for emission reductions of
       CO2 and other pollutants
	    	Emission offsets, i.e. a reduction in emissions of pollutants
       made in order to compensate for or to offset an emission
       made elsewhere.

At the “high end” of economic/market-based approaches is
carbon trading. The carbon trade refers to the ability of individual
companies to trade polluting rights through a regulatory system
known as cap and trade. Companies that pollute less can sell their
unused pollution rights to companies that pollute above regulated
amounts. The goal is to ensure that companies in the aggregate
do not exceed an agreed baseline level of pollution and to provide
a financial incentive for companies to pollute less. An example
of tradable permits is the sulfur dioxide (SO2) trading program
implemented in the U.S. under the 1990 Amendments to the
Clean Air Act. This program allows coal‑burning utilities and other
industries to reduce their SO2 emissions by buying and selling



68                                   Chapter 1
Food for thought:




                                                        John Hogg/World Bank

To be successful, economic/market based approaches require
that regulated entities have the means and technical knowledge
to introduce and maintain the correct technology to reduce their
environmental impact. New technology requires significant up-
front investment for installation and ongoing financial support for
running and upkeep. Moreover, regulated entities should already
have knowledge of the required technology or be in the position
to hire a technical expert to ensure the correct technology is
installed and maintained properly. Accordingly, environmental
regulators should carefully consider the capacity and financial
position of the regulated entities when weighing up whether to
introduce economic/market based approaches.

In this context a level playing field for all producers of a particular
pollutant (e.g. SO2, referring to the above given example) is
extremely important, as inconsistent enforcement, that leaves
loopholes or tolerates exceptions, could have the perverse effect
of creating economic disadvantages for compliant businesses.


                         Chapter 1                                       69
1.2.3 	 Incentives and deterrents




“allowances.” An allowance is the right to emit one ton of sulfur
dioxide. The trading program allows companies that can cost
effectively reduce their emissions lower than required levels to sell
allowances to companies that have difficulty reaching the required
limits. In most cases, buyers are required to “retire” or remove
from the market a certain percentage of the allowances they buy.
Removing allowances from the market pushes their cost up thereby
encouraging companies to reduce their SO2 emissions by technical
means, rather than purchase allowances. Other parties, such as e.g.
environmental groups also can purchase allowances and “retire”
them to influence the cost of allowances, and thus overall emissions.

Pollution taxes are another example of an economic/market based
approach. Taxes incentivize pollution reduction because it increases
the cost of producing pollution and therefore companies have a
financial interest in eliminating it.

When considering the combination of incentives and deterrents
required for compliance, environmental regulators must take into
account the specific motivation and behavior of regulated entities.
To this end, it might be useful to think about the “willingness” of
a regulated entity to comply as falling into a classical bell curve, as
illustrated in figure 5. The vertical axis indicates the relative number
of regulated entities and the horizontal axis indicates the degree
of compliance. The bell curve can be roughly roughly divided into
three groups namely: the “Criminal Group”— the group to the far
left or those most resistant to comply; the “Compliant Group”— the
group on the far right which will comply with the least legal /
regulatory pressure; and the “Reactive Group”— usually the



70                                   Chapter 1
  When considering                              regulators must take   Figure 5: The
  the combination of                            into account the       compliance bell curve
  incentives and                                specific motivation
  deterrents required                           and behavior of
  for compliance,                               regulated entities.
  environmental




                            Criminal                      Reactive        Compliant
REGULATED ENTITIES




                     Less                     DEGREE OF COMPLIANCE                    More



  largest group in the center;, which will comply based on a
  combination of regulatory pressure and peer behavior, adjusting
  their business model to the path of least resistance and always
  alert to what is happening to the rest of their sector.
                            Criminal                      Reactive        Compliant

  The “criminal group” or the group most resistant to compliance will
  comply only if forced to do so by        determined legal and regulatory
                                       Assistance

  action, such as fines and criminal prosecution. This group often
REGULATED ENTITIES




                                                  Inspection
  operates in a range of marginal profitability (though not always) and
                          Civil or
  is motivated by a corporate      culture that is indifferent to, or does
                          Administrative
                          Enforcement
  not respect the environment or the government’s right to regulate
                                                       Assistance &
  them. Lack of sufficient financial capital is often  Publicity a factor, but also the
                                                        Deterrence


                                Criminal Prosectution

                                                 Chapter 1             Recognition
                                                                       and Reward
                                                                                             71
1.2.3 	 Incentives and deterrents




“criminal” firm might be actively subverting regulations in order
to profiteer.

For example, in Germany, in the years after the fall of the Berlin
Wall, private companies took over many hitherto public services,
such as waste collection and disposal. However, in the first years of
the “Wild East”, under an often unclear legal situation and gaps
in regulatory oversight and enforcement, profiteering companies
would dispose of waste at lowest cost possible. This led to a surge
in dumping waste (sometimes hazardous) in unsuitable areas, often
causing considerable environmental damage and hazards, or to the
“export” of hazardous waste to neighboring Poland, where is
usually was also dumped without considerations for good practice.
For this “criminal group” enforcement action against each
individual facility or company in this group may be needed.

The middle group is the reactive group. This group is “on the
fence” and will react according to the mainstream happening
around them. Factors they may consider include:

	    	 What the rest of the companies in their sector are doing?

	    	 Is the government enforcing the requirement?

	     Are the penalties or punitive actions meaningful
     	
      (= painful enough)?

	    	 Is the government providing incentives, support or assistance?

	     Has the government leveled the playing field or are some
     	
      companies/sectors being regulated more than others?



72                                   Chapter 1
                                                                                     Figure 6: Shifting the
                                                                                     compliance bell curve
                     Less                     DEGREE OF COMPLIANCE                                      More




                            Criminal                      Reactive                          Compliant



                                                           Assistance
REGULATED ENTITIES




                                                                        Inspection

                                               Civil or
                                               Administrative
                                               Enforcement

                                                                             Assistance &
                                                                             Publicity
                                                        Deterrence


                                Criminal Prosectution

                                                                                     Recognition
                                                                                     and Reward




                     Less                     DEGREE OF COMPLIANCE                                      More



  The shape of the curve (amplitude and width) will vary depending
  on the nature of the regulation and the sector, and will change over
  time based on the activities and determination of the regulator.
  The shape of the curve will also vary depending on the rules itself.
  Compliance will be much higher in the case of clear rules that are
  simple to understand and apply, while complex rules that are poorly
  written, costly to implement and difficult to enforce may have very
  low rates of compliance.

  As illustrated in Figure 6, if regulators are able to increase
  compliance amongst regulated entities, the entire bell curve will
  shift to the left. To achieve this movement toward compliance,



                                                 Chapter 1                                                     73
1.2.3 	 Incentives and deterrents




environmental regulators may deploy a range of different
approaches for different categories of individuals under the curve
as discussed below.

	     Criminal to Reactive: Actions that involve strong
     	
      deterrence including criminal sanctions, such as large fines,
      jail time or closing the facility are appropriate where people
      refuse to obey the law or intentionally find ways to mislead
      regulators and hide their wrongdoings. Civil or administrative
      enforcement is appropriate for less extreme violations. In some
      cases increased inspections may change behavior by alerting
      people to the problem they cause and have, as well as the
      potential consequences / liabilities for their businesses as well
      as them personally, and may avoid having to enter into more
      forceful types of enforcement response.

	     Reactive to Compliant: On the low end of this category
     	
      the same deterrent techniques may have to be applied as for
      the criminal group. Alternatively on the more compliant end,
      actions that involve incentives may be more appropriate.
      These include cases where environmental regulators may
      provide assistance to help someone comply by explaining the
      rules, and providing advice or additional resources to help
      them comply. Additionally, publicizing the good actors can
      help others understand how to comply and can provide
      motivation and good publicity for those doing the right thing.
      Finally, for the really good guys that are going beyond their
      minimal responsibilities, tax incentives, or a prize or recognition
      is appropriate to award the good behavior and motivate others
      to achieve the same objective.


74                                    Chapter 1
	   	 Non-Regulatory Drivers: Compliance can also be driven
       by non-regulatory factors, such as international standards and
       cost-saving measures. Nini Flower Farm in Naivasha, Kenya is
       an excellent example of a regulated entity where compliance
       is driven partly by Kenyan environmental laws and standards,
       but also by a number of important external factors and positive
       incentives: energy conservation, water recycling and reuse of
       organic waste as substrate to grow flowers on are all important
       cost reduction factors, besides their positive environmental
       effects, thus compliance actually created a clear win-win
       situation. Other factors are the standards of the EU (a key
       export market) for flower certification, governing e.g. the use
       of pesticides, labor conditions, water and biodiversity protection
       and other environmental and social sustainability criteria.

However, the motivations of regulated entities are not always
immediately obvious and thus it is not always clear what combination
incentives and deterrence would best ensure compliance. Kenya’s
NEMA has addressed this issue by using surveys to assess awareness
of regulations and standards amongst regulated entities in different
sectors. For example, NEMA did a survey of water protection
compliance and awareness in Kiambu and discovered awareness was
high but compliance low. These results impacted on the compliance
and enforcement approach as clearly education and awareness
was not the issue and other means of enforcing or incentivizing
compliance needed to be employed. Conversely, a similar survey of
waste management entities found that 50% of waste recyclers were
not aware of the regulations and compliance was low. Thus in this
case a wider dissemination of legislation and regulations governing
the management of wastewater and waste has been carried out.


                          Chapter 1                                   75
1.2.4 	 Practical Approach




— Practical Approach —

	     Technical skills: All management tools and approaches
     	
      discussed in this section necessitate co-operation with specialists.
      Scientists and Engineers are required to define, establish
      and monitor technical standards and contribute to realistic
      strategies when pursing each stage of the mitigation hierarchy.
      The skills and knowledge of economists and lawyers are
      important for the development of economic/market based
      approaches to compliance. All of this has been vividly demon-
      strate by the case example from Mali presented further below.

	     Soft skills: Specialists and environmental regulators may
     	
      not fully appreciate each other’s objectives and constraints.
      It’s therefore vitally important to invest additional energy
      into teambuilding and open and consistent communication
      to ensure a desirable and relevant outcome.

	    	 Result mindfulness: In order to effectively apply these
        management tools and get to win-win, environmental regulators
        should be deft in diplomacy and emotional intelligence. Even if
        there are advantages to the regulated entity in complying, they
        may not recognize the benefits immediately or seek to better
        their end of the bargain. Therefore, to get to win-win, environ-
        mental regulators must have an excellent overall and long
        term visions, be able to maneuver through human interactions
        effectively or, in other words, utilize their emotional intelligence.
        For example, environmental regulators may need to convince
        regulated entities of the advantages of avoidance strategies



76                                      Chapter 1
     both in terms of cost and effectiveness. When using incentives
     and deterrents, the proficient environmental regulator should
     have the skills and the know-how to negotiate the right amount
     of give and take required to achieve compliance in a given
     regulated entity. Characteristics of emotional intelligence
     include: self-awareness, emotion management, self-motivation,
     recognizing emotions in others, empathy, and managing
     relationships. By underpinning a systematic approach to
     negotiation with emotional intelligence, it’s more likely that
     a regulated entity will undertake actions that protect
     the environment.

	    Consultation and participation: Public consultation
    	
     is required in the development of technical standards and
     guidelines as it not only enhances transparency but also
     encourages the ‘buy in’ of the public and regulated entities
     and helps ensure that the guidelines produced are easy to
     understand and effective. Public consultation mechanisms
     should be undertaken through a range of mechanisms, such
     as through an advisory council, ad hoc consultations or internet
     based social media, to inform governmental decision-making.
     Close consultation with affected communities is also necessary
     when pursuing the steps in the mitigation hierarchy. For
     example, an avoidance strategy such as placing a road outside
     a key species’ breeding ground may result in the road cutting
     in too close to (or through) a nearby village. Thus, conflict
     management, a resettlement action plan and consultation
     and engagement (public to public) redress will need to be
     considered and acted upon.



                         Chapter 1                                 77
1.2.4 	 Practical Approach




In the case of regulation of specific industrial sectors or for
specific pollutants, the consulted stakeholders must include the
“perpetrators” to understand the technical, economic, financial,
market-related parameters of their businesses and find
approaches that are realistic both in the scope and timing of
the regulatory approaches.
 

  Useful Links:

  Emissions trading: http://einstitute.worldbank.org/ei/course/emissions-
  trading-schemes-using-markets-promote-low-emissions-development




                                                           Arne Hoel/World Bank


78                                     Chapter 1
Food for Thought




                 One example of an international certification
                 program with both a far reach into producer
                 networks in developing economies, as well
                 as high consumer penetration in mature
                 economies, is the Fair Trade (FT) certificate
                 (see www.fairtrade.net ).

Fair Trade is an alternative approach to conventional trade
based on a partnership between producers and traders,
businesses and consumers. The international Fairtrade
system — made up of Fairtrade International and its member
organizations — represents the world’s largest and most
recognized fair trade system. The idea behind it is to create
a certification instrument which enables consumers to
consume more responsibly, by ensuring that their buying
power translates into tangible quality standards on the
producer’s end, which are also adequately remunerated by
higher commodity prices for certified produce.

Incentivized by higher revenue, producers must nevertheless
adhere to a number of quality standards that include — as high
priority criteria — the environmental and social conditions under
which a commodity is produced and brought to market. The
environmental objectives of Fair Trade are quoted from their
webpage as follows: “Fairtrade rewards and encourages farming
and production practices that are environmentally sustainable.
Producers are also encouraged to strive toward organic
certification. Producers must: (i) Protect the environment in
which they work and live. This includes areas of natural water,
virgin forest and other important land areas and dealing with


                       Chapter 1                                 79
       Practical Approach
1.2.4 	




problems of erosion and waste management. (ii) Develop,
implement and monitor an operations plan on their farming and
techniques. This needs to reflect a balance between protecting
the environment and good business results. (iii) Follow national
and international standards for the handling of chemicals.
There is a list of chemicals which they must not use. (iv) Not,
intentionally, use products which include genetically modified
organisms (GMO). (v) Work out and monitor what effect their
activities are having on the environment. Then they must make
a plan of how they can lessen the impacts and keep checking
that this plan is carried out.“

Fairtrade stringently audits its members using specially trained
inspectors and certifiers, who carry out on site audits (both for
initial certification and later for continuous quality control) for
every Fair Trade member producer, regardless of type and size
of the operation.

For environmental regulators, cooperating with an organization
such as FT might be highly synergetic in several ways: the
auditors could help with technical advice, equipment, and budget;
the entities audited by FT would be considered compliant by
regulators, thus freeing resources for other, more problematic
sectors; joint workshops, trainings and field visits could be
organized to exchange knowledge, build capacity in a highly
practical manner, discuss standards, and share cutting edge
knowledge from international good practice. In exchange FT
auditors could gain much by access to local information from
experienced regulators. This would result in a win-win situation
for both the FT organization and the domestic regulatory system.


80                                  Chapter 1
                                              Food for Thought




                                                    Melody Lee/World Bank



In addition to FT, personnel working in environmental NGOs
often carry significant expertise in relation to the implementation
of environmental laws. NGOs may function in helpful cooperation
with governmental authorities in the role of unofficial or deputy
inspectors, monitors or watchdogs for environmental non-
compliance. These functions may include mapping biological
resources, observation of pollution sources and pathways, and
sampling polluted media, recording the harvesting of natural
resources and, in particular, illegal mining, logging, hunting
and fishing.




                        Chapter 1                                     81
        Practical Approach
1.2.4 	 




Case study:
Ensuring Compliance amongst Craft Dyers in Mali

Mali is known in the West African sub-region for the quality of its dyed
fabrics (called “bazin”) which are very popular. This activity is a major
source of revenue for many Malian women, but at the same time is a
highly polluting activity.

Craft dyers have proliferated throughout the larger cities; in the dying
process chemicals such as caustic soda (NaOH) and pigments
containing a range of heavy metals are used. Process-related effluents
and liquid residues are discharged untreated into streets, gutters and
collectors. Some dyers’ workshops are located directly at river banks
(e.g. of Niger River) and effluents and wastewater discharged directly
into the river. An additional problem with this direct discharge is the
effluents’ high temperature, which adds to the environmental hazards
posed by caustic and toxic contents.

Negative impacts on rivers were felt in various ways, including change
of color, bad odors, and mass poisoning of fish and other aquatic life.
The City of Bamako, notably, is supplied with drinking water from the
River Niger.

Faced with this problem, the Malian Ministry of Environment, through its
pollution control agency, conducted an extensive awareness campaign
for all users of the river water (dyers, fishermen, gardeners) to alert all
stakeholders on the negative impacts environment and human health of
their respective activities.

In an effort to follow up with concrete measures, the technical and
financial assistance of donors and NGOs was sought to establish a
better organized and thus regulated sector: larger scale dyeing centers




82                                     Chapter 1
                                                Case Study 1:
                                                Ensuring Compliance
                                                amongst Craft Dyers
                                                in Mali




catering to a large number of dyers were constructed, that could — due
to their scale — be equipped with wastewater treatment plants while
still operating economically.

In this case both an awareness campaign and technical assistance
for better environmental performance / compliance created the
foundations to make regulations on pollution management enforceable,
and allow a large number of entrepreneurs to achieve compliance
without too much regulatory deterrence.




                                                    Curt Carnemark/World Bank




                         Chapter 1                                        83
Notes




84       Chapter 1
Chapter 1   85
Notes




86       Chapter 1
Chapter 1   87
Chapter 2
Applying frameworks,
mechanisms and tools
for achieving effective
regulatory compliance




            Nugroho Nurdikiawan Sunjoyo/World Bank




88                  Chapter 2
                                            Kubat Sydykov/World Bank




                                       Simone D. McCourtie/World Bank




Gerhard Jörén/World Bank



                           Chapter 2                              89
2.1 	 Environmental Regulatory                 Environmental regulators
       Frameworks                               need effective tools,
2.1.1	Processes, instruments and               both for oversight and
       documentation                            enforcement downward,
                                                and communication and
                                                feedback upward.



Environmental Regulatory Frameworks — Processes,
instruments and documentation — Environmental regulators
need to have access to the right tools in order to be empowered
to regulate effectively and provide feedback to policy makers
on the strengths and shortcomings of a given existing environ-
mental framework. Ultimately, the success and usefulness of
the management approaches and legislation discussed in the
preceding sections depends largely on their clarity, accessibility,
and user-friendliness. The better the knowledge of regulations
and guidelines, the better the regulator can identify, describe
and communicate situations of non-compliance. It is therefore
imperative that well defined processes — in particular the ESIA
process — and the resulting reports, such as management plans
and compliance frameworks, including guidance, templates,
examples and required auxiliary documentation are complete,
up to date, well structured, and easy to get to (either on paper
or via www).

There also needs to be a formalized and effective process that
allows environmental regulators “at the coalface” to feedback
problems with, or gaps in, legislation and management approaches
to policy-making colleagues. Such a formalized process allows for
the “shapers” and the “implementers” to work together to create
a regulatory framework that is ‘best fit’ for the context.

Moreover in order to keep standards consistent, particularly when
conducting EIA, it’s important to have a system to track and make
widely available regulatory activity. Such a system requires careful
documentation of ESIAs, a well-structured methodology and clear



90                                  Chapter 2
                                              Well-functioning
                                              regulatory systems
                                              need a feedback
                                              process from
                                              enforcement into
                                              legislative, and
                                              judicial functions.


criteria for reviewing and approving documents, and an
accessible, preferably electronic database. Without such a system,
regulators run the risk that processes such as the ESIA might be
executed to, and reviewed by widely varying standards, as field
based staff are unable to get a sense of what the appropriate
benchmark might be based on clear guidance, or the “case
law” of previous approvals of environmental due diligence
documentation. Moreover, careful tracking, documentation and
accessible archiving, enhances the transparency of ESIAs,
thus reducing the chances for rent-seeking, or the likelihood
of interference from elites or lobbies.

The same principle applies to all monitoring efforts and
activities carried out as a result of an agreed environmental
management process. Ensuring effective monitoring is an
integral part of achieving compliance with environmental
standards, and data on setting up monitoring programs,
choosing analytical parameters (that are meaningful and can
realistically be analyzed in-country), the monitoring frequency,
methodology, responsibility and — very importantly — cost,
can be very valuable for the regulator’s work. In developed
systems, analytical and monitoring programs for site investigation,
risk assessment, remediation planning and supervision, and
for post-remediation verification purposes are generally codified
and described in great technical detail.




                        Chapter 2                                   91
      Processes, instruments
2.1.1	
      and documentation




Case study:
Study On Improvement And Efficiency In
Eia Implementation


In 1999, all ESIA field reports in Nigeria were done by hand and filed as
hard copies. Moreover, due to a lack of functioning photocopiers in the
EPA’s premises the field reports had to be copied at an external copying
center. There was neither place nor system to store the draft and final
EIA reports in an organized and accessible manner, and as captured
in the photo, reports gradually accumulated in large disorganized
stacks that were largely unsearchable, inaccessible and made it almost
impossible to keep track of any given project through its history.

In 2011, as part of the World Bank project “Nigeria Electricity Gas
Improvement Project (NEGIP)” the Environmental Assessment
Department received capacity building, monitoring equipment,
vehicles, an electric generator, fiber-optic internet facilities, computers
and a dedicated website. Additionally, an overhaul of the management
and storage of existing EIA was initiated.

KTF workshop participant Aliyu oversaw the process of organizing the
EIA reports. The starting point was setting up a system for cataloging
the hard copies of the EIA reports, followed by the establishment
of an Electronic Data Management System to enhance (or — in many
cases — establish) the accessibility of the reports. This involved the
conversion of 1,700 hard copies of final EIA reports to electronic
versions. Finally, whereas before regulators would have to travel to
Abuja to initiate the first stage of the EIA process, Aliyu and his team
designed and developed a website with a portal which enabled the
first stage to be initiated and filed online.




92                                      Chapter 2
                                              Case Study 2: Study
                                              On Improvement
                                              And Efficiency In Eia
                                              Implementation




Furthermore, the EA Department using Multiple Development Services,
an environmental consultancy firm, and with the support of Emerging
Markets Telecommunication Services, developed a web-enabled portal
for archiving approved EIA reports, starting with the telecommunication
sector. Thus, it was possible to access and assess these reports without
relevant officials having to carry hardcopy versions.




                         Chapter 2                                    93
      Oversight and reporting
2.1.2	
      arrangements




— Oversight and reporting arrangements — As a general
principle of environmental and social management under good
practice conditions, environmental and social (E&S) factors
must be integrated into licenses issued for activities that might
affect the environment. This includes the clear definition of
processes and allocation of responsibilities for producing,
reviewing, approving the E&S instruments; advisory / consultative
arrangements for issuing licenses (e.g. construction license,
operation permit); and the integration of E&S considerations
into a larger approval process (for example, a construction
license may cover anything from technical design, to fire safety,
energy efficiency and number of toilets required, and inter alia
include E&S management and performance requirements).

In practical terms, however, environmental regulators often have
very limited leverage when it comes to ensuring that E&S factors
are addressed. Regulators may well be sidelined or overruled by
other departments, particularly when E&S factors are perceived
to be blocking or inhibiting economic interests. For example, the
department or ministry that is responsible for mining will often
be in control of giving a license to a mining company rather than
the environmental regulators. Thus, as illustrated in Case Study 3,
E&S issues are often best addressed through smart negotiation
and consensus-building, as was done when the Nigerian National
Environmental Standards and Regulations Enforcement Agency
(NESREA) conflicted with the standards of the Nigerian
Communications Commissions.





94                                 Chapter 2
                                                  Case Study 3:
                                                  Resolving
                                                  Institutional Conflicts
                                                  For Sustainable
                                                  Development




                                                          Arne Hoel/World Bank

Case study:
RESOLVING INSTITUTIONAL CONFLICTS FOR SUSTAINABLE
DEVELOPMENT: Setting Appropriate Standards for the Installation
of Telecommunication Towers In Nigeria

Conflicts among entities that are entrusted with the implementation of
environmental and social laws are particularly tricky and not amenable
to easy resolution in FCS.

The Nigerian Communications Commission (NCC) is an independent
National Regulatory Authority for the telecommunications industry
in Nigeria responsible for creation of an enabling environment for
competition among operators in the industry as well as ensuring
the provision of efficient telecommunications services throughout
the country. The National Environmental Standards and Regulations
Enforcement Agency (NESREA) is a body mandated to enforce
compliance with the environmental legislations and prohibit processes
and / or technologies that negatively impact the environmental
quality in Nigeria.

                         Chapter 2                                         95
      Oversight and reporting
2.1.2	
      arrangements




In order to effectively fulfill their constitutional mandates, both NCC
and NESREA have developed guidelines and standards for the
industries operating within the areas of their jurisdictions. Particularly,
in accordance with NCC guidelines telecommunication service
providers are expected to maintain a minimum of five meters (5m)
setback/distance from the telecommunication tower (BTS) to the
nearest habitable building. In contrast, NESREA guidelines state that
all telecommunication towers should be located at a minimum
distance of ten meters (10m) from the nearest habitable building.

The differences between NCC and NESREA had affected the activities
of the Department of Environmental Assessment of the Federal
Ministry of Environment which is charged with the responsibility of
implementing Environmental Impacts Assessment (EIA) in Nigeria.
Being in charge of evaluation, analysis and certification of EIAs in
all sectors in Nigeria, evaluation and certification of EIAs for planned
telecommunication masts (BTS) became a difficult task for the
department due the technical discrepancy between NCC and
NESREA standards.

Subsequently, the Environmental Assessment Department initiated an
action to resolve the conflict for sustainable development. A five (5)
member committee was set up to address the conflict involving the
Permanent Secretary, Federal Ministry of Communication Technology;
Permanent Secretary, Federal Ministry of Environment; The Executive
Vice Chairman, NCC; The Director General, NESREA and, the
Director, Environmental Assessment Department. The committee
had series of meetings for a period of about six (6) months evaluating
all technical issues relating to the minimum distance for BTS from
inhabited structures.




96                                       Chapter 2
                                                     Case Study 3:
                                                     Resolving
                                                     Institutional Conflicts
                                                     For Sustainable
                                                     Development




At the end of the committee’s meetings; a distance of ten (10)
meters was adopted for telecommunication towers in Nigeria to
the nearest habitable building. However; the committee agreed that
all the existing telecommunication towers across the country that
have maintained five (5) meters setback should not be penalized for
violating the law by NESREA. This amicable resolution of conflict
has significantly accelerated the EIA process for telecommunication
industry in Nigeria, which will in turn fast track telecommunication
coverage in Nigeria, so direly needed for sustainable development.

In conclusion, the amicable resolution of conflicts between various
government Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) has
the potential to bring about harmonious working relationships
that benefit sustainable development of any nation. This experience
therefore advocates that whenever there is conflict between
executive agencies due to differing standards of guidelines, the
most recommendable way of addressing it is through dialogue,
collaboration and consensus, keeping a balance between the
expected risks and benefits of a given measure with the cost of
compliance for a particular sector (this e.g. prevented NESREA
from insisting on retrofitting all towers built in the past with a lesser
distance than 10 m).




                           Chapter 2                                        97
      Practical approach
2.1.3	




— Practical approach — The following practical skills and
behavioral aspects are relevant in making environmental regulatory
oversight work more effectively in FCV affected situations:

	    	 Technical skills: In order to be effective, environmental
        regulators require access to an extensive enforcement
        arsenal including standards, codified compliance criteria,
        fees, fines and strong linkages to penal codes. Moreover, a
        sound knowledge of the typical technologies and methods
        in a given sector, e.g. pollution management, energy and
        resource conservation, land management or biodiversity
        protection greatly enhances the regulator’s credibility in
        the dialogue with the regulated entities, facilitates finding
        workable solutions and reasonable compromise, and
        increases the likelihood that regulatory action will in fact
        improve environmental conditions and / or performance.

	    	 Soft skills: Include the capacity to convince others of
        the importance of E&S concepts, such as sustainability;
        ability to work with many different parties to ensure E&S is
        integrated on all the different levels it should be. In this
        context cooperation with the police is critical, as persuasion
        may not always work and have to be replaced with higher
        enforcement pressure. It is important that at least a
        select group of law enforcers have an understanding of
        environmental law and management approaches, and here
        the regulator’s skills in communication concepts, and
        managing executive approaches will be very important.




98                                    Chapter 2
	   	 Results mindfulness: –sometimes it is really hard to win
       everything – choose your battles carefully. Let go of the
       small things. But be careful though, as small concessions
       may create precedence for bigger concessions…

	   	 Context consideration: Fragile and conflict affected
       environments require sensitive and flexible approaches when
       it comes to regulatory enforcement. For example, Burkina
       Faso shares long and porous borders with Mali and Niger.
       The region is under severe security threats from several
       armed groups, and environmental regulators thus need to
       develop tailored, flexible approaches for their enforcement
       objectives in this area.

	The approach used includes close cooperation with the local
  authorities to map the most hazardous areas (which are of
  course quite dynamic), and to establish geographical “red
  zones” where active conflict makes it too dangerous to monitor
  and enforce in person. The regulators then “set up shop” in
  the nearest safe village to the red zones and collect information
  using proxy methods such as phone conversations, text
  messaging and monitoring agents. For one project, a private
  security team was contracted who worked with local authorities
  to assess the security situation ahead of visits. Additional
  options to consider pursuing include:

		 — 
     Targeted, often abbreviated supervision & enforcement,
     focusing on selected key issues;
      se of local capacity, as locals often can move in areas
		 — U
     under threat less conspicuously and thus safer;


                        Chapter 2                                  99
      Practical approach
2.1.3	




		 — 
     Use of NGOs and CSOs that may be already present and
     operating in insecure areas;
		 — 
     Employment of local community members, which in some
     situations may be under lesser threats than Government
     officials;
		 — 	
      Flexible / opportunistic Supervision & Enforcement
		 — 
     Supervision / monitoring by remote sensing techniques,
     possibly as simple as Google Earth, or using aerial or
     satellite imagery; cooperation with military operations may
     be useful to get information from regular flyovers; the use
     of commercial (= non-military) unmanned aircraft has much
     advanced and may be an option worth considering.
		 — 
     No supervision & enforcement, e.g. if the risk and effort is
     disproportionate to the expected environmental benefits
     from the regulatory activity. For a decision not to enforce
     the maximum effective environmental risk from a particular
     project or operation should alo be considered.
		 — 	
      Self-reporting by proponents, and community monitoring
      and reporting

	      Consultation and participation: Especially in FCV
      	
       situations obtaining and sharing information can be a
       critical factor in several ways, which underscores the
       importance of transparency, consultations and disclosure.
       The following thoughts are put forth for consideration:

		 — 	
      Local populations may actually profit from, and thus have
      a strong interest in regulatory enforcement, especially in
      sectors with high potential environmental impacts, high



100                                  Chapter 2
      pollution potential, or high demand for land (e.g. extractive
      industries, large scale agriculture, harvesting of nature
      resources, such as logging). Their perception of the
      regulator as their ally and protector from environmental
      harm can — if regulatory enforcement is executed in an
      unbiased, fair and diligent manner — often ensure their
      cooperation and participation.
		 — 	
      Inclusive consultations may improve the security situation
      by making the local populations more inclined to provide
      vital, security-related information to regulators, and help
      regulators become part of the local fabric, rather than
      complying with insurgent or terrorist groups.
		 — 	
      Properly informed and consulted local populations may be
      more inclined to facilitate the regulator’s work by acting
      as proxies, monitoring agents and information collectors.
      Given the high penetration of mobile networks and phone
      use, crowd-sourcing techniques (such as e.g. the Ushahidi
      Platform) could be applied on a broader scale with a
      cooperative population.
		 — 	
      Consultations may also be an important contributor to
      better understanding the drivers and dynamics of an armed
      conflict such as an insurgency, rebellion or ideologically
      motivated terrorism, on a local level. This would not only
      be an important factor to better understand the overall
      security situation, but also anticipate if regulatory
      intervention could have any effect, and if so if rather net
      mitigating or aggravating.




                        Chapter 2                               101
Useful links
Notes




  Useful Links:

  Valuable information that is of high detail and often real time can
  be found at the following, web-based global data platforms:


  Global Forest Watch: http://www.globalforestwatch.org/


  Protected Planet: http://www.protectedplanet.net/


  The Land Matrix: http://www.landmatrix.org/en/


  Flexicadastre: http://www.spatialdimension.com/Map-Portals


  Global Earth Observation System of Systems (GEOSS):	


  http://www.earthobservations.org


  Geo-Wikki Platform: http://www.geo-wiki.org/


  IBAT for Business: https://www.ibatforbusiness.org/


  Climate explorer: http://toolkit.climate.gov/climate-explorer


  Climate resilience toolkit: http://toolkit.climate.gov/tools


  Climate change media watch: http://www.ecoresearch.net/climate/




102                                      Chapter 2
Chapter 2   103
Notes




104      Chapter 2
Chapter 2   105
2.2	 Management Approaches
        and Tools
2.2.1	 Project-related solutions




Management Approaches and Tools — Project-related
solutions — Often, projects demand regulatory solutions tailored
to the nature and / or the limitations of the specific project.
When considering project-related solutions, both constraints and
opportunities should be taken into account. Sometimes a best fit
for purpose solution will have to be modified in the face of cost
limitations — an issue that will be discussed in greater detail in the
section “Scope of Remedies” below. Additionally there are times
when aggregate solutions, or the strategic combination of a
number of project-related solutions, are a more effective way to
address environmental and social impacts.

Consider the following example of a pragmatic compromise
reached specifically for a specific project, the Olkaria Geothermal
field in Hell’s Gate National Park, Naivasha, Kenya. For this
project of national importance, some of Kenya’s regulations on
biodiversity conversation and habitat protection were partially and
locally disabled.

Hell’s Gate near Naivasha is a unique landscape and an important
biodiversity area for mammals and especially birds. It has several
scenic spots that are well known attractions, sought out by local and
international tourists. It also offers several unique landscape features
(see figure 7), e.g. steep and high cliffs that offer refuge and niches
for rare and endangered species.

However, Hell’s Gate also lies above a geothermal anomaly, with
a very steep temperature gradient, evident through numerous
naturally occurring hot springs and steam vents. The geothermal



106                                  Chapter 2
Well-functioning       realities and employ    Figure 7: KTF
regulation cannot      creative, adaptive,     workshop participants
be blind to project    sometimes               exploring the unique
realities, but needs   unconventional          landscape features
to consider ground     regulatory              of Hell’s Gate
                       approaches.             National Park




power production potential is of a significant dimension for the
country and production cost is comparatively low. Current installed
capacity is ca. 500 MW, and mid-term plans aim to add another
1,000 MW, with the full development potential well over 5,000 MW.
Moreover, geothermal energy is renewable, non-polluting and
carbon-neutral, thus also from the environmental point of view a
desirable energy source. However, there are also a number of
negative environmental impacts associated with geothermal power
production, which are exacerbated by the location in a national
park (see figure 8). Roads and pipelines fragment habitats and often
cause secondary impacts, such as land degradation and erosion.
Noise and odors (especially H2S) from steam vents affect wildlife,
and the impact on the landscape has been significant and has led
to effects on tourism.



                        Chapter 2                                107
2.2.1	 Project-related solutions               With all the best
                                                intentions laid down on
                                                paper — proportionate
                                                and smart enforcement
                                                is key to balancing
                                                economic and
                                                ecological outcomes.


To reconcile the conflicting interests around Hell’s Gate National
Park, conservation aspects on the one hand, national economic
interests on the other, a MOU was developed between two national
agencies, the Kenya Wildlife Service (KWS) as conservation
agency, and KENGEN as developer and operator of geothermal
power plants. The MOU seeks to ensure that the exploitation
of geothermal power in the park is accomplished with minimal
environmental disruption and damage, but — while well
conceptualized — lacks clout and determination in its enforcement.
With better enforcement tools and more leverage from the
conservation angle the MOU could actually have become an
effective management instrument, that would have pushed
KENGEN to rise above “business as usual”. An enforcement-biased
MOU would have helped KENGEN — with regulatory pressure — to
develop awareness towards the specific environmental sensitivities
in Hell’s Gate, and respond to them with innovative, adaptive
technologies, practices and management approaches.

While the MOU has not been very well implemented it nevertheless
offers an interesting and innovative way of dealing with the nexus
of biodiversity and energy production. While issuing such MOUs
to delineate exceptional circumstances is not the usual practice
for Kenya’s environmental authorities (such as KWS and NEMA), it
was considered appropriate given the importance of both positions
in the competing interests of KWS and KENGEN for sustainable
development in Kenya. The MOU clearly needed a more precise
plan for implementation, including clearer ground rules for
KENGEN’s operations, higher awareness of staff, a more stringent
compliance framework (with monitorable compliance criteria,



108                                 Chapter 2
                        Figure 8: Brine          and the adjacent
                        pond with significant    vegetated slope:
                        erosional damage,        A telltale sign of
                        affecting both the       poor environmental
                        structural stability     management.




and meaningful fines / penalties for noncompliance, especially
by Contractors), and overall management including budget and
high level support and advocacy from within KENGEN. Had these
implementation-oriented mechanisms been built into the MOU it
would likely have better performed as a project-related solution
appropriate for the situation.

In other cases, environmental regulators should be cognizant
of situations where it is more strategic to combine a number of
different, project-specific related solutions to achieve higher
impact by unlocking synergies. For example, it might make more
sense to pursue larger, aggregate offsets for several similar
projects, instead of isolated, project-specific biodiversity offsets.



                         Chapter 2                                    109
2.2.1	 Project-related solutions                           Figure 9:
                                                            Un-coordinated offsets
                                                            from four different
                                                            mine operators:




Individual offsets for four mine sites




         0   5   10 15 20 25 kilometres
                                           Converted land           Semi-deciduous
                                                                    forest
                                           Moist evergreen          Moist evergreen
                    villages               secondary forest         forest




As discussed in an earlier section, the principles of environmental
mitigation, including biodiversity offsets, promote to achieve zero
net loss (and preferably a net gain) of environmental performance
of quality.

However, offsets, particularly project-specific offsets, are often
challenging, and do not yield optimal results, for the following
reasons:

	      Companies often lack knowledge, experience and resources
      	
       to achieve effective offsets, despite often high transaction
       costs of such measures;



110                                       Chapter 2
                              Figure 10: Scheme for          area will be signifi-
                              aggregated offsets             cantly larger and
                              by coordinating the            can be identified
                              efforts and resources          in line with national
                              of 4 individual mine           conservation
                              operators. The offset          priorities.




Aggregate offset for four mine sites




       0   5   10 15 20 25 kilometres
                                          Converted land            Semi-deciduous
                                                                    forest
                                          Moist evergreen           Moist evergreen
                  villages                secondary forest          forest




	    Finding offset sites that meet the required criteria can
    	
     be difficult;

	    Long-term protection at offset sites can be very challenging,
    	
     especially beyond the lifetime of a specific project;

	    Numerous small individual offsets often fail to address issues
    	
     related to habitat fragmentation, retaining biodiversity
     corridors, and preserving ecosystems in an integrated
     manner. A possible unsatisfactory outcome could e.g. be
     “islands of conservation” as illustrated in figure 9, resulting
     from individual offsets for four different mines operating in
     the same region.



                              Chapter 2                                           111
2.2.1	 Project-related solutions                Thinking beyond the
2.2.2	 Scope of remedies                         single project scale,
                                                 e.g. regionally, can
                                                 greatly enhance the
                                                 effectiveness of
                                                 offset-measures.



Alternatively, aggregate offsets are more likely to result in
measurable, positive conservation outcomes as a consequence of
coordinated actions that compensate for biodiversity losses (see
Figure 10). They allow regulators as well as operators to overcome
financial, logistical and geographic limitations of individual project
offsets by pooling resources, knowledge and land. Moreover, often
a regulator involved with a specific sector (e.g. mining) in a specific
region will have a ‘birds-eye view’ of the totality of projects, and
will often be in a good position to propose schemes to effectively
aggregate offsets from a number of projects. Furthermore the
regulator may also (i) link aggregate offsets to national conservation
priorities, (ii) set up a national offsets framework and (iii) tie
aggregate offsets to other initiatives such as the conservation
priorities and support a protected area networks (REDD+1)

— Scope of remedies — As discussed in the preceding sections,
the range of options that an environmental regulator can pursue to
ensure environmental preservation is wide. However, the range of
options — or scope of remedies — that one can pursue in practical
terms in FCV-affected situations is often much more limited.
Lack of resources, incomplete, broken or absent processes and
systems, adapting to security constraints, juggling other pressing
development priorities, all these factors constrain both the
regulators and the regulated entities in achieving compliance.
Accordingly, the environmental regulator in FCV must be more
willing to compromise on regulatory standards and creatively
adapt their management approach accordingly. 1 	www.un-redd.org/




112                                  Chapter 2
                       Working with the        Figure 11: The 80:20
                       famous 80:20 rule…      rule visualized.




   RESULTS
100%

 80%




                20%                 EFFORT                       100%



Nevertheless, much can still be achieved even in the face of
significant constraints. According to the empirical “80:20 rule” ,
80% of outcomes or results can be attributed to 20% of the causes
or efforts for a given event (see Figure 11). In business, the 80-20
rule2 is used to help managers identify problems and determine
which operating factors are most important and should receive the
most attention based on an efficient use of resources. Resources
should be allocated to addressing the input factors have the most
effect on a company’s final results.

                                               2	 This is strictly NOT a
It can be applied just as well to
                                               scientific rule, but will be
environmental regulation in situations of
                                               confirmed as more or less
capacity and resource constraints; focus       applicable by a majority of
should be on addressing the primary 20%        environmental practitioners




                        Chapter 2                                          113
2.2.2	 Scope of remedies                      Figure 12: The 80:20
                                              rule implemented in
                                              construction site
                                              management.




causes rather than the full 100%. Consider waste disposal: The
most important objective is that waste is collected and safely
stored, which would eliminate the majority of environmental and
health hazards. Recycling and waste reduction can follow later
once effective systems for waste collection and disposal are
established. Environmental regulators often will have to search
for a solution that addresses immediate needs — it might not be
technically perfect but it will hopefully be the best fit for the
circumstances. In pollution management, especially the remediation
of legacy pollution, 80% of a pollutant can usually be recovered
with 20% of the cost that would be required to reclaim all 100%
of pollutants. The last 20% of the pollutant recovery usually show
an exponential rise in cost and effort (see Figure 11 above).



114                               Chapter 2
Similarly, health and safety risks to site personnel and adjacent
communities can often be mitigated to much lower levels with
comparatively simple means. Figure 12 below depicts a public
works site in the Central African Republic, where drainage channels
are cleaned from debris, garbage and sediment to enhance flood
protection. The safety measures in place are simple, comprising
signposting, barriers, and personal protective equipment (PPE)
for the workers, but thus help to reduce some of the most
pronounced and common accident risks, such as traffic accidents,
falls, and injuries from moving machinery. Also the risk of workers
contracting diseases is much reduced by wearing PPE, especially
impermeable gloves, boots and masks. Certainly there are
remaining gaps, but for the given country context this is one
manifest example that compliance with good practice can work.

The water supply and sewage plant in Naivasha, Kenya,
demonstrates an example of challenges experienced by a publicly
owned company that on the one hand operates under tight
financial constraints (prices for water and tariffs for sewage being
fixed by the local authorities), on the other hand is required to
meet strict quality criteria and the same environmental standards
as any other entity in Kenya. Drinking water is taken from Lake
Naivasha and purified to sufficient quality to be consumable, while
sewage is treated to sufficient quality to be discharged back into
the lake. While the lake itself has some natural regeneration and
attenuation capacity, poor sewage treatment will make the supply
of quality drinking water progressively difficult. This conundrum is
met by plant management with near-heroic efforts to operate as
good as possible on a shoestring, with much creativity, improvisation,
and ingenious ways to repair their ageing equipment.


                         Chapter 2                                 115
2.2.2	 Scope of remedies
2.2.3	Realism of
       regulatory approach




Nonetheless, if the local authorities are unwilling to adjust the
prices for water and tariffs for sewage, regulators at one point will
have to accept that environmental standards can no longer be
met, unless the public is willing to pay for at least the core envi-
ronmental services. While 20% of a hypothetical “perfect” budget
may buy 80% of compliance, dipping below 10%, or even 5% of
what would be required will clearly have negative consequences.

Achieving compliance following the 80/20 rule of thumb would
likely benefit from negotiated compliance, where negotiation is
used to determine the terms by which regulatory standards will
be enforced against a particular firm (or other regulated entity)
that is out of compliance with a particular regulatory standard.

— Realism of regulatory approach — As discussed from the
outset of this handbook, the job of an environmental regulator
is generally a difficult one. The real value of environmental
components and ecosystem services are not recognized or
quantified in monetary terms in most countries’ national
accounting systems. On project level environmental regulation
may often be seen as an obstacle to entrepreneurship, economic
development and the building of a “modern” state or society.
Therefore, more often than not environmental concerns and
arguments will take a lesser priority than economic growth.
Regulators must accordingly adjust their approach to the full
spectrum of environmental regulation — from developing a
functional legislative base to enforcing compliance — to a better
fit of regulatory approaches with the reality of their context.




116                                 Chapter 2
Maintaining political support for the production and enforcement
of EIAs at both central and local level, for example, can be
challenging. Further, particularly during election periods,
inconsistent political positions and statements on the environment
can undermine the integrity (as based on proven scientific
concepts and best practice) of the monitoring and compliance
process. At the same time, development that does not take into
account environmental impacts and losses of natural capital,
effectively undermines the foundation upon which economic
growth is built (in recent years “green accounting approaches”
showed that some strongly resource-based economies, e.g. the
Russian Federation, would effectively have negative GDP growth,
if the cost of resource depletion and environmental damages
were duly accounted for).

Indeed, there is no simple answer when it comes to balancing
environmental and economic interests. In FCV affected situations a
third factor often is the feasibility of environmental regulatory work
under security constraints and access restrictions to certain areas.
The best way forward almost always involves a dual approach
that promotes economic interests while addressing environmental
concerns. Context should be taken into account as relative
economic benefits and environmental threats vary considerably
from one situation to the next.

Regulators could use transparent forms of dialogue (i.e. carried
out largely open to the public) to deal with a culture of non-
compliance and political interference. Effective checks and
balances are indispensable to harmonize development objectives,



                         Chapter 2                                 117
2.2.3	Realism of                               Establishing a regulatory
       regulatory approach                      system that works
2.2.4	 Practical approach                       effectively, requires
                                                clear recognition of the
                                                given economic,
                                                governance, security
                                                and technical context


poverty alleviation and conservation interests, and negotiate
well-informed trade-offs. Additionally, the use of economic and
social incentives for environmental regulation has provided a basis
for payment of fees, levies and charges under the permit and
license system. This should go hand in hand with valuing natural
resources and their contribution to GDP.

— Practical Approach — Establishing a regulatory system that
works effectively, requires clear recognition of the given economic,
governance, security and technical context, and takes account
of the prevailing environmental baseline, both in terms of actual
state of the environment, but also the prevailing management
practices and awareness. This requires of course a rather wide
scope of technical skills within a regulatory team or agency, which
will need staff with backgrounds as diverse as natural science,
environmental engineering, economics, environmental policy and
governance / security.

These technical skills need to be complemented by an array of
soft skills, such as diplomacy and negotiation, results mindfulness,
context consideration, and the ability and willingness to identify
and accept pragmatic compromise that recognizes and respects
all interests.

Finding pragmatic solutions can often be a “moral balancing
act”, where compromises may sometimes be seen as a result of
vested interests, rather than the best negotiable option. Thus,
consultation and participation of the public in the process, and
keeping the discussions and dialogue on issues open and



118                                 Chapter 2
Food for thought




                                                   Scott Wallace/World Bank



In some cases industries that may operate on small profit margins
and employ comparatively few people may still have considerable
environmental impacts. The artisan brickmaking industry is an
example for such, where small scale, barely profitable kilns
degrade and deforest land (clay mining, charcoal production)
and pollute the air (brick-baking) on a significant scale. Here a
stronger-handed regulatory approach would inflict little economic
damage (at least if measured on the national scale), but yield very
tangible environmental benefits. Alternatives to closing down
industries may also be the merging into cooperatives that would
firstly be easier to regulate, secondly — through economy of
scale — experience lesser challenges with compliance by sharing
costs and pooling environmental services (see also example of
Malian dyers).



                       Chapter 2                                      119
2.2.4	 Practical approach                      Finding pragmatic
                                               solutions can often be a
                                               “moral balancing act”




transparent, can often be a key enabling factor. A public that has
trust in the process and the key players and has access to all
important criteria for decision-making, will be able to understand
the rationale behind compromise, and, flexible solutions for
specific problems that are outside the regulatory mainstream work.

The following figure 13 underscores that one factor, however, is
really key in being able to think and act “out of the box” without
compromising the regulators key mandate to act in the interest
of environmental quality, performance and sustainability:
This factor is the amalgamate of the regulator’s professional
knowledge, experience and ability to make an informed judgment
on specific situations.

The environmental regulator in her / his daily work navigates in a
hypothetical coordinate system, defined by the axes of “policy”
(between the extremes of rules based and principles-based) and
“practice” (between business as usual, and tailored, flexible
solutions). Especially in FCV affected situations experience and
testimony show that the quadrant defined by rules-based policy
and business as usual will probably show the poorest results, due
to the inherent rigidity and inability to respond to dynamically
evolving changes and challenges. The policy / practice
combination that will usually yield the best results will be in the
quadrant defined by a more principles-based (or results-oriented)
policy, and a business approach that allows flexible solutions,
instead of prescribed, stringent procedures.




120                                Chapter 2
                          Figure 13: Defines the     circle (lower left) is
                          preferred regulatory       empirically the least
                          approach (circle upper     successful regulatory
                          right) in a coordinate     approach in FCV
                          system of policy and       situations
                          practice. The red




                 POLICY          Principles-based


                                         Adaptive
                                         proactive
                                         scenario

   Business
   as usual               Knowledge
                          Experience
                          Judgement
                                                        Flexible,
PRACTICE
                                                        tailored solutions
              Rigid
              reactive
              scenario




                 Rules-based




                          Chapter 2                                      121
Notes




122      Chapter 2
Chapter 2   123
Notes




124      Chapter 2
Chapter 2   125
Epilogue




           Dominic Chavez/World Bank




126                           Epilogue
                                        Dominic Chavez/World Bank




Masaru Goto/World Bank




                         Introduction                        127
Epilogue




The figure on page 119 illustrates, and experience
and empirical data show, that a behavioral change
towards more flexible, yet effective regulatory
approaches need solid professional capabilities,
and the ability to recognize, understand, judge
a situation and to develop a tailored, workable
approach. Without this key factor of professional
judgment “flexibility” might quickly turn into a
dilution of environmental due diligence requirements,
and “tailored solutions” might result in the lack of
compliance and resulting significant environmental
deterioration and damage.

To transmit this crucial knowledge, experience and
judgment to regulators was the main rationale for
the KTF financed workshop on regulatory practice in
FCV situations, and this handbook hopes to further
consolidate the information and discussions from the
workshop in Naivasha in June 2014. While this booklet
will certainly not offer a tailored solution for every
regulatory problem, it may offer guidance regarding
the general approach, direction and methodology in
a wide range of situations and problems, specifically
in FCV affected countries and situations.

128
