                                                                                                103190


                                            Approach Paper

               Growing the Rural Non-Farm Economy to Alleviate Poverty:
               An IEG Evaluation of World Bank Group Support 2004-2014

                                             December 8, 2015


Background
1.       Assisting the development of the rural non-farm economy (RNFE) is essential to the
World Bank Group’s twin goals of poverty alleviation and shared prosperity. The non-farm
economy is a crucial pathway out of poverty for households in rural areas, supplementing or
substituting for agricultural income. Through employment or direct entrepreneurship, nonfarm
activity can benefit both the poor and other rural residents. Thus increasing the opportunities and
abilities of the rural poor to benefit from the rural nonfarm economy is thus essential for goals of
poverty elimination and shared prosperity.

2.       Most of the world’s poor live in rural areas. In 2010, over 900 million poor people
resided in rural areas, an estimated 78 percent the total poor. Taking into account projected rates
of migration and population growth, it is estimated that 2.8 billion people will live in rural areas
in 2050, with roughly two-thirds of this population located in two regions of the world (South
Asia and Africa). While some of the rural poor will migrate, most will not. Therefore, most
income gains to end poverty will need to come from income generating activities that are capable
of lifting rural populations out of poverty.1

3.      While agriculture has traditionally accounted for a large share of rural household incomes
- over 80 percent of all rural households farm to some extent - the empirical evidence points to
the existence of a large and growing rural non-farm economy.2 It is estimated that rural non-farm
enterprises account for 35 to 50 percent of rural income in developing countries.3 And, because
employment data typically measure only primary occupations, to the exclusion of secondary and
seasonal pursuits, these estimates would tend to understate the importance of rural non-farm
activities.

4.      Rural non-farm activities are an important part of rural poor households’ complex
income strategies. Often highly seasonal, rural nonfarm activity fluctuates with the availability
of agricultural raw materials and in rhythm with household labor and financial flows between

1
  Olinto, P., Beegle, K., Sobrado, C., Uematsu, H. (2013). The State of the Poor: Where Are the Poor, Where is
Extreme Poverty Harder to End, and What is the Current Profile of the World’s Poor. Economic Premise, October.
World Bank.
2
  Carletto, Gero et al. Rural Income Generating Activities in Developing Countries: Reassessing Evidence. Journal
of Agricultural and Development Economics. Volume 2, No. 1 2007 pp. 146-193.
3
  Haggblade, Steven, Peter Hazell and Thomas Reardon. (2007). Transforming the Rural Nonfarm Economy. IFPRI.
Washington

                                                        1 
                                                                                                                     
 
farm and non-farm activities (Wiggins and Hazell, 2008). For the landless and the very poor,
often employed as farm laborers, sustainable income gains at the household level are generally
associated with additional wages earned from non-farm employment and self-employment
opportunities.4 However, households that rely solely on farm labor tend to be amongst the
poorest.5

5.       In the rural non-farm economy, the poor are often engaged in subsistence level,
micro-level or household enterprises, which are located at the village level and are operated by
a single person, owner-operating unit, or small units engaging family members. Often referred to
a subsistence activities, these small enterprises provide employment opportunities in the absence
of more profitable alternatives, and constitute secondary sources of income, as they tend to be
intermittent, part-time and seasonal. Surplus earnings are often too meager too support
reinvestment, and are used for household expenditures instead. These enterprises require low
levels of skill and capital, so potential entrepreneurs face low barriers to entry. The non-poor are
more often engaged in non-farm sector enterprises that employ wage labor and use a higher level
of skill and capital intensity than do household enterprises. Some of these enterprises have the
potential for scaling up, as well as increasing their capital intensity and market size.

6.      There is emerging evidence that rural diversification and secondary town
development leads to faster poverty reduction and more inclusive growth patterns than
metropolitization.6 An emerging line of inquiry in the agricultural economics community,
several recent studies have highlighted the role that the rural non-farm economy plays in
reducing poverty. In rural Tanzania, a study of 3,300 individuals found that close to half of the
28 percentage point decline in poverty over the past decade could be attributed to farmers
transitioning out of agriculture into rural non-farm activities and jobs in secondary towns. While
those moving to the city experienced faster consumption growth, most farmers who exited
poverty did so by finding their way into the rural nonfarm economy and the neighboring towns.
In India, a long term study of a village in western Uttar Pradesh concluded that the steady decline
in poverty in this village has been associated with increased access to non-farm jobs, including
for many of its poorest households. A general equilibrium analysis conducted in Ethiopia
concluded that redirecting urban growth toward towns rather than cities, leads to more inclusive
growth and poverty reduction.

7.     The farm and non-farm sectors are related through production and consumption linkages,
and through the supply of labor and capital, although the strength of these linkages will vary
depending on the specific stage of transformation. Understanding these phenomena – which vary
both between and within countries – is important for subsequent prioritization. For example, in
                                                       
4 IFAD. 2011. Rural Poverty Report. Rome, Italy: Quintily.
5 Tacoli, Cecilia. 2007. Poverty, Inequality and the Underestimation of Rural-Urban Linkages. Development. 50,
90-95. Doi: 10:1057/palgrave.development. 1100375.
6
  Christiaensen, Luc; Introduction: rural diversification, secondary towns and poverty reduction: do not miss the
middle, Agricultural Economics 44 (2013) 433-434.
Christiaensen, Luc, Joachim De Weerdt, Yasuyuki Todoc; Urbanization and poverty reduction: the role of rural
diversification and secondary towns, Agricultural Economics 44 (2013) 447-459.
Dorosh, Paul, James Thurlow; Agriculture and small towns in Africa, Agricultural Economics 44 (2013) 449-459. 

                                                          2 
 
                                                                                                         
 
some cases, if farm income growth (and associated backward and forward linkages) is the driver
of non-farm rural incomes, focusing on agriculture could be the most effective way to increase
rural non-farm incomes. If the link between farm and non-farm rural incomes is weaker, then a
more balanced approach may be more effective.

8.       The poor, however, face specific constraints that limit their ability to profitably benefit
from opportunities offered by the rural non-farm economy. The poor engage in the least
productive non-farm activities. This is due to a lack of access to human capital (education,
skills), finance, infrastructure (roads, power) and social capital (identity based exclusion, lack of
networks, gender). While the relative weights of these constraints differ by country and area,
evidence from the literature suggests that increased access to these forms of capital can yield
considerably increased opportunities for the poor in the non-farm economy (Box 1).

9.      Various studies have shown that there is a positive correlation between increased
access to rural services and the ability of the poor to benefit from the rural non-farm
economy. In China, authors Luo and Zhu (2006) find that non-farm activity plays an increasingly
important role in rural household income. An analysis of LSMS data from the provinces of Hebei
and Liaoning revealed that non-farm activity reduces rural income inequality by raising the
income of poor households to a larger extent than that of rich households. Improving rural
infrastructure and implementing universal basic education were found to be critical in enabling
the rural poor to benefit from the rural non-farm economy. In India, Lanjouw (2002) finds that
access to regular non-farm jobs is positively correlated with individual and household
characteristics such as education and landholdings, implying that the most disadvantaged in
village societies are rarely employed in the non-farm sector, especially those activities which are
well-paid. Yet, while the most disadvantaged in India may not directly participate in the non-
farm sector, the sector’s impact on agricultural wage rates is considerable, and therefore of
indirect importance to poverty reduction. In Tanzania, in stark contrast to the formal sector,
where taxation and other regulatory constraints have been identified as key constraints in other
countries, infrastructure constraints (but not regulatory ones) pose a formidable barrier to rural
households’ participation in rural non-farm activities and to investment and increased
productivity by existing ones.




                                                  3 
 
                                                                                                                                       
 
    Box 1. Access to the Rural Non-farm Economy: Evidence from the Literature and Evaluative Material
     Capital Constraints     Evidence from the Literature
     Human Capital:          Evidence suggests that even relatively small gains in educational outcomes may yield
     Education, Skills       considerably improved employment prospects in the non-farm sector (Lanjouw, Jean O. and
                             Peter Lanjouw. 2001). The rural young lack fundamentally in foundation skills that are,
                             necessary to compete for employment. Rural youth with foundation skills have a better chance
                             of non-farm work. Most poor rural youth in developing countries are likely to depend on
                             smallholder farming and non-farm work for the foreseeable future. New developments in
                             agricultural production and marketing are likely to mean that job opportunities will be scarcer
                             and demand higher skills, so the rural non-farm sector will become more important as a source
                             of jobs for poor rural youth, who will need improved skills to make the best of the available
                             opportunities. Many rural youth, particularly women, need to improve their literacy and
                             numeracy skills as a first step to ensuring that they can benefit from other agricultural and non-
                             farm skills development programmes (UNESCO, Global Monitoring Report, 2012).
     Physical Capital:       Infrastructure exercises significant influence on the likelihood of finding non-farm employment.
     Roads, Power            Households with electricity connection are more likely to have household members that are
     Electricity             participating in the non-farm sector (Zhu and Luo 2006; Sundaram-Stukel, Deininger and Jin).
     Financial Capital       Lack of access to a wide spectrum of financial instruments, including safe savings, (for
     (Real Finance)          insurance, or to smooth inter temporal consumption), and to payments networks for small
                             financial transactions limits the ability of the rural poor to create or participate in rural non-farm
                             activities and to invest in existing ones to increase productivity.

     Social Capital:         Excluded groups, scheduled castes and scheduled tribes are less likely to find employment in
                             the well paid non-farm occupations. Such individuals also earn lower non-farm incomes
                             (Lanjouw, Himanshu, Mukhopadhyay and Murgai).
     Land Markets/Access     Village studies in India indicate that access to regular non-farm jobs is positively correlated
                             with landholdings.
     Location/Connectivity   Location and institutions are increasingly recognized as crucial determinants of economic
                             performance. (2009 World Development Report on Economic Geography).
    Source: IEG.

10.    Participation in rural non-farm (as well as farm) also varies along gender lines.
Migration patterns are different for men and women. Household types and composition matter in
unique ways for men and women (e.g., widows, divorced, presence or absence of able men in a
household and their impact on the ability to farm or conduct a household enterprise). Access to
resources is very gender specific because rights differ (access to land, primarily, but also finance,
technology, etc.). Other constraints that are also gender-specific include time constraints and care
needs so that women may decide to engage in lower productivity activities. Gender
discrimination also exists with regard to accessing opportunities and wage earnings.

Alignment with IEG’s Strategic Engagement Areas
11.     Following consultations with internal and external stakeholders, IEG selected three cross-
cutting Strategic Engagement Areas for the FY16-18 work program. These three topics –
Inclusive Growth, Sustainable Service Delivery and Environmental Sustainability - lie at the
heart of the new WBG Strategy. They are designed to maximize the collection of evaluation
evidence and unpack the overall challenge of meeting the twin goals in a sustainable manner;
ensure better coordination and synergy on thematic issues across IEG product lines and
departments; and create a stronger platform for medium-term strategic engagement with
Management on critical development challenges.


                                                             4 
 
                                                                                                      
 
12.     This evaluation is fully aligned with the Inclusive Growth Strategic Engagement Area
which recognizes that a key development challenge is generating growth that is inclusive,
resilient and sustainable, and that creates productive employment for the poor. It also recognizes
that – to eliminate extreme poverty – World Bank Group assistance must support a holistic
approach to tackling the constraints that affect the poor’s ability to participate in and benefit
from productive employment opportunities. Thus, in addition to focusing directly on the creation
of productive opportunities along the agricultural value chain – for example – it must also
support the enabling environment by providing access to basic services, investing in human
capital, enabling voice and promoting empowerment especially of the most marginalized

Evaluation Aim and Scope
13.     Evaluation Aim: In line with IEG’s first objective, this evaluation aims to deepen the
evidence concerning the effectiveness of WBG support to the development of a sustainable and
inclusive rural non-farm economy. The rural non-farm economy is a vital pathway for many
rural poor households to lift themselves out of poverty and thus a key building block of the twin
goals of ending extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity. The evaluation proposes to take
on an area that will be critical for realizing further gains in poverty in the coming decade. To
date, none of IEG’s evaluations have conducted a multi-sectoral assessment to learn about what
works in this segment of the economy.

14.     The evaluation will be aimed at the Sustainable Development Network and its Vice-
Presidency in the World Bank and the Manufacturing, Agribusiness and Services (MAS)
department in IFC, including staff that are affiliated with investments and agribusiness related
advisory services. Key counterpart groups include the Rural Livelihood and Agricultural Jobs
Global Solution Group, the Value Chains Global Solution Group, the Jobs Cross-Cutting
Solution Area, the Rural group within GPSURR, and the Competitive Industries practice within
the Trade and Competitiveness GP. The evaluation will also target relevant managers and
underwriters in MIGA dealing with its guarantees in this area. A secondary audience within the
World Bank will include Finance and Markets staff working on financial inclusion in rural areas
and IFC Staff in the Financial Institutions Group also working on financial inclusion in rural
areas. Other stakeholders include the Bank’s international and bilateral donor partners and
programs.

15.     Evaluation Scope: The rural non-farm economy comprises a highly heterogeneous
collection of trading, agro-processing, manufacturing, and service activities. There are also
strong regional differences within countries as a result of differing natural resource endowments,
labor supply, location, infrastructural investments and culture. The scale also varies, from part-
time self-employment in household-based cottage industries to large-scale agro-processing and
warehousing facilities operated by large multinational firms. Sectorally, manufacturing typically
accounts for only 20-25 percent of rural non-farm employment, while trade, transport,
construction and other services account for 75 to 80 percent (Wiggins and Hazell, 2008).
Spatially, the composition of non-farm activity varies as well. While home-based cottage
industries predominate in rural areas, secondary towns and cities support an increasing number
of activities undertaken by farm households as independent producers in their homes, the

                                                5 
 
                                                                                                        
 
subcontracting of work to farm families by urban-based firms, non-farm activity in village and
rural town enterprises, and commuting between rural residences and urban non-farm jobs
(Wiggins and Hazell, 2008).

16.     At the global level, since in many countries and lagging regions the link between
agriculture and the growth of the non-farm economy is strong, the evaluation will assess the role
of the World Bank Group in supporting rural non-farm income generating activities that are
derived from and directly linked to farm activities e.g. that add value along supply chains
(production, aggregation, distribution, marketing, transport etc.). IEG will also assess the World
Bank Group’s role in helping to provide the rural poor with sustainable and productive income
generating opportunities outside of the agricultural sector, in areas like services, manufacturing
or tourism, for example. The scope of the evaluation is determined by the types of activities that
have were identified by the preliminary Portfolio Review, described in detail in the following
section. It points to activities and projects, outside of the agriculture sector, that, for example,
have supported agglomerated and spatial approaches, supported small and medium sized rural
enterprises, increased competitiveness and access to finance. The global level assessment
excludes some activities, such as forest management, fisheries and mining since IEG had
recently conducted or is planning to conduct reviews of these sectors (see “Other IEG Studies”).
Nonetheless, the findings of these evaluations will be referenced in formulating a holistic
understanding of WBG engagement with the nonfarm economy.

17.     At the country level, the scope of the evaluation extends beyond those activities intended
to provide productive income generating opportunities to the rural poor. It also considers the
specific stage of transformation in the country and within different areas, the constraints to
developing a more inclusive sustainable rural transformation, country strategies and the broader
country context of WBG efforts in the country to promote in the country employment and create
an enabling environment that would benefit nonfarm earning opportunities Depending on the
country diagnostic, these interventions may include, but are not limited to, targeted support for
human capital development (education, skills), rural finance, connectivity (roads, electricity),
identity based exclusion, and the investment climate, including business development services,
business linkages support etc. Special focus will also be placed on the specific gender dynamics
present in the rural non-farm economy and the interventions that are needed to reduce gender
disparity in the rural non-farm economy.

The World Bank Group’s Analytical and Strategic Frameworks Include a
Focus on the Rural Non-Farm Economy
THE WORLD DEVELOPMENT REPORT ON AGRICULTURE (2008): THE THREE WORLDS

18.     The World Bank Group’s approach in the Agriculture Sector is based on an extensive
amount of analysis conducted for the World Development Report on Agriculture (2008), which
recommended that when crafting policy, the World Bank Group should consider the specific
growth pathways of client countries -- with particular attention to their dependence on
agriculture and rural poverty. The 2008 WDR introduced the idea of the “Three Worlds of
Agriculture” (Figure 1) which clusters countries around their relative stage of transformation

                                                 6 
 
                                                                                                     
 
with regard to the importance of agriculture to growth, rural livelihoods, and the efficiency of
backward and forward linkages between the agricultural sector and other production and
consumption sectors that have the potential to help reduce rural poverty. A brief description of
the characteristic of these three worlds follows:

    Figure 1. The “Three Worlds” as expressed in the WDR on Agriculture (2008)




    Source: WDR. 2008.

    (a) Agriculture-based countries - where agriculture is a major source of growth,
        accounting for 32 percent of GDP growth on average—mainly because agriculture is a
        large share of GDP. This group of countries has about 417 million rural inhabitants,
        mainly in Sub-Saharan countries. Eighty-two percent of the rural Sub-Saharan
        population lives in agriculture-based countries.

    (b) Transforming countries – found mainly in South and East Asia where agriculture is
        no longer a major source of economic growth, contributing on average only 7 percent
        to GDP growth, but whereas poverty remains overwhelmingly rural (82 percent of all
        poor) and where rapidly rising rural-urban disparities and the persistence of extreme
        rural poverty are sources of social and political tension. This group has more than 2.2
        billion rural inhabitants.

    (c) Urbanized countries - where agriculture contributes directly even less to economic
        growth, 5 percent on average and poverty is mostly urban. Even so, rural areas still have
        45 percent of the poor, and agribusiness and the food industry and services account for
        as much as one third of GDP. Here, agriculture can help reduce remaining rural poverty
        through better integration into modern food markets and the development of rural and
        environmental services. Included in this group of 255 million rural inhabitants are most
        countries in Latin America and the Caribbean and in Europe and Central Asia. Eighty-
        eight percent of the rural populations in both regions are in urbanized countries.

                                                   7 
 
                                                                                                     
 
ANALYTICAL CONTRIBUTIONS SINCE THE AGRICULTURE WDR 2008 HAVE HELPED THE
WORLD BANK GROUP TO THINK MORE SPATIALLY

19.     A Focus on Economic Geography: Increased Attention to Lagging Regions and
Areas. The 2008 WDR’s “three world” typology was a useful starting point to identify discrete
areas of needed attention. Subsequent analytical work conducted for the 2009 World
Development Report on Economic Geography dug deeper and recommended the need for a more
nuanced understanding of the influence of country conditions and policies on the pace, pattern,
and consequences of rural-urban transitions.

20.     The work uncovered vast inequalities between countries within the three worlds, between
areas within a country, between rural and urban areas, and within cities themselves. While the
work substantiates the conventional wisdom that in both low and middle income countries, urban
areas are almost always better off than rural areas, it finds that the magnitude of rural-urban
inequalities is extremely variable across welfare measures and across countries. Even in
countries with the same level of urbanization or GDP per capita, the rural-urban welfare
differences may be enormous or relatively small. The welfare gap is not consistently wider in
low income countries than in middle-income countries. When measured by consumption and
stunting, the average rural-urban welfare difference is roughly the same, irrespective of a
country’s development. Comparing improvements in welfare in 41 low and middle income
countries during two survey intervals, findings suggest that there are a greater number of
divergences than there are convergences for consumption based welfare measures.

21.     The Global Monitoring Report (2013) on Rural-Urban Dynamics and the Millennium
Development Goals focused on spatial inequality. Utilizing estimates from more than 100 Living
Standard Measurement Surveys, the GMR found that households in the most prosperous areas of
several developing countries enjoy an average level of consumption that is 75 percent higher
than that of similar households in the lagging areas. The findings suggest that there is little
evidence that spatial inequalities will automatically diminish as countries develop. Rather,
empirical and qualitative analysis suggests that spatial divides are mainly a function of country
conditions, policies and institutions which, combined, determine the way by which a country
may choose to address or neglect drivers of rural poverty and the quality of growth.

World Bank Group Strategies
22.     The World Bank Group’s Agriculture Action Plans (FY10-FY12, FY13-15) have
explicitly recognized the importance of the rural non-farm economy, including the poverty
reduction potential of promoting more effective local production and expenditure linkages. In the
current Action Plan, launched 2010, it is included as one of the Plan’s major thematic areas of
assistance (Thematic Area 3: Facilitate Rural Non-Farm Income):

       Rural non-farm income is increasingly important in many countries and often
       provides critical linkages for agricultural growth as a vital source of savings and as
       a significant contribution to food access and food security. Growth of farm and rural
       non-farm sectors often has mutual benefits through production and expenditure
       linkages. As urban centers and associated job opportunities develop, labor migration
                                                   8 
 
                                                                                                         
 
          out of agriculture will increase. However, where there is excess labor in agriculture,
          a continued lag in urban job creation, and urban congestion, a priority is to promote
          rural non-farm employment in secondary towns, including for women, and to
          strengthen rural-urban linkages. Effective functioning of land markets is also
          necessary to facilitate both entry and exit from agriculture. Facilitating exit from
          agriculture, including the intergenerational transfer of assets, is an important issue
          facing many middle-income countries, many of which are also facing the challenge of
          an aging population. In addition, to strengthening land markets, the WBG will
          continue to support improvements to skills upgrading, the investment climate, and
          investment in rural infrastructure and livelihood programs.

    23. Embedded in this approach are five specific priority interventions that the Bank has
    supported over the past decade. These include: (1) an innovative line of analytical work on the
    rural investment climate; (2) investment in rural infrastructure; (3) skills upgrading and rural
    education; (4) rural livelihoods; and (5) youth employment. These priority lines of business – as
    articulated in the Agriculture Action Plan – are summarized below:

       Support for the Rural Investment Climate. The WBG piloted a set of agribusiness
        indicators through a series of Rural Investment Climate Studies in nine countries that
        were intended to inform policy dialogue and to stimulate investment.

       Investment in rural infrastructure. Recognizing that rural areas often have poor
        physical and communications infrastructure, the Bank would help to lower transaction
        costs, increase connectivity, and raise non-farm earnings, especially in densely
        populated lagging areas.

       Upgrading skills to expand job opportunities. The Bank recognizes that specific
        skills and training are necessary to promote non-farm activities (e.g.,
        subcontracting/outsourcing from urban to rural enterprises and households). More
        generally, it recognizes that enhanced rural education is important for improving the
        productivity of the non-farm sector, including support for vocational training for
        supply chain skills (production, marketing, transport), especially for women.

       Improve rural livelihoods. Recognizing the key role that local institutions play in
        facilitating access for the rural poor, the strategy made a commitment to expand its
        approach – already underway in South Asia – of supporting representative platforms
        of the rural poor that increase women’s access to household income, social, and
        financial services. Key areas of support envisioned as part of the livelihood operations
        would include (i) institutions of the poor that provide the initial “push” for collective
        action, development of “voice” and organized access to new economic opportunities;
        (ii) human capital development, which is essential to equip communities with the
        range of functional, entrepreneurial, administrative, technical, and social skills; (iii)
        networks and federation development to allow conversion of opportunities through
        economies of scale and greater representation and aggregation of demand; (iv) systems
        of capital development through access to credit, savings mobilization, insurance, and
        matching grants for asset creation and venture capital for the poor; (v) linkages with
                                                      9 
 
                                                                                                      
 
       markets and the private sector by facilitating access to markets and partnerships or
       “co-production” arrangements that support forward and backward linkages.

     Promotion of youth employment: When compared to adults, youth are more often
      employed under informal and casual contracts; earn less; work more hours; have less
      assets, in particular land; and lack access to finance. To promote youth employment,
      the World Bank Group would help to remove barriers for women and men youths to
      join the formal and informal labor force by improving youth access to land, capital,
      and skills, including by identifying entry points to add a youth lens to the ongoing and
      new projects and programs. In AFR, the Youth Employment Flagship AAA was also
      designed to help take stock of youth employment tailored programs, define actions to
      promote youth employment in wage and informal sectors, and identify entry points for
      youth in ongoing and new projects and programs.

24.     Other World Bank Strategies approved during the evaluation period support the
enabling environment for the development of the rural non-farm economy. While they do not
directly reference the development of this segment of the economy, several strategies support
more effective spatial development, skills and capacity strengthening, and more effective service
delivery in the rural space. Several strategies stand out in this regard. The World Bank Group
Sustainable Infrastructure Action Plan 2009-2011, for example, aims to improve the reach
and quality of infrastructure service delivery in a sustainable manner through increased financing
and leverage. Developed alongside the 2009 World Development Report on Economic
Geography, it draws attention to the rising spatial divides – between leading and lagging regions,
between rural and urban areas, and within large cities. The Plan notes that, “thinking
geographically can help stimulate growth by prioritizing across transport corridors that
physically connect the country to regional and international markets. While our understanding of
the dynamic impacts of infrastructure investments in bridging spatial gaps is still evolving, a
spatial development perspective will increasingly inform the World Bank’s advisory and
operational work to improve the contribution of infrastructure to growth and poverty reduction.”
Other strategies that have been approved during the evaluation period and that will form part of
the evaluation include the Financial Inclusion Support Framework, the World Bank Education
Strategy, the World Bank Social Protection and Labor Strategy and the World Bank Urban and
Local Government Strategy.

25.     IFC’s Agribusiness Strategic Action Plans (FY10-FY12, FY12-FY14) have been part
of an integrated World Bank approach that supports the implementation of the World Bank’s
Agriculture Action Plan. Interviews conducted for this approach explained that this alignment
occurred around the development of the World Development Report on Agriculture (2008),
which according to Bank and IFC staff interviewed, ‘represented a sea change with regard to the
way that the Bank Group agencies framed their cooperation in the sector. The WDR 2008, and
the subsequent World Bank Agriculture Action Plan put private sector development squarely on
the Agricultural Development agenda. IFC’s Action Plan utilizes an analysis of sector and
country performance along the lines of the “three worlds” to determine the mix of targeted
assistance.


                                               10 
 
                                                                                                        
 
Evaluation Methodology
THEORY OF CHANGE, KEY EVALUATION QUESTIONS, PORTFOLIO REVIEW, GENDER
ANALYSIS, PARTNERSHIP, COUNTRY CASE STUDY AND STAKEHOLDER INTERVIEW APPROACH

26.     The evaluation will rely on several elements to inform its assessment of WBG work on
the rural nonfarm economy. The first is a broad review of the relevant literature, which has
already informed this approach paper and will continue to inform the evaluation. The second is a
careful assembly and analysis of the relevant portfolio addressing the nonfarm economy and
employment opportunities within it. Third is a set of in-depth interviews with concerned
stakeholders within the World Bank Group, partner organizations, academia and civil society
globally and at the country level. The fourth is a set of purposively selected, detailed country
case studies that delve deeply into the Bank Group’s strategy, activities and impact in countries
at different stages of development (agriculture-based, transforming and urban-based). Special
attention will be paid to strategic coherence, cooperation and synergies between the institutions
of the WBG and other key players (e.g. counterparts, stakeholders, beneficiaries, and other
donors), identifiable impact, quality of M & E and feedback loops and missed opportunities.
Finally, an analysis of key partnerships will complement this work.

27.     Theory of Change: The rural poor are often engaged in “last resort” non-farm activities
that are not associated with high levels of labor productivity while the non-poor are engaged in
non-farm activities with higher levels of labor productivity. Significant correlates of these high-
productivity occupations include: human capital (education, skills), physical capital (roads,
power, and electricity), access to finance, and social capital. There are also large gender
disparities in the rural non-farm labor market. Targeted development assistance, designed to
strengthen the human, physical, financial, and social capital of the poor, can increase the
likelihood that the poor can gain access to a wider variety or opportunities in the rural non –farm
economy, including more productive opportunities and or an expanded, more diversified set of
activities that can help households to sustainable increase their overall standard of living. To
achieve these gains, rural non-farm enterprises and services must be sustainable and competitive
which, in turn, requires investments that integrate the different parts of the rural economy. Public
sector investment in basic services plays an important role in providing the enabling environment
for these enterprises to grow and remain profitable. Private sector development assistance can
help to identify gaps and to reduce risk to incentivize scalable investment (Figure 2).

28.     The World Bank Group does not have an explicit theory of change that articulates its
approach for helping to grow the rural non-farm economy, although a general approach and a list
of interventions are included in the Agriculture Action Plan as described above. IEG has
therefore constructed a Theory of Change based on the existing rural non-farm literature and by
conducting a preliminary portfolio review. The interventions are indicative of the type of
approaches that the World Bank Group has taken to contribute to the development of the rural
non-farm economy. The Theory of Change has been shared with World Bank Group
Management during the Approach Paper comment period and will be used in IEG’s Learning
Days as a platform for discussion.


                                                11 
 
                                                                                                                   
 
    Figure 2: Theory of Change: World Bank Group Support for the Development of an Inclusive
    Rural Non-Farm Economy




Source: IEG.
*Notes: Indicative Interventions include Rural Livelihoods and Employment activities that include Rural Livelihood
Projects, Rural Community Driven Development (CDD) with productive subprojects; Projects with explicit reference
to Rural Non-Farm Employment; Agribusiness investments and advisory services; Value Chain approaches, including
livestock value chains etc. Private Sector Development includes activities addressing Competitiveness; Micro, Small
and Medium Enterprises; and Trade Facilitation. Spatial Approaches include activities addressing the development
of Growth Poles and Corridors; Special Economic Zones linking rural areas and other spatial approaches. Transfers
and Productive Social Safety Nets includes activities Food Crises and Emergency response; Public Works;
Productive Social Safety Nets; and Rural Cash Transfers.

Key Evaluative Questions

29.     The Overarching Question of this thematic evaluation is: How successfully has the World
Bank Group contributed to the creation of sustainable income generating opportunities for the
rural poor within the Rural Non-Farm Economy and what attributable effects have Bank Group
efforts had on reducing poverty? In order to answer this question, the relevance, effectiveness,
efficiency and sustainability of the WBG interventions at all levels –strategy, project, portfolio,
program, country, aggregate- will be assessed. Table 1 shows the set of questions to be explored
as well as the sources, methods, and expected constraints of the analysis.


                                                       12 
 
                                                                                                                          
 
TABLE 1. KEY EVALUATION QUESTIONS

    Key Questions                   Information               Data Analysis and collection                 Data limitations
                                    sources                   methods
    Overarching Questions: How successfully has the World Bank Group contributed to the creation of
    sustainable income generating opportunities for the rural poor within the Rural Non-Farm Economy
    and what attributable effects have Bank Group efforts had on reducing poverty?

    Relevance: Are World Bank Group Interventions Relevantly responding to client needs to help alleviate poverty by
    developing the Rural Non-Farm Economy in a sustainable and inclusive way? Is the World Bank Group strategically
    collaborating with partners to help develop the Rural Non-Farm Economy for the benefit of the poor?
    How relevantly are WBG          Corporate Strategies;     The Strategy Level:          The Rural Non-Farm Sector is a
    interventions diagnosing and    GP, VP Strategies and     Review of Strategies;        Multi-sectoral theme that requires
    addressing the supply and       Action Plans; CASs,       Dialogue with Key            collaboration across GP (AG,
    demand side constraints         SCDs and CPFs;            Members of the GPs and       SURR, Transport, Macro, Water,
    related to the development of   AAA; Investment           VPs + Staff; Interviews      Poverty SP etc.). Rural Non-farm
    a sustainable, profitable and   Climate; Project          of Key Partners (IFAD,       aims are part of the Ag Action Plan
    inclusive (pro-poor) rural      Appraisal and             FAO, CGIAR, IFIs,            but require multi-sectoral
    non-farm economy?               Supervision               Bilateral) + Country         collaboration for implementation.
                                    Documents +               Clients. Portfolio
    At the Global and Country       evaluations.              Review.                      At the country level, rural Non-
    Level, how is the Bank          Structured Interviews,                                 farm data is weak, not consistent
    positioning itself              Focus Groups,             The Country Level:           across countries. Definition of
    strategically? At the country   Country Cluster Visits    CAS/ SCD /CPF Review         “Rural” differs; Households only
    level, how relevant are         + reports; portfolio      for countries selected for   report income from primary
    project designs to country      review of rural           desk and field Review +      employment; Variations in country
    contexts and national           themed projects in the    Structured Interviews of     conditions will make conclusions
    poverty reduction planning      WB; portfolio review      Country Teams.               limited and contingent
    needs with regard to the        of IFC investments in     Portfolio Review of
    development of the RNFE?        the rural non-farm        AAA, Lending,
                                    economy + MIGA            Advisory, TA etc. Field
    At the household level                                    Visits protocols will
    (project design, targeting,     Survey of                 triangulate feedback
    measurement) how                collaboration with        from Multiple
    relevantly is the WBG           IFAD                      Government agencies.
    addressing the differentiated                             Feedback from project
    needs of the marginalized,                                teams and beneficiaries.
    vulnerable, women, youth                                  Focus Groups with
    etc.?                                                     Thematic TTLs and
                                                              Country Teams.
    Effectiveness: How effectively have World Bank Group interventions contributed to the development of a
    sustainable and inclusive rural non-farm economy? How have these efforts contributed to alleviating rural
    poverty?
    How effectively has the WBG     ISRs, ICRs, ICRRs,        Portfolio Review             Many projects will not have
    supported employment            PPARs, XPSR               Country Case Studies         recorded impacts; IFC projects,
    creation, increased incomes     EvNotes, PCRs, PES,       Interviews                   Macro (PRSCs and DPLs) will
    and enhanced welfare for the    PERs, Review of           Focus Groups                 have system effects that will need
    poor within the Rural Non-      GAFSP. Country            Partnership Review           to be measured differently than
    Farm Economy?                   Studies, Country                                       direct Bank investments in the rural
                                    Missions. Interviews,                                  space.

                                                             13 
 
                                                                                                                    
 
    Key Questions                   Information            Data Analysis and collection              Data limitations
                                    sources                methods
    How has this assistance been    External Evaluation
    targeted towards and how        materials.
    has it impacted the
    marginalized, vulnerable,
    women, youth etc.?

    Efficiency
    How efficiently have the World Bank Group agencies worked together to help develop a sustainable and inclusive
    rural non-farm economy?
    How has the World Bank        Mainly from Country Effectiveness data in the Information on the cost and benefits
    Group helped clients to       Case Studies that    ICRRs and PPARs.         for the poor (or cost and benefit of
    reduce the transaction costs  include a review of  Interviews with country  attaining specific distributional
    associated with integrating   the portfolio of the teams, TTLs, and         impacts) will be lacking.
    the rural poor into the non-  three agencies.      Government               Coordination efforts tend to be
    farm economy? At the                               counterparts             poorly documented in project
    country level, how have the                                                 documents and micro evaluation
    World Bank, IFC and MIGA                                                    documents, according to IEG
    worked together to increase                                                 experience.
    opportunities for the rural
    poor to benefit from the non-
    farm economy?

    Environmental and Social Sustainability: Is the WBG’s support for the RNFE environmentally and
    socially sustainable?
    What are the Key E&S issues     Safeguards and         Extraction of E&S Lessons from the        IEGFP only
    that emerge in the review of    Performance            Safeguards and performance standards      validates 25% of all
    the core Rural Non- Farm        Standards Data         data as part of the portfolio review of   projects; quality of
    portfolio and how effectively                          WB, IFC and MIGA. Interviews with         E&S issues in
    were these issues addressed?                           E&S Specialists that have supported       ICRRs, PPARs.
    How did E&S affect                                     RNFE activities. Country Mission
    decision-making, risk-taking                           Protocols, pairing with E&S IEGFP
    and investment choices in                              country visits.
    the portfolio?

Source: IEG.

Identification of the Rural Non-Farm Portfolio: The Portfolio and Country
Level Assessment Methodology
30.     The Rural Non-Farm Economy is not a sector but a prominent theme in the World Bank’s
Agriculture Action Plan which requires a multi-sectoral approach and collaboration across
different units in the World Bank Group. The evaluation offers an opportunity to better
understand the universe of projects that are supported by the Bank Group that contribute to the
development of the rural non-farm economy, at the global and country level.

31.    To identify the universe of projects that directly support the development of income
generating opportunities for the poor within the rural non-farm economy, IEG has applied a
Screening Criteria – described below- that has enabled the development of a Preliminary

                                                          14 
 
                                                                                                       
 
Portfolio of activities across the World Bank Group (Figure 3). The rural-non farm economy is
also supported by many enabling activities, which will be thoroughly identified and assessed
from the point of view of their contribution effects at the country case study level.

The Preliminary Rural Non-Farm Portfolio Screening Criteria for the World
Bank
32.      For the World Bank, all IBRD/IDA projects that were approved between FY04-FY14 are
included in the Universe of projects screened for the Rural Non-Farm Evaluation. IEG identified
a total of 3,472 IBRD/IDA activities, including additional financing, which were approved
during this period.

33.      Next, IEG identified all projects with at least one agricultural sector code. IEG screened
these projects to determine the extent of their alignment – or rural non-farm content – with
regard to the evaluation scope. IEG identified 801 projects with at least one agricultural sector
code, including additional financing that were approved between FY04-FY14. IEG then screened
these projects by reviewing each project’s objectives and components and abstract. Of these, IEG
selected 595 projects that, based on a preliminary review, are aligned with the evaluation scope.
These projects will be more extensively reviewed individually during the evaluation to determine
the actual extent of non-farm versus agricultural support and the portfolio will be revised to
reflect the review’s findings.

34.     This screening technique allowed IEG to formulate a preliminary, indicative list of
projects with Rural Non-Farm Economic activities that are mainly derived from and directly
linked to Farm activities. These projects include targeted investments to remove critical
constraints, improve productivity and build capacity along the value chains of targeted
commodities in rural areas. Examples include the Rural Productive Partnership Projects
implemented in the LAC region, the Rural Livelihoods projects implemented in South Asia and
Community Driven Development projects with productive sub-projects (which also feature a
strong empowerment aim), Livestock value chains, including pastoral development in the Sahel
etc.

35.      This screening procedure also allowed IEG to remove projects that were not in line with
the evaluation aim, namely projects with an environmental conservation or disaster risk or
mitigation theme. These included projects that support terrestrial and marine conservation,
pollution abatement, disaster risks management and recovery etc. Projects that have a productive
theme in the forest sector were reviewed in IEG’s Forest Evaluation (2012) and lessons from that
portfolio review will be utilized by the rural non-farm evaluation, but will not be included again
in this portfolio review.

36.    Next, IEG identified all of the remaining IBRD/IDA projects approved between FY04-
FY14 that have been coded with a Rural Theme but did not have at least one agricultural code.
IEG screened these projects for their alignment with the evaluation scope – in terms of rural non-
farm content - by reviewing each project’s objectives and components and the project abstract.
These rural themes, as identified by the Bank’s thematic coding system, include Rural Non-Farm

                                                15 
 
                                                                                                                      
 
Income Generation,7 Rural Markets, Rural Policies and Institutions, Rural Services and
Infrastructure, or other forms of Rural Development. Guided by management comments, the
team realized that some former projects, including FPD projects supporting competitiveness or
spatial approaches such as growth poles (now largely mapped to the T&C portfolio) are relevant
but would not have agricultural or rural codes because they were considered “sector neutral” at
the time of the appraisal information sheet (AIS) code allocation. Utilizing the Bank’s Rural
Themes as an additional screening tool, IEG identified an additional 536 projects that have been
preliminary included in the portfolio, which will be fully reviewed individually as part of the
portfolio work of the main evaluation. Examples of projects identified by this additional
screening tool that have been included in the preliminary portfolio include:

            Agglomerated or Spatial Approach, such as activates that support the development of special
             economic zones, growth poles, industrial clusters in rural areas, secondary or rural market town
             development. These projects, many of which are mapped to the Trade and Competitiveness
             practice, seek to support broad-based economic growth through strong contributions from the
             private sector focusing on competitiveness and promoting linkages between global value chains.
             Some of the project activities include increasing and diversifying production of tradable goods,
             fostering complementarities between public and private investments, facilitating linkages with
             regional and global economies, and building the capacity of the private sector in order to raise
             labor productivity. Projects identified by this preliminary review include activities that provide
             select infrastructure along supply chains between farmers and markets, promote exports of high
             value agricultural products, help improve rural livelihoods, support MSMEs in rural areas etc. An
             indicative list, the full portfolio will screen all projects for relevance along these spatial lines.

            World Bank financed Private Sector Development projects that support the development of
             the rural non-farm economy. These projects support the development and strengthening of
             Micro, Small and medium size rural enterprises, enhanced competiveness, access to finance –
             including micro-finance- and trade facilitation. Many focus on access to markets and improved
             opportunities for market linkages. Others seek to support business and regulatory reforms and
             foster public-private collaboration.

            Transfers and Productive Social Safety Net Projects that ensure access to food and basic needs
             for vulnerable households and support food/cash for work programs in highly food insecure rural
             areas; some of these programs provide cash or in-kind payments to the poor in return for work
             performed in labor-intensive public works projects. Public works included critical infrastructure
             and livelihood activities such as rural roads. Other projects included in this segment of the
             portfolio are the Emergency Food Crises projects. The more advanced cohort of social safety net

                                                       
7
  Given the relevance of the sub-theme “Rural Non-Farm Income Generation” to the core evaluative
questions in this review, IEG conducted a preliminary Evaluability Assessment of these projects to
determine the type of data that was being collected and used to measure income and welfare. IEG found
that there was a highly variable use of indicators between regions, with some consistency across projects
types. Projects in ECA with a Rural Non-Farm Income Generation theme tend to report on incomes; projects
in LAC report aggregate levels of revenue; there are more projects in the East Asia and the Pacific region
that report on employment than elsewhere. None of the projects that reported on employment provided
information on the quality of the jobs created.

                                                          16 
 
                                                                                                           
 
        projects feature a productivity component at the HH level that is often comprised of rural non-
        farm economic activities.

37.     The final portfolio will reflect these sum of the portfolio from all of these three major
approaches, plus one more to ensure against omission. As part of its portfolio review, IEG will
use QDA Miner, a mixed methods and qualitative data analysis software, to conduct content
analysis and text mining across the universe of projects that have been approved between FY04-
F14. The exercise will allow IEG to capture relevant projects that have not been identified using
the selection criteria, and to develop a more nuanced identification and description of the content
of the World Bank supported Rural Non-Farm Portfolio.

               Figure 3: Preliminary Rural Non-Farm Portfolio Mapped to the GPs
                                 (by Number of Projects) n=1,131

                                     Education
                                        3%
                            Social Protection             Other       Agriculture
                                   5%                     12%            22%
                                                   Macro 
                                                Economics & 
                                                   Fiscal 
                                                Management               Transport & ICT
                                                     9%  & 
                                                    Energy                    16%
                                                   Extractives   Social, Urban, 
                                                       9%          Rural and 
                                                           Water
                                                                   Resilience
                                                           12%
                                                                      12%


Source: IEG.

Key World Bank AAA Support for Developing the Rural Non-Farm Economy
38.     The Rural Investment Climate Surveys. The World Bank Group conducted a series of
Rural Investment Climate Assessments between 2006-2010.These were conducted in Ghana,
Mozambique, Ethiopia, Burkina Faso, Tanzania, Kenya, Zambia, Georgia and Tajikistan. This
work was intended to be scaled up through the Doing Business Surveys (using a hybrid approach
of an annual Doing Agribusiness Survey, together with more focused multiple country analysis
on specific topics). The work was intended to help guide policy dialogue to improve the overall
investment climate. Across these countries, the assessments revealed a common set of constraints
that were blocking access for the poor to benefit from more productive rural opportunities. The
evaluation will include an analysis of this body of sector work (ESW). The RICAs will also be
used as an input in the Country Case Studies.

39.     The Development Economics Group (DECRG-RU) Rural Non-Farm Economy
Research Program. One program of research in DECRG-RU focuses on key questions
regarding the nonfarm economy which are not yet fully resolved, or have not yet received
adequate attention in the literature. The program examines those knowledge gaps that are of
direct relevance to the design of policy interventions. One pillar of the program has been
                                                             17 
 
                                                                                                     
 
focusing on perhaps the most important lever available to policy makers aiming to in promote
the rural non-farm economy - the provision of infrastructure. A second pillar of the research
program seeks to shed further empirical light on other potentially important constraints on rural
non-farm growth which are amenable to policy intervention, primarily education and financial
intermediation. A third area seeks to understand whether non-farm growth can translate into rural
poverty reduction.

IFC Support for Rural Non-Farm Activities: Investments and Advisory
Services
40.     IFC does not apply a farm/non-farm or urban/rural definition to its activities. IFC
operations can affect both rural and urban populations, such as linking rural producers to
markets. IFC also undertakes activities in other sectors which may have a potential impact on
rural populations, such as grid or off-grid energy and micro-finance.

41.    IFC supported Agribusiness projects. IFC’s investment portfolio contains
approximately 3,846 projects approved between FY04-14 of which 378 have been identified by
IFC as supporting the Agribusiness supply chain (Figure 4). Of these, 45 have XPSRs and IEG
EvNotes. During the review period, IFC has more than doubled its investment commitment, with
investments currently roughly equaling that of the Bank in the agribusiness sector. IFC’s
investment commitment amount in agribusiness equaled, on average, US$16.7 million annually
between FY09-FY11 and US$24 million annually between FY12-FY14.

42.    IFC Advisory Services linked to Agribusiness. Using a similar approach, out of 2,539
Advisory Services implemented during FY04-14, 235 Advisory Services projects support the
Agribusiness supply chain by strengthening linkages, raising corporate standards, supporting
adoption of environmental and social standards and assisting farmers meet standards (Figure 5).

43.     IFC Investments designed to Increase Access to Rural Finance. Utilizing the database
developed by IEG for the Financial Inclusion, SME and Jobs and Competitiveness Study, the
approach identified 41 IFC financed Finance and Insurance projects – including support for
commercial banking, finance companies, and microfinance – that were designed to support rural
development. During the course of the evaluation, IEG will screen other financial market
investments, including but not limited to support commercial banks, specialized FIs, trade
finance banks, and private equity funds, to assess whether these investments seek to extend
access to rural areas.

44.     IFC Advisory Services linked to Infrastructure. IEG will also screen infrastructure
related advisory projects (such as PPPs, Clean Energy and Resource Efficiency) that have
potential impact on helping to develop the rural non-farm economy.

 




                                               18 
 
                                                                                                            
 
    Figure 4. Preliminary RNFE IFC                      Figure 5. Preliminary RNFE IFC
    Investments Portfolio (n=378)                       Advisory Services Portfolio (n=235)
    By Sector                                           By Sector


    Transportation and 
      Warehousing…      Other                          Transportation and 
                         5%                                                             …
                                                                                  Other, 
                                                        Warehousing, 4%


                                                                     Food & 
             Chemicals                                              Beverages, 
                6%                                                     9%
            Finance &           Agriculture 
            Insurance              and                            Finance & 
               12%               Forestry                         Insurance,                Agriculture 
                                   39%                               17%                       and 
                                                                                             Forestry, 
                                                                                               67%

                    Food & 
                   Beverages
                     34%




Source: IEG.



MIGA Guarantees for Rural Non-Farm Activities
45.     Since 2004, MIGA has provided 311 political risk insurance (guarantees) or credit
enhancement support against certain noncommercial risks with 23 investments in the
agribusiness sector in 15 developing countries, mostly in Africa with a total gross exposure of
US$469.3 million. At the time that this approach was undertaken, 19 of the Agribusiness
guarantees were still active. Roughly one-quarter of the portfolio’s exposure was in one
guarantee in Liberia that is no longer active. Another quarter of the portfolio provides political
risk insurance coverage in Zambia (all of which are still active). All of the active guarantees in
the Agribusiness Portfolio are rated as Category B projects with regard to Environmental and
Social risks. The rest of the sectors will be examined carefully with MIGA’s guidance.

COUNTRY LEVEL ANALYSIS: ASSESSING THE DIRECT AND ENABLING SUPPORT OF THE WORLD
BANK GROUP AND THE EFFECTS OF ITS PARTNERSHIP EFFORTS

46.     The breadth of the WBG Portfolio selection for country case studies will be guided by an
assessment of the specific country conditions, with regard to the stage of development of both
the country and areas of the country that may be lagging. The portfolio team will provide the
country case study authors with a portfolio review of the projects identified through the global
screening criteria described above. Country case study authors should then determine additional
activities that are relevant with regard to the enabling environment activities specific to that
country. In addition to financing that supports the direct creation or strengthening of micro, small
                                                 19 
 
                                                                                                           
 
and medium rural enterprises (MSMEs), income generation, or skilled employment, for example,
the country case studies will examine potential synergies affecting the RNFE across the
portfolio. At the country level, where relevant, the country case study authors may examine:

           o   Decentralization. Various forms and processes of administrative, fiscal, and political
               decentralization that are prevalent in many countries that affect the overall
               socioeconomic environment in rural areas and project implementation performance.
               There may be some lessons on how various institutional forms and actions of
               decentralized governance affect project results.
           o   Infrastructure and energy. Positive impact is often difficult without stable supplies of
               affordable and adequate energy, transport and communication services. The country case
               studies will provide an opportunity to look at synergies derived from investments and
               projects that seek to strengthen these areas.

           o   Secondary (rural) town development. The role of secondary towns for job creation (many
               of which include agro-processing, and agricultural inputs supply) and other efforts to
               promote rural-urban linkages.
           o   Access to Land. Understanding the land policy debate and land access issues that affect
               the development of the rural non-farm economy in the case studies will be important to a
               broader understanding of the rural non-farm economy. Without officially registered land
               titles, for example, many people can be in danger of being deprived of their possessions
               and evicted from their land parcel. Moreover, the absence of secure property rights has
               many other negative socioeconomic impacts: land conflicts, poor land governance, loss
               of tax revenues, underdeveloped agriculture and land markets, lack of access to mortgage
               finance, and more.

47.      Contribution Analysis. A central challenge in evaluating the World Bank Group’s
effectiveness in promoting the development of the Rural Non-Farm Economy is that the Bank
Group is never the only cause of observed outcomes and impacts. Instead, activities contribute to
observed outcomes that are also influenced by local and global policies, events, and activities,
both positive and negative. At the country level, country case studies will be conducted – using
contribution analysis - to consider the plausible association of interventions or programs to
observed outcomes while accounting for the various other factors that may have positively or
negatively influenced them. Contribution analysis will seek to understand the ways that the
World Bank Group has partnered with other actors and institutions (including domestic
institutions in the public and private sectors and other donors), leveraged its investments, and
created synergies within the international aid community to help develop an inclusive rural non-
farm economy with the aim of reducing poverty.

48.     The Approach Paper lays out a proposed theory of change that guides the different levels
of inquiry within the macro-evaluation. Country case studies should test this proposed theory
against each country’s unique strategy and portfolio assessments and weigh in on its applicability
across different country and regional characteristics. Country cases should be prepared to assess
whether multiple theories – nuanced to fit particular historical, political, social and cultural


                                                  20 
 
                                                                                                              
 
circumstances – may be needed to guide Bank Group support for poverty reduction as part of a
countries’ rural transformation.

Country Case Selection and Methodology
49.     As stated in the Guidance Note on the Use of Country Case Studies in IEG Macro-
Evaluations, country case studies can provide more contextually specific evidence on factors of
success and failure – a richer “textured” sense of how things work in practice – by assessing a
number of activities and circumstances that have operated in tandem over time. Country case
studies offer an opportunity to provide important details on patterns within countries and across
similar or contrasting country typologies. Country Case Study selection is traditionally made to
reflect a range of regions and/or income categories of countries, but it can be strategically
aligned with the initial understanding of the key conditions influencing country strategy and
outcomes in the focal area of the evaluation. A multiple country case study design can enable
richer and more robust learning if countries can be differentiated by a set of parameters that are
relevant for the anticipated effective development impact. These parameters are not only
characteristics of the countries, but also determine how the respond to Bank Group interventions
and should allow readers to draw lessons as a function of these parameters.

50.    This evaluation will conduct a total of 12 country case studies (including six field
assessments). The selection criteria that will be used to identify country cases is as follows:

       (1) Country selection will be guided by a stratification of countries along the different
           stages of Agrarian transformation, as identified by countries’ current position the “three
           worlds” diagram utilized by the World Development report 2008. This will allow the
           evaluation to share illustrative examples of what has worked to help grow the rural non-farm
           economy to reduce poverty within cohorts of countries – or across areas- that are at relatively
           the same stage of transformation. This will also allow IEG to share lessons about what has
           worked to help develop the rural non-farm economy in economies that have experienced a
           more rapid transition than others during the past decade. The attached annex presents data on
           the transformational stages of each country, utilizing data on labor movement and
           agriculture’s contribution to GDP.

       (2) Country selection will also be guided by a stratified approach across the World Bank
           Group’s regions, weighted with regard to the number of countries in each region.

       (3) Finally, country selection will also aim to select countries that have received several
           different types of interventions which together may have contributed to the growth of the
           rural non-farm economy with the aim of reducing poverty. This criterion will help the team
           focus on coordination, synergy, and sequencing in the activities of the key WBG institutions
           (WB, IFC, and MIGA).




                                                   21 
 
                                                                                                      
 
Cross Cutting Tools: Gender Analysis
51.     Recognizing the importance of gender disparities in the rural nonfarm economy, this
evaluation will integrate the project level gender analysis conducted for IEG’s 2010 Gender
Evaluation, the 2014 Social Safety Net and Gender Learning Product, and the 2015 RAP, for
projects that overlap. The gender analysis conducted for the 2010 Gender Evaluation assessed
the extent of gender analysis in program documents, the extent of gender-related measures or
actions planned at entry for these projects, and the extent to which gender-related results were
targeted and included in projects’ M&E systems. The evaluation will also utilize relevant
analysis conducted by the 2015 RAP that included a review of completion documents to assess
the extent to which changes during implementation impacted the expected results at entry,
whether those results were monitored and tracked, and whether any additional gender relevant
results were reported on.

52.     At the country case study level, the country evaluation teams will review relevant
literature, poverty and gender assessments, and economic and sector work. It will also utilize
databases such as the Women and the Law indicators to develop an understanding and country
specific gender framework. The work will focus on the role of women in the rural non-farm
economy, including recognized constraints and the efforts undertaken by the World Bank Group
to reduce gender disparity in this space, as well as highlighting where these efforts have not
taken place. For example, the vital issue of differences in treatment of women with regard to land
tenure will be treated at the country case study level.

53.    At the Portfolio Review level, the portfolio team will work with IEG’s Poverty and
Gender Specialist to formulate relevant screening questions on identification, targeting, voice
and participation, the relevance of the activities from a gender specific point of view, gender
monitoring and reporting of disaggregated benefits.

World Bank Group Partnerships
54.     As earlier agreed with CODE, IEG is mainstreaming the review of individual partnership
programs into major evaluations. This evaluation will include a review of the Global Agricultural
and Food Security Program (GAFSP), with a focus on the performance of the WBG as a partner
in the program and how WBG performance has created opportunities within the rural non-farm
economy (See Box 2). IEG notes that an external evaluation has been recently commissioned by
the GAFSP program at the request of the GAFSP donors and IFC is leading this effort. In
accordance with protocol, the IEG team will work closely with the GAFSP team leads from the
WBG and will review and take account of the external evaluation findings.




                                                22 
 
                                                                                                                  
 
    Box 2: The Global Agriculture and Food Security Program (GAFSP)

    The GAFSP is a multilateral mechanism designed to assist in the implementation of pledges made by the
    G20 in Pittsburgh in September 2009. It is implemented as a Financial Intermediary Fund for which the
    World Bank serves as Trustee. The World Bank also hosts a small coordination unit that provides support
    to the GAFSP Steering Committee. Its objective is to improve incomes and food and nutrition security in
    low-income countries by boosting agricultural productivity. GAFSP addresses the underfunding of country
    and regional agriculture and food security strategic investment plans that are already being developed by
    countries in consultation with donors and other stakeholders at the country-level. It includes both public
    and private sector financing windows: The public sector window assists strategic country-led or regional
    programs that result from sector-wide country or regional consultations and planning exercises such as
    CAADP in Africa. The public sector window is under the external governance of a Steering
    Committee composed of an equal number of voting donor and recipient representatives, and non-voting
    representatives from: the Trustee, UN agencies, potential Supervising Entities (MDBs, World Bank,
    IFAD), and Civil Society Organizations. The private sector window is designed to provide long and short
    term loans, credit guarantees and equity to support private sector activities for improving agricultural
    development and food security. The private sector window is managed by the International Finance
    Corporation (IFC) with the annual investment plans submitted to and endorsed by the (public sector
    window) Steering Committee.
    Source: http://www.gafspfund.org.




Evaluation Tools: Interviews, Focus Groups, Project Performance Assessment
Reports (PPARs), and Beneficiary Feedback
55.     The evaluation will develop and administer semi-structured interviews to concerned
stakeholders within the World Bank Group, partner organizations, academia and civil society
globally. Focus Groups will be conducted with select staff and mangers in the World Bank
Group that have been integrally involved in policy setting or the implementation of activities
within the core themes examined by this evaluation. At the country level, the macro-evaluation
has conducted in advance and commissioned simultaneously project performance assessments
that are designed to complement and feed into the country case studies. These performance
assessments (PPARs) will also include a participatory evaluation approach and tools to solicit
beneficiary feedback.

Team Composition
56.     The evaluation will be managed by Marvin Taylor Dormond, Director, IEGSP and
Midori Makino, Acting Manager, IEGSD. The team is comprised of a multi-disciplinary team,
combining deep evaluation experience and multi-sectoral expertise. It is designed to be highly
collaborative, tapping skills across IEG, that in addition to evaluation, include specializations in
agriculture, agribusiness, education, participatory rural development, social protection and
gender.

       Lauren Kelly, TTL, Senior Evaluation Officer and Rural Development Specialist, IEG
       Andrew Stone, Co-TTL, Head, Macro Evaluation, IEG
       Hassan Kaleem, IFC and MIGA Lead, Evaluation Officer, IEG

                                                       23 
 
                                                                                                         
 
       Kendra White, Marie Noelle Lantin Roquiz, Daniel Palazov, Portfolio Team
       Jack W. van Holst Pellekaan, Agricultural Economist, IEGPS; Senior Advisor and
        Country Case Lead (AFR)
       Christopher Nelson, Senior Evaluation Officer, IEG; Country Case Lead (EAP)
       John Redwood, Senior Consultant, Country Case Study Lead, (LAC)
       Marcelo Selowsky, Senior Consultant, IEGCC and Country Case Lead (LAC)
       Pradeep Mitra, Senior Consultant and Country Case Lead (SAS)
       Roger Slade, Senior Consultant (SAS)
       Rasmus Heltberg, Anna Anahit Aghuminan, and Detlev Puetz, former Chief
        Evaluation Officer of the African Development Bank, Global Programs and
        Partnerships.
       Gender Consultant (TBD)
       Kate Steingraber, Beneficiary Assessment, Country Study Support Team
       Local Consultants: TBD (Field level Case Study undertakings, including facilitation
        and translation)

57.    The evaluation will be reviewed to ensure its quality. As with the Approach Paper, the
Peer Reviewers include:

           a. Peter Lanjouw. Peter is the former Research Manager of the Poverty and Inequality
              Group in the Development Economics Research Group of the World Bank. Dr.
              Lanjouw’s research focuses on poverty measurement methods and rural-urban
              economic transformation, including the role the rural non-farm sector plays in a
              developing country as it transforms from a primarily agricultural economy to a
              diversified and urbanized economy, and how this shapes poverty and inequality

           b. Steven Haggblade Steven is a Professor of International Development in the
              Department of Agricultural, Food and Resource Economics at Michigan State
              University. His research interests include agricultural productivity growth and poverty
              reduction, the rural nonfarm economy, and supply chains that link farms and related
              nonfarm businesses with final consumers. He has spent the majority of his professional
              career—22 out of the past 35 years—working overseas on long-term assignments in
              Bangladesh, Botswana, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Madagascar and Zambia.

           c. Nora Dudwick Nora is a former Senior Social Scientist at World Bank and currently
              heads the Gender and Social Program at the Millennium Challenge Corporation. Nora
              has published extensively on topics related to the rural non-farm economy. Recent
              notable contributions include “Creating Jobs in Africa's Fragile States: Are Value
              Chains an Answer? (Directions in Development, 2013) and From Farm to Firm: Rural-
              Urban Transition in Developing Countries (The World Bank, 2011).

In addition, the team will identify an additional peer reviewer from a Part 2 country for the final
evaluation review process.




                                                  24 
 
                                                                                                       
 
EXPECTED OUTPUTS, LINKS TO OTHER STUDIES AND DISSEMINATION

58.      The primary output of the evaluation will be a report to the World Bank Group Board of
Directors, in particular to the Board’s Committee on Development Effectiveness (CODE). The
evaluation will be published and disseminated both internally and externally. IEG will develop
presentations, quick notes, blogs, videos, and other products as appropriate for other audiences,
including client countries, donors, and NGOs. During the evaluation preparation, the team will
solicit feedback and comments from stakeholders, in particular World Bank Group management
and practitioners in industries and government agencies in client countries to improve the
evaluation’s accuracy and relevance.

59.     To maximize the value and use of findings and recommendations to strengthen
development outcomes, IEG will implement an outreach plan during the evaluation and after the
completion of the evaluation. IEG will launch the report both in Washington, DC, and abroad.
The events will target key stakeholders, including staff at headquarters and country offices, other
multilateral development banks and donors, government authorities, civil society organizations,
and counterpart officials. Possible dissemination events are: IFAD and FAO meetings, the
Annual and Spring Meetings, the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, WEF regional
conferences, UN Dept. of Economic and Social Affairs annual conference, the International
Institute for Sustainable Development (IISD), country workshops, etc.

60.     Synergies with Other IEG Studies. The approach paper also reviewed existing
evaluations to determine whether pre-existing evaluative material was available to both add
value to and to streamline the budget.

     The IEG Evaluation of Growth and Productivity in Agriculture and Agribusiness (IEG
      2011) focused on “the World Bank Group’s contribution to agricultural growth and
      productivity, while the evaluation of IFC activities focused on food and agribusiness
      (F&A) growth and development (p.8). ‘The evaluation [did] not explore broader issues of
      rural development’ (p.8). Data utilized for the evaluation was taken from World Bank
      projects approved between 1998 and 2008. For IFC, only projects that were mature and
      evaluated by 2008 were utilized. On average, IFC investments require five years to
      mature, thus these projects pre-date the Rural Non-Farm Evaluation Period. While the
      evaluation did not include a focus on core rural non-farm income generating
      opportunities, it did include a section on Rural Finance that will be utilized as an input.

     The recent evaluation, Financial Inclusion - A Foothold on the Ladder toward
      Prosperity (IEG 2015) recognized that most of the future unbanked will be the rural
      poor. The evaluation recommended that the World Bank Group find and replicate
      innovative delivery models of financial services to the poor through sequenced and
      evidence-based approaches. To deliver sustainable, low-cost services, the Bank Group
      and its partners should research, pilot, and scale up innovative business models and
      approaches to reach underserved (especially rural) clients. Such an approach would focus
      on delineated and evaluable interventions and ensure a feedback loop in the design of
      new projects. Several project performance assessments were utilized as inputs into this

                                                25 
 
                                                                                                       
 
       evaluation, two of which overlap with the country case study work proposed for this
       evaluation (Brazil and Bangladesh).

     The Institutional Capability and Financial Viability to Sustain Transport (IEG 2012)
      highlighted the results of an econometric modeling exercise conducted by the
      International Food Policy Research Institute in China, India, Thailand, Uganda, and
      Vietnam that will be used as a basis of understanding for our enabling reviews at the
      country level. The study pointed to the positive relationship between public spending on
      rural roads and poverty reduction. The direct effects were shown to arise in the form of
      employment programs (directly targeted to the rural poor) that were more accessible
      owing to the rural roads. The indirect effects were shown to arise when government
      investments in rural roads, agricultural research, health, and education stimulated
      agricultural and nonagricultural growth, leading to higher employment and income-
      earning opportunities for the poor and to cheaper food. Another study of the
      socioeconomic impact of national highways on rural populations conducted in India
      between 2003 and 2010 showed a threefold increase in the share of income from non-
      agriculture activities; an 85 percent increase in female labor participation; a twofold
      increase in the per capita trip rate for education; and about a 50 percent increase in school
      enrollment (Fan 2009).

     The evaluation Managing Forest Resources for Sustainable Development found that a
      decade into implementation of its forestry strategy, the strategy was still relevant and in
      line with the overall mission of the World Bank Group, but that managing tradeoffs and
      exploiting synergies among the three goals of poverty reduction, conservation and
      economic development has proven difficult in implementation, with greater success along
      the environmental dimension. It found that the World Bank has played a major role in
      shaping the dialogue on the role of forests and climate change and the development of
      forest carbon instruments. It also found that Bank Group efforts to provide local
      populations with sustainable alternatives to forest degradation have often proved to be
      ineffective or unsustained after project completion. The evaluation found neglect of the
      informal sector represented a missed opportunity to reach more of the forest dependent
      rural poor while helping to enhance the environmentally sustainable forest management.
      IEG recommended that Bank Management undertake and disclose a comprehensive
      review of the economic, environmental and social outcomes associated with World Bank
      support for industrial timber concession reforms in tropical moist forest countries with
      weak governance. IFC was found to have forestry investments that helped client
      companies and supported sustainability, yet faced continuing challenges in achieving
      certification and traceability.

     Several project performance assessments have been conducted in anticipation of this
      evaluation, and others – that coincide with the country case study selection – will be used
      as inputs.




                                                26 
 
                                                                                                      
 
Timeline and Budget
61.    Timeline. The Approach Paper was sent to Management during the first quarter of FY16
and to CODE on December 8th, 2015. The evaluation will be discussed in a One-Stop Meeting,
followed by Management Review and submission to CODE by December 2016.

62.     Budget. The estimated cost of this evaluation, US$1.2 million, is consistent with other
major IEG studies of similar complexity. It seeks to achieve increased efficiencies by utilizing a
scoping mission workshop (Delhi) that was conducted in tandem with a project performance
mission to India (November 2014) and project performance assessments that were purposively
conducted in FY14-FY15 (India, Nigeria, Sri Lanka, Colombia) to inform the development of
this approach paper.




                                                27 
 
                                                                                                          
 


References
Christiaensen, Luc; Introduction: Rural Diversification, Secondary Towns and Poverty Reduction: Do
Not Miss the Middle, Agricultural Economics 44 (2013) 433-434.

Christiaensen, Luc, Joachim De Weerdt, Yasuyuki Todoc; Urbanization and Poverty Reduction: the Role
of Rural Diversification and Secondary Towns, Agricultural Economics 44 (2013) 447-459.

Davis, J. (2006). Rural non-farm livelihoods in transition economies: Emerging issues and policies.
Journal of Agricultural and Development Economics 3(2):180-224.

Nagler, P. and W. Naude. (2014). Patterns and Determinants of Non-Farm Entrepreneurship in Rural
Africa: New Empirical Evidence.

Davis, Junior R., and Dirk J. Bezemer Non-Farm Economies in Developing Countries and Transforming
Countries (2004) by published by DfID.
Dorosh, Paul, James Thurlow; Agriculture and small towns in Africa, Agricultural Economics 44 (2013)
449-459.
Dudwick, Nora at al. From Farm to Firm: Rural Urban Transition in Developing Countries. Directions
in Development. The World Bank. Washington DC.

Fox, Louise and Thomas Pave Sohnesen, Household Enterprises in Sub Saharan Africa: Why the Matter
for Growth, Jobs and Livelihoods, Policy Research Working Paper 6184.
Giné X., Mansuri. 2011. Money or ideas? A field experiment on constraints to entrepreneurship in rural
Pakistan. Unpublished manuscript, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Haggblade, Steven, Peter Hazell and Thomas Reardon. (2007). Transforming the Rural Non-farm
Economy. IFPRI. Washington DC.
Hazell, S. W. (2008). Access to rural non-farm employment and enterprise development.

Haussmann, R., et al. The Atlas of Economic Complexity: Mapping Paths to Prosperity.

IFAD. (2010). Rural Poverty Report 2011. Rome, Italy: Quintily.

ILO. (2008). Report V: Skills for improved productivity, employment growth and development. Geneva.

IEG (Independent Evaluation Group). 2014. The Big Business of Small Enterprises: Evaluation of the
World Bank Group Experience with Targeted Support to Small and Medium-Size Enterprises, 2006-12.
Washington, DC: World Bank. ———. 2011.
Assessing IFC’s Poverty Focus and Results. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Jonasson, E., and Helfand, S. (2008). Locational Determinants of Rural Non-agricultural Employment:
Evidence from Brazil. Working Paper 2008/02. University of California.

                                                   28 
 
                                                                                                            
 

Lampetti et al. The Changing Face of Rural Space: Agriculture and Rural Development in the Western
Balkans. Directions in Development. Agriculture and Rural Development. World Bank. Washington DC.

Lanjouw, P. (2001). Non-Farm Employment and Poverty in Rural El Salvador. Great Britain: Pergamon.

Lanjouw, Jean O. and Peter Lanjouw. (2001). The Rural Non-Farm Sector: Issues and Evidence from
Developing Countries.

Losch, Bruno; Sandrine Fréguin-Gresh, Eric Thomas White. 2012. Structural Transformation and Rural
Change Revisited: Challenges for Late Developing Countries in a Globalizing World. African
development Forum Series. Washington DC: World Bank.

Nagler, P. and W. Naude. (2014). Patterns and Determinants of Non-Farm Entrepreneurship in Rural
Africa: New Empirical Evidence.

Reardon, Thomas, J. Edward Taylor, Kostas Stamoulis, Peter Lanjouw and Arsenio Balisacan, Effects of
Non-Farm Employment on Rural Income Inequality in Developing Countries: An Investment Perspective
(2000).
Reka Sundaram-Stukel, K. D. (2006). Fostering growth of the rural non-farm sector in Africa: The case
of Tanzania.
Sawada, Naotaka. Improving the Rural Investment Climate for Income generation. A Background Paper
for the World Development Report 2013.
Start, D. (2011). The Rise and Fall of the Rural Non-farm Economy: Poverty Impacts and Policy Options.
Development Policy Review 19 (4): 491-505.

World Bank. (2008). World Development Report: Agriculture for Development. Washington D.C

World Bank. (2009). World Development Report 2009: Reshaping Economic Geography. Washington
D.C.

World Bank, IMF. (2013). Global Monitoring Report 2013: Rural-Urban Dynamics and the Millennium
Development Goals. Washington D.C.

World Bank (2013). Growing Africa: Unlocking the Potential of Agribusiness.
World Bank (2015). Dynamics of Rural Growth in Bangladesh: Sustaining Poverty Reduction.

Zhu, N., X. Luo (2006), “Non-farm activity and rural income inequality: a case study of two provinces in
China”, Policy Research Working Paper No. 3811, The World Bank




                                                   29 
 
                                                                                                    
 
                             2004   2005   2006   2007   2008   2009   2010   2011   2012   2013
    Afghanistan               ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..
    Albania                  58.5   58.5   58     47.6   43.9   42.1   41.5    ..     ..     ..
    Algeria                  20.7    ..     ..     ..    13.7   13.1   11.7   10.8    ..     ..
    American Samoa            ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..
    Andorra                   ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..
    Angola                    ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..
    Antigua and Barbuda      2.8    2.8    2.8    2.8    2.8     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..
    Argentina                1.2    1.1     1     0.9    1.2    1.2    1.3    1.2    0.6     ..
    Armenia                  46.9   46.2   46.2   46     37.6   39.5   38.6   38.9    ..     ..
    Aruba                     ..     ..     ..    0.7     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..
    Australia                3.7    3.6    3.4    3.3    3.3    3.3     ..     ..     ..     ..
    Austria                   5     5.5    5.5    5.7    5.4    5.3    5.2    5.3    4.9     ..
    Azerbaijan               39.5   39.3   39.1   38.7   38.4   38.1   38.2   37.9   37.7    ..
    Bahamas, The             4.4    3.5    2.5    2.3    2.9    2.9     ..    3.7     ..     ..
    Bahrain                  0.8     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    1.1     ..     ..     ..
    Bangladesh                ..    48.1    ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..
    Barbados                 3.3     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    2.8    3.3    2.8     ..
    Belarus                   ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    10.5    ..     ..     ..     ..
    Belgium                  2.2     2     1.9    1.8    1.6    1.5    1.4    1.3    1.2     ..
    Belize                   22.6   19.5    ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..
    Benin                     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..
    Bermuda                  1.7     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..
    Bhutan                    ..    43.6   63.1    ..     ..    65.4   59.5   60.1   62.2    ..
    Bolivia                  35.1   38.6   39.5   36.1   34.3   32.1    ..     ..     ..     ..
    Bosnia and Herzegovina    ..     ..    20.6   19.8   20.6   21.2   19.7   19.6   20.5    ..
    Botswana                  ..     ..    29.9    ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..
    Brazil                   21     20.5   19.3   18.3   17.4   17      ..    15.3    ..     ..


                                                   30 
 
                                                                                                    
 
    Brunei Darussalam           ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    Bulgaria                   10.6   8.9    8.1    7.5    7.5    7.1    6.8    6.8    6.4    ..
    Burkina Faso                ..    84.8    ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    Burundi                     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    Cabo Verde                  ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    Cambodia                    ..     ..     ..     ..    72.2   57.6   54.2   55.8   51     ..
    Cameroon                    ..    55.7    ..     ..     ..     ..    53.3    ..     ..    ..
    Canada                     2.7    2.7    2.6    2.5    2.4     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    Cayman Islands              ..    1.7    2.3    1.8    1.9     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    Central African Republic    ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    Chad                        ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    Channel Islands             ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    Chile                      13.4   13.2   12.8   12.3   11.7   11.2   10.6   10.3    ..    ..
    China                      46.9   44.8   42.6   40.8   39.6   38.1   36.7   34.8    ..    ..
    Colombia                   19.5   21.4   20.7   19.7   17.9   18.1   18.4   17.6   16.9   ..
    Comoros                     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    Congo, Dem. Rep.            ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    Congo, Rep.                 ..    35.4    ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    Costa Rica                 14.8   15.2   14     13.2   12.3   12.3   15     14.1   13.4   ..
    Cote d'Ivoire               ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    Croatia                    16.4   17.3   14.2   13.1   13.4   13.9   14.9   15.4   13.7   ..
    Cuba                       21.2   20.2   20     18.7   18.6   18.6   18.5   19.7    ..    ..
    Curacao                     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    Cyprus                      5     4.6    4.3    4.4    4.2    3.9    3.8    3.8    2.9    ..
    Czech Republic             4.3     4     3.8    3.6    3.2    3.1    3.1     3     3.1    ..
    Denmark                    2.9    2.8    2.9    2.6    2.5    2.6    2.4    2.4    2.6    ..
    Djibouti                    ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    Dominica                    ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..


                                                     31 
 
                                                                                              
 
    Dominican Republic   14.8   14.6   15     14.5   15     14.5   12     14.5    ..    ..
    Ecuador              32.7   31.5   31.3   29.6   28.7   28.7   28.2   28.3   27.8   ..
    Egypt, Arab Rep.     31.8   30.9   31.2   31.7   31.6   29.9   28.2   29.2    ..    ..
    El Salvador          19.1   20     18.9   18     18.7   20.9   20.8   21.6   21     ..
    Equatorial Guinea     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    Eritrea               ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    Estonia              5.8    5.2    4.8    4.6    3.9     4     4.2    4.4    4.7    ..
    Ethiopia             82.1   79.3    ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    Faeroe Islands        ..    11.1    ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    Fiji                  ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    Finland              4.9    4.8    4.6    4.5    4.5    4.6    4.4    4.2    4.1    ..
    France               3.9    3.6    3.7    3.5    2.7    2.9    2.9    2.9    2.9    ..
    French Polynesia     4.3    4.3    4.4    9.2     4     3.3    3.4    3.4     ..    ..
    Gabon                 ..    24.2    ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    Gambia, The           ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    Georgia              54     54.3   55.3   53.4    ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    Germany              2.3    2.4    2.3    2.2    1.8    1.7    1.6    1.6    1.5    ..
    Ghana                 ..     ..    57.2    ..     ..     ..    41.5    ..     ..    ..
    Greece               12.6   12.4   12     11.5   11.3   11.9   12.5   12.4   13     ..
    Greenland             ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    Grenada               ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    Guam                  ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    0.3     ..     ..    ..
    Guatemala            38.3    ..    33.2    ..     ..     ..    33.5   37.7   32.3   ..
    Guinea                ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    Guinea-Bissau         ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    Guyana                ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    Haiti                 ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    Honduras             34.9   39.2   36.3   34.6   35.5   37.1   36     35.3    ..    ..


                                               32 
 
                                                                                                            
 
    Hong Kong SAR, China   0.3    0.3    0.2    0.2     0.2     ..       ..         ..        ..      ..
    Hungary                5.3     5     4.9    4.7     4.3    4.6      4.5        4.8        5.2     ..
    Iceland                6.4    6.5    6.3    5.9     4.6    4.8      5.5        5.5        5.5     ..
    India                   ..    55.8    ..     ..      ..     ..      51.1        ..       47.2     ..
    Indonesia              43.3   44     42     41.2    40.3   39.7   38.34747   38.96495   35.0896   ..
    Iran, Islamic Rep.      ..    24.7   23.2   22.8    21.2    ..       ..         ..        ..      ..
    Iraq                   17      ..    29.7   15.1    23.4    ..       ..         ..        ..      ..
    Ireland                5.4    5.9    5.6    5.4     5.3    4.9      4.5        4.5        4.7     ..
    Isle of Man             ..     ..    1.9     ..      ..     ..       ..         ..        ..      ..
    Israel                  2      2     1.8    1.6     1.7    1.7       ..         ..        ..      ..
    Italy                  4.2    4.2    4.3     4      3.7    3.7      3.8        3.7        3.7     ..
    Jamaica                18.5   18.1   18.2   17.6    18.7   20.2     20.2       17.6      18.1     ..
    Japan                  4.5    4.4    4.3    3.9     3.8    3.9      3.7         ..        ..      ..
    Jordan                 3.6    3.4    3.1    2.7     2.6     3        2         1.7        2       ..
    Kazakhstan             33.5   32.4   31.5   31.2    30.2   29.4     28.3       26.5      25.5     ..
    Kenya                   ..    61.1    ..     ..      ..     ..       ..         ..        ..      ..
    Kiribati                ..     ..     ..     ..      ..     ..       ..         ..        ..      ..
    Korea, Dem. Rep.        ..     ..     ..     ..      ..     ..       ..         ..        ..      ..
    Korea, Rep.            8.1    7.9    7.7    7.6     7.2     7       6.6         ..        ..      ..
    Kosovo                  ..     ..     ..     ..      ..     ..       ..         ..        4.6     ..
    Kuwait                  ..    2.7     ..     ..      ..     ..       ..         ..        ..      ..
    Kyrgyz Republic        38.9   38.5   36.3   34.5    34      ..       ..         ..        ..      ..
    Lao PDR                 ..     ..     ..     ..      ..     ..       ..         ..        ..      ..
    Latvia                 13.2   12.1   11.1   9.9     7.9    8.7      8.8        8.9        8.4     ..
    Lebanon                 ..     ..     ..     ..      ..    6.3       ..         ..        ..      ..
    Lesotho                 ..     ..     ..     ..      ..     ..       ..         ..        ..      ..
    Liberia                 ..     ..     ..    47.6     ..     ..      48.9        ..        ..      ..
    Libya                   ..     ..     ..     ..      ..     ..       ..         ..        ..      ..


                                                  33 
 
                                                                                                  
 
    Liechtenstein            ..     ..     ..     ..      ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    Lithuania               15.8   14     12.4   10.4    7.9    9.2     9     8.7    8.9    ..
    Luxembourg               2     1.8    1.8    1.8     1.7    1.3     1     1.2    1.3    ..
    Macao SAR, China        0.3    0.1    0.2    0.1     0.2     0      ..     ..     ..    ..
    Macedonia, FYR          16.8   19.5   20.1   18.2    19.7    ..     ..    18.7   17.3   ..
    Madagascar               ..    80.4    ..     ..      ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    Malawi                   ..     ..     ..     ..      ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    Malaysia                14.6   14.6   14.6   14.8    14     13.5   13.3   11.5   12.6   ..
    Maldives                 ..     ..    11.5    ..      ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    Mali                    41.5    ..    66      ..      ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    Malta                   1.9    1.7    1.6    1.6     1.7    1.4    1.3    1.1     1     ..
    Marshall Islands         ..     ..     ..     ..      ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    Mauritania               ..     ..     ..     ..      ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    Mauritius               10     10     9.6    9.1     8.9     9     8.7    8.4    7.8    ..
    Mexico                  16.4   14.9   14.3   13.5    13.1   13.5   13.1   13.4    ..    ..
    Micronesia, Fed. Sts.    ..     ..     ..     ..      ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    Moldova                 40.5   40.7   33.6   32.8    31.1   28.2   27.5   27.5   26.4   ..
    Monaco                   ..     ..     ..     ..      ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    Mongolia                40.2   39.9   38.8   41.6    40.6   40     33     32.6    ..    ..
    Montenegro               ..    8.6     ..    8.7     7.6    6.5    6.2    5.6    5.7    ..
    Morocco                 45.8   45.4   43.3   42.1    40.9   40.5   40.2   39.8   39.2   ..
    Mozambique               ..     ..     ..     ..      ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    Myanmar                  ..     ..     ..     ..      ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    Namibia                 29.9    ..     ..     ..     16.3    ..     ..    29.8   27.4   ..
    Nepal                    ..     ..     ..     ..      ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    Netherlands             3.1    3.2    3.1    2.8     2.6    2.5    2.8    2.5     ..    ..
    New Caledonia            ..    3.1    2.9    2.9     2.7     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    New Zealand             7.5    7.1    7.1    7.2     6.9    6.6     ..     ..     ..    ..


                                                   34 
 
                                                                                                      
 
    Nicaragua                  30.3   28.9   29.1   29.5   28.2    ..    32.2    ..     ..     ..
    Niger                       ..    56.9    ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..
    Nigeria                    44.6    ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..
    Northern Mariana Islands    ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..
    Norway                     3.6    3.3    3.3    2.9    2.6    2.7    2.5    2.4    2.2     ..
    Oman                        ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    5.2     ..     ..     ..
    Pakistan                   43     43     43.4   43.6   44.7    ..     ..    45.1    ..    43.7
    Palau                       ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..
    Panama                     19.3   19.3   19.5   18.9   17.9   17.9   17.4   17     16.7    ..
    Papua New Guinea            ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..
    Paraguay                   33.3   32.4   31.2   29.5   26.5   29.5   26.8   26.4   27.2    ..
    Peru                       33.3   32.9   32     28.2   27.5   27.7   25.7   25.8    ..     ..
    Philippines                36     36     35.8   35.1   35.3   35.2   33.2   33     32.2    ..
    Poland                     18     17.4   15.8   14.7   14     13.3   12.8   12.7   12.6    ..
    Portugal                   12.1   11.8   11.7   11.6   11.2   11.2   10.9   9.9    10.5    ..
    Puerto Rico                2.1    2.1    1.4    1.1    1.5    1.5    1.6    1.6    1.6     ..
    Qatar                      2.7     ..     3     2.4    1.6    1.6     ..    1.4    1.4     ..
    Romania                    31.6   32.1   30.5   29.5   28.7   29.1   30.1   28.6   29      ..
    Russian Federation         10.2   10.2   10      9     8.6    9.7     ..     ..     ..     ..
    Rwanda                      ..    78.8    ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..
    Samoa                       ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..
    San Marino                 0.4    0.5    0.4    0.4    0.3     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..
    Sao Tome and Principe       ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..
    Saudi Arabia                ..     ..     4     4.3    4.3    4.1     ..    4.3    4.7     ..
    Senegal                     ..     ..    33.7    ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..
    Serbia                     24     23.3   20.5   20.8   25.1   24     22.2   21.2   21      ..
    Seychelles                  ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..
    Sierra Leone               68.5    ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..


                                                     35 
 
                                                                                                          
 
    Singapore                        0.8    1.1    1.3    1.1    1.2    1.1     ..     ..     ..    ..
    Sint Maarten (Dutch part)         ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    Slovak Republic                  5.1    4.7    4.4    4.2     4     3.6    3.2     3     3.2    ..
    Slovenia                         9.6    8.8    9.6    10.2   8.6    9.1    8.8    8.6    8.3    ..
    Solomon Islands                   ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    Somalia                           ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    South Africa                     9.1    7.5    8.5    8.8    5.7    5.1    4.9    4.6     ..    ..
    South Sudan                       ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    Spain                            5.5    5.3    4.8    4.5     4     4.2    4.3    4.2    4.4    ..
    Sri Lanka                        33.5   30.7   32.2   31.3   32.6   32.6   32.7   40.2   39.4   ..
    St. Kitts and Nevis               ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    St. Lucia                        14.8    ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    St. Martin (French part)          ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    St. Vincent and the Grenadines    ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    Sudan                             ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    Suriname                          8      ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    Swaziland                         ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    Sweden                           2.1     2      2     2.2    2.1    2.2    2.1     2      2     ..
    Switzerland                      3.8    3.8    3.8    3.9    3.3    3.1    3.3    3.4    3.5    ..
    Syrian Arab Republic              ..     ..    19.6   19.1   16.9   15.2   14.3   14.3    ..    ..
    Tajikistan                       55.5    ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    Tanzania                          ..     ..    76.5    ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    Thailand                         42.3   42.6   42.1   41.7   42.5   39     38.2   38.7   39.6   ..
    Timor-Leste                       ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    50.6    ..     ..    ..
    Togo                              ..     ..    54.1    ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    Tonga                             ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    Trinidad and Tobago              4.6    4.3    4.4    3.8    3.8     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    Tunisia                           ..    18.7   19.3   18.3   17.7   18.1   17.6   16.2    ..    ..


                                                           36 
 
                                                                                                       
 
    Turkey                         34    29.5   27.3   23.5   23.7   22.9   23.7   24.2   23.6   ..
    Turkmenistan                    ..    ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    Turks and Caicos Islands       1.6   1.4    1.8    1.2     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    Tuvalu                          ..    ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    Uganda                          ..   71.6    ..     ..     ..    65.6    ..     ..     ..    ..
    Ukraine                       19.7   19.4   17.6   16.7   15.8   15.6    ..    16.8   17.2   ..
    United Arab Emirates            ..   4.9     ..     ..    4.2    3.8     ..     ..     ..    ..
    United Kingdom                 1.3   1.3    1.3    1.4    1.1    1.1    1.2    1.2    1.2    ..
    United States                  1.6   1.6    1.5    1.4    1.5    1.5    1.6     ..     ..    ..
    Uruguay                         5    4.6    11.1   11     10.8   11.1   11.8   10.9    ..    ..
    Uzbekistan                      ..    ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    Vanuatu                         ..    ..     ..     ..     ..    60.5    ..     ..     ..    ..
    Venezuela, RB                 10.4   9.7    9.1    8.7    8.5    8.8    8.7     ..    7.7    ..
    Vietnam                       57.9    ..    51.7    ..     ..     ..     ..    48.4   47.4   ..
    Virgin Islands (U.S.)           ..    ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    West Bank and Gaza            15.9   14.6   16.1   15.6   13.4   11.8   11.8   11.9   11.5   ..
    Yemen, Rep.                    31     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    24.7    ..     ..    ..
    Zambia                          ..   72.2    ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
    Zimbabwe                      64.8    ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..     ..    ..
Source: World Development Indicators.




                                                        37 
 
                                                                                                      
 
Attachment 2.B: Country Tables, Employment in Agriculture, IFAD

                                                                        Growth in Ag       Ag
                                                 Ag Employment          Employment     Employment
                                                    (millions)              (%)           (%)
                                                 1988           2007     1998-2008     1988   2007
                Afghanistan                      3.89           7.53        93.8       63.3
                Algeria                          1.84           2.92        58.5       14.6   12.5
                Angola                           3.52           5.22        48.4       69.6   55.4
                Antigua and Barbuda              0.01           0.01        12.5         .      .
                Argentina                        1.46           1.43        -2.5        7.7   5.6
                Bangladesh                       32.9          37.87        15.1        56    36.9
                Barbados                         0.01           0.01       -44.4        5.4   2.7
                Belize                           0.02           0.03        52.6       20.3   15.5
                Benin                            1.44           1.92        33.7       62.8   41.4
                Bhutan                           0.75           1.02        36.1         .      .
                Bolivia                          1.21           1.65        36.5       34.5   29.1
                Botswana                         0.29           0.35        21.6       43.8   29.7
                Brazil                          16.03           11.93      -25.6       18.6    9.3
                Burkina                          Faso            3.9        5.79       48.5   93.1
                Burundi                          2.67           3.59        34.5       95.2   76.4
                Cambodia                         3.03           4.96        63.8       62.9   56.2
                Cameroon                         3.13            3.7        18.2       53.2   35.3
                Cape Verde                       0.04           0.04        10.8       22.5    14
                CAR                              1.14           1.28        12.2       74.9   52.4
                Chad                             2.25           3.09         37        77.3   54.3
                Chile                            0.92           1.02        11.4       11.3    8.9
                China                           474.53         509.22        7.3       65.6   53.7

                                                         38 
 
                                                                            
 
                                              Growth in Ag       Ag
                        Ag Employment         Employment     Employment
                           (millions)             (%)           (%)
                        1988          2007     1998-2008     1988   2007
    Colombia             3.76          3.65        -3        20.1   12.6
    Comoros              0.18          0.27       54.9       84.7   71.7
    Congo                0.49          0.58       19.7       40.7   29.1
    Costa                Rica          0.31       0.33        7.2   17.7
    Côte d'Ivoire        2.83          3.22       14.1       46.2   28.3
    Cuba                 0.87          0.71      -18.2       12.3     9
    Korea                3.84           3.1      -19.2       28.5    19
    DRC                 10.44         14.43       38.2       58.3   44.6
    Djibouti             0.01          0.01      -11.1         .      .
    Dominica             0.01          0.01      -11.1       21.6   17.6
    Dominican            0.69          0.53      -23.1       15.5    7.7
    Ecuador              1.17          1.21       3.3        21.3   14.4
    Egypt                7.88           8.6       9.2        26.6   16.7
    El Salvador           0.7          0.81       15.3       25.2   21.9
    Equatorial Guinea    0.11          0.14       25.2       53.2   37.8
    Eritrea                .          1.43          .          .    53.3
    Ethiopia               .          27.53         .          .    64.4
    Fiji                 0.11          0.14       19.5       26.8   25.3
    Gabon                0.22           0.2      -10.5       47.4   23.1
    Gambia              (The)          0.36       0.6        66.3    80
    Ghana                4.15          6.25       50.4       55.8   46.4
    Grenada              0.01          0.01       -8.3       22.6   16.1
    Guatemala            1.54          1.93       24.9       35.5   26.4
    Guinea               2.67          3.79       41.9       88.9   71.5
                                39 
 
                                                                          
 
                                            Growth in Ag       Ag
                    Ag Employment           Employment     Employment
                       (millions)               (%)           (%)
                     1988           2007     1998-2008     1988   2007
    Guinea-Bissau    0.37           0.55        47.3       70.9   64.9
    Guyana           0.06           0.05       -13.3       13.7   10.7
    Haiti            1.93           2.24        16.2       53.1   38.8
    Honduras          0.7           0.79        12.5       29.7   18.8
    India           225.85         280.72       24.3       47.7   38.8
    Indonesia       42.18          50.54        19.8       41.3   33.2
    Iran             5.36           6.69        24.9        20    13.2
    Iraq             0.83           0.65       -21.3        9.4     .
    Jamaica          0.29           0.25        -13        21.3   14.8
    Jordan           0.12           0.19        67.2         8     5.4
    Kenya            8.39          12.71        51.5       80.3   60.4
    Lao              1.52           2.28        49.5       72.7   63.1
    Lebanon          0.07           0.04       -52.1        4.3    1.3
    Lesotho          0.24           0.28         14        30.6   24.4
    Liberia          0.63            0.8        25.6       54.3   38.9
    Madagascar       4.36           6.46        48.1        79     63
    Malawi           3.74            4.9         31          .     68
    Malaysia         2.05           1.71       -16.4       20.5    9.7
    Maldives         0.03           0.03       -12.9       30.3    13
    Mali             3.67           4.98        35.7       95.8   73.3
    Mauritania       0.52           0.71        35.1       53.7   38.3
    Mauritius        0.08           0.05       -30.8       11.4    6.1
    Mexico           8.44           8.51        0.9        18.9   12.4
    Morocco           4.1           4.24         3.5       31.8   20.6
                             40 
 
                                                                                
 
                                                  Growth in Ag       Ag
                            Ag Employment         Employment     Employment
                               (millions)             (%)           (%)
                            1988          2007     1998-2008     1988   2007
    Mozambique              5.72          8.25        44.2       84.8   71.9
    Myanmar                 14.85         19.48       31.2       66.5   58.7
    Namibia                 0.21          0.25        22.4       30.3   20.5
    Nepal                   8.17          12.08       47.9       82.6   71.8
    Nicaragua               0.41           0.38       -6.8       20.6   11.3
    Niger                   3.44          5.64        63.7       95.9   79.5
    Nigeria                 15.46         15.19       -1.7       33.9   18.5
    Oman                    0.24          0.32        32.6       26.2   17.5
    Pakistan                20.03          27.7       38.3       36.9   28.4
    Panama                  0.24          0.25        5.1        17.2   11.4
    PNG                      1.5          2.03        35.2       68.8   54.8
    Paraguay                0.58          0.77        32.6       26.8   20.4
    Peru                    2.56           3.1        20.7       21.5   16.9
    Philippines             10.73         13.09       21.9       32.4   23.5
    Rwanda                   3.2          4.38        36.7       93.7   81.4
    Saint Kits and Nevis    0.01             0        -20          .      .
    Saint Lucia             0.02          0.02        6.7        20.8   14.2
    Saint Vincent and the
    Grenadines              0.01          0.01         0         204    16.7
    Samoa                   0.03          0.02        -20          .     20
    Sao Tome and Principe   0.03          0.05        32.4       62.8   50.9
    Senegal                 2.55          3.75        46.7        71     57
    Seychelles              0.03          0.04        14.7         .      .
    Sierra Leone            1.04          1.25        20.2        48    40.9

                                    41 
 
                                                                                               
 
                                                                 Growth in Ag       Ag
                                           Ag Employment         Employment     Employment
                                              (millions)             (%)           (%)
                                           1988          2007     1998-2008     1988   2007
                     Solomon Islands       0.12          0.18        50.8       78.4   61.1
                     Somalia               2.29          2.57        12.1       65.9   54.8
                     South Africa          1.63           1.29      -20.6        8.4    4.2
                     Sri Lanka              3.4          4.23        24.4        33    30.6
                     Sudan                 6.47          8.22         27        47.5   34.9
                     Suriname              0.03          0.03        14.3       11.6    9.6
                     Swaziland             0.11          0.12        4.5         28    17.4
                     Syrian                1.15          1.69        46.7       19.9    13
                     Thailand              19.56          20.2        3.3       55.4   42.5
                     Togo                  1.02          1.49         45        54.6   40.9
                     Tonga                 0.01           0.01      -14.3       26.8   20.4
                     Trinidad and Tobago   0.05           0.05       -7.8         7     4.8
                     Tunisia               0.82          0.99        20.3       18.5   13.8
                     Turkey                12.92         14.99        16        40.7   30.3
                     Uganda                7.09          10.57       49.1       86.9   68.9
                     Tanzania              10.87          15.8       45.4       88.9   71.2
                     Uruguay               0.19           0.19       -1.6       10.1     9
                     Venezuela             0.86           0.76      -11.5        7.9    4.2
                     Vietnam               22.8          29.47       29.2        65    50.9
                     Yemen                 2.07          3.09        49.6       39.5   25.1
                     Zambia                2.53          3.29        30.4       66.2   51.4
                     Zimbabwe              3.07          3.69        20.1       62.1   53.1
Source: IFAD Rural Poverty Report (2011)



                                                   42 
 
