                                                  103237




INVESTING IN
LEARNING
OUTCOMES
Findings from an Independent Evaluation of the Russia
Education Aid for Development (READ) Trust Fund Program.




Alan Ruby and Daniel C. Kent

Prepared for the World Bank, December 2015

                                                           1
This report was prepared by Alan Ruby, Senior Scholar, and Daniel C. Kent, graduate assistant, of
the Alliance for Higher Education and Democracy (AHEAD) at the University of Pennsylvania’s
Graduate School of Education. AHEAD is a group of scholars, researchers, and practitioners who
share a commitment to “advancing higher education policy and practice that fosters open,
equitable, and democratic societies” (http://ahead-penn.org). The authors wish to thank the
representatives of the Russian Government and current and former World Bank officials for their
willing participation in the review of Russia’s significant investment in strengthening learning
outcomes. The final report has benefited from constructive feedback and helpful comments and
corrections from both the Russian authorities and the World Bank. We particularly wish to
acknowledge the inputs of Emily Gardner who prepared the final report for the World Bank and
Marguerite Clarke whose technical expertise in assessment and leadership were referenced by
many we interviewed and were present in all aspects of the review.




                                                                                               2
Table of Contents
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ...................................................................................................................... 4
WHAT IS READ? .................................................................................................................................9
  OVERVIEW .................................................................................................................................................. 9
  BASIC ORGANIZATION ................................................................................................................................... 9
  OPERATIONAL GOALS.................................................................................................................................. 10
  WHY EVALUATE READ? .............................................................................................................................. 10
NATURE OF THE EVALUATION .......................................................................................................... 11
  OUR TASK ................................................................................................................................................. 11
  REVIEW PROCESS ....................................................................................................................................... 12
  DOCUMENT REVIEW ................................................................................................................................... 14
  LIMITATIONS.............................................................................................................................................. 14
HOW MUCH MONEY WENT WHERE? ................................................................................................ 15
  GLOBAL-LEVEL ALLOCATIONS ....................................................................................................................... 15
  COUNTRY ALLOCATIONS .............................................................................................................................. 15
WHAT DID READ ACHIEVE AT THE GLOBAL LEVEL .............................................................................. 16
  METHODS ................................................................................................................................................. 16
  ACTIVITY TYPES AT THE GLOBAL LEVEL ........................................................................................................... 17
  TRAINING CONSTITUENCY AT THE GLOBAL LEVEL ............................................................................................. 18
SCOPE AND DEPTH OF GLOBAL KNOWLEDGE PRODUCTS. ................................................................. 19
WHAT DID READ ACHIEVE AT THE COUNTRY LEVEL? ......................................................................... 21
  METHODS ................................................................................................................................................. 21
  ACTIVITY TYPES AT THE COUNTRY LEVEL ......................................................................................................... 21
  TRAINING CONSTITUENCY AT THE COUNTRY LEVEL ........................................................................................... 22
HOW TO APPRAISE READ’S ACHIEVEMENTS? .................................................................................... 26
  FIELD BUILDING OR FIELD SUPPORTING? ........................................................................................................ 28
  ACTIVITY PURPOSE AT THE COUNTRY LEVEL .................................................................................................... 29
WHAT DID READ ACHIEVE FOR THE DONOR? .................................................................................... 30
WHAT DID READ ACHIEVE FOR THE WORLD BANK?........................................................................... 30
WHAT DID READ ACHIEVE FOR THE FIELD?........................................................................................ 32
WHAT WERE READ’S STRENGTHS & WEAKNESSES? ........................................................................... 34
IS THERE A NEED FOR READ 2? ......................................................................................................... 38
SYNTHESIS ....................................................................................................................................... 41
APPENDICES .................................................................................................................................... 42
REFERENCES .................................................................................................................................... 55

                                                                                                                                                             3
Executive Summary


The goal of the Russia Education Aid for Development (READ) Trust Fund program was to increase
educational assessment capacity in developing countries. Funded by the Russian Government
and overseen by a council made up of Russian Government appointees and World Bank officials,
it operated from 2008 to 2015. The READ Council asked the World Bank to commission an
independent review of the Trust Fund’s impact to identify strengths and weaknesses in design
and implementation. The findings would be used to inform the development of other donor-led
trust funds and to guide the design of any future iteration of the READ program.

The Trust Fund’s emphasis on the quality of education and focus on learning outcomes makes it
an ideal candidate for evaluation. In addition to capturing knowledge about what worked and
what was difficult, this evaluation is also an opportunity to document the experience of a large
institution working with and adapting to a new, significant donor with distinct needs, priorities,
and norms of practice.

The review explores eight broad themes: 1) Global Achievements of the READ Program; 2)
Country-Level Achievements of the READ Program; 3) Donor-Side Achievements of the READ
Program; 4) World Bank-Side Achievements of the READ Program; 5) Strengths of the READ
Program; 6) Weaknesses of the READ Program; 7) Opportunities for More Global Work on
Learning Outcomes; and 8) the Shape and Design of READ 2. It does not cover READ Reimbursable
Advisory Services, which supported Russia’s Center for International Cooperation in Education
Development (CICED).

In its final form, the READ Trust Fund held US$32 million. Just over a third of the fund was
allocated to global activities and nearly 60 percent to country-level programs and projects; the
balance was the World Bank’s standard trust fund management fee. The global allocations
supported five main streams of work: new knowledge products about student assessment
systems and techniques; disseminating this knowledge and country experiences to a global
audience; building and participating in partnerships with other donors and development
agencies; strengthening connections and networks in the assessment field by convening the
READ country teams and other assessment practitioners and experts; and overseeing and
monitoring the implementation of projects at the global and country levels.

The two most striking global achievements were a substantial addition to the knowledge base on
assessment and the closer integration of the agencies, national officials, and academic experts
working in the field of educational assessment. READ “created a lot of value through global public
                                                                                                4
goods”, deepening understanding of national and international assessment techniques and
sharing instances of good practice. The SABER (Systems Approach for Better Education Results)-
Student Assessment frameworks are a significant technological advance in how to diagnose the
strengths and weaknesses of a national assessment system. The knowledge products produced
under READ cover different assessment traditions, different institutional approaches to quality
assurance, and different governance structures. The READ global products were “Russian funded
and READ branded, but the quality is World Bank assured.”

READ initially focused on seven countries: Angola, Ethiopia, Kyrgyz Republic, Mozambique,
Tajikistan, Vietnam, and Zambia. In 2011, Armenia was invited to join the program at the request
of the donor. The eight target countries received US$18.7 million over the life of the program.
The individual country allocations were based on national action plans and ranged from just over
US$1 million in Ethiopia and Armenia to a little more than US$4 million in Tajikistan.

The scope of READ-financed activities at the country level was wide and deep, addressing topics
as diverse as early grade reading in Mozambique and Angola to exit examinations and school
inspections in Ethiopia. All eight nations invested significantly in developing local expertise in
assessment using short courses, degree programs, study tours, and workshops covering topics
like item banks, test integrity, formative assessment, and interpreting national and international
survey results.

At the start of the READ program, the World Bank team used key indicators from the SABER-
Student Assessment framework to establish baseline values for each target country in the four
main domains of a national assessment system. Repeating the exercise in 2014 allowed the team
to determine the progress each country had made in these key indicator areas and domains. In
all, six of the initial seven READ countries made progress on at least one of the main domains.
The exception, Tajikistan, showed progress on some of the sub-indicators and is well placed to
continue to develop. Armenia, a later addition to the READ target group, had less time to gain
momentum.

While the eight target nations benefited substantially from READ, its activities also reached many
other nations. For example, the World Bank team used some of the READ-financed tools to
benchmark countries in East Asia and the Middle East and North Africa. In all, 51 countries were
involved in READ activities or were the subject of READ case studies or reports.

One way to capture what READ produced is to view its outputs through a “field-building” versus
“field-supporting” framework. This language from the philanthropic community makes a
distinction between interventions which support a range of activities and organizations in a
strategic or innovative fashion and activities which take a proven technique to a wider audience.



                                                                                                5
Field-building activities tend to address a specific opportunity in a domain; create new knowledge
or technologies; invest in actions, networks, and agencies that apply new policies or practices;
develop and adopt the right standards; build up infrastructure; and share knowledge.

Field-supporting activities scale up an existing process or program, reaching more people or sites.
They tend to be activities that are or will become the ongoing responsibility of an agency or
organization.

More than half of READ’s global activities were oriented towards field building while three
quarters of the country-level activities were field supporting.

The field-building work is exemplified by the SABER-Student Assessment framework, the country
case studies, the investment in PISA for Development, and the alliances and partnerships
developed through READ.

In addition to its contributions to the field of educational assessment and to education in the
target countries, READ’s successes can be viewed in terms of what it achieved for Russia and for
the World Bank.

For Russia, the donor, READ established its reputation as a global leader committed to the
improvement of education in developing countries. It also established Russia as a source of
expertise in the field of educational assessment and proved that Russia was committed to
working collaboratively with the World Bank to improve educational achievement, equity, and
quality across the world.

READ allowed the World Bank to leverage its world-class assessment expertise by creating
accessible materials in the domain, including a global template for diagnosing assessment
systems. READ’s activities and products shifted the focus of the development community
towards issues of quality and learning outcomes, equipped World Bank operations staff to lead
policy discussions with country counterparts, and established a basis for new investments in
educational quality.

Some of READ’s successes come from the way it was designed and implemented. READ focused
on a specific field, assessment of learning outcomes. It concentrated its resources on a small
number of countries and on a suite of knowledge products. As a result, at both the country and
global levels, work programs were relatively well resourced. This enabled countries to carry out
substantial initiatives.

Overall, READ was purposefully and thoughtfully planned. The program channeled a new
international donor’s funds into an area where they could have some observable impact in the
short term and lay the basis for sustained improvement. The READ Council was also flexible,

                                                                                                 6
responding positively to proposals from countries that took different approaches to building
better assessment systems.

The design and implementation of READ also struck an appropriate balance between creating
global public goods (the READ knowledge products) and supporting country-specific activities
that were grounded in a good appreciation of the needs and priorities of a particular nation.

The tight geographic focus of the country-level activities was in part a product of the donor
predetermining the beneficiaries. The selection of the target countries by the donor concerned
many World Bank staff who felt that it created a sense of entitlement rather than an incentive to
improve or innovate. Many of them preferred a competitive funding process where countries
applied for support. Other criticisms of the program include its support for large-scale training
and the limited opportunities for cross-national exchange of ideas and approaches in the initial
years.

These design issues from READ 1 – the pre-determined target nations and sense of entitlement;
the balance between innovative, experimental, and reform activities and large-scale, recurrent
training; and national insularity in the initial planning phases should be addressed in the design
of subsequent trust funds. At the heart of these concerns is the selection of eligible countries.
There is a difference between a donor-determined closed set of target countries and a “donor
informed” list of eligibility criteria for applicants. The first has the problems of entitlement and
reduced motivation. The second raises country expectations and tends to diffuse resources and
diminish donor commitment. The middle ground may be in determining a list of eligible countries
with the active engagement of the donor and inviting applications in a form akin to the action
plans from READ 1. Eligible countries might request through a “letter of intent” a modest base
allocation to underwrite the preparation of a national improvement plan that is assessed
competitively by a central team, with allocation decisions made by the READ Council.

There is still much to be done in the broad area of learning outcomes globally and within the
eight countries in the initial READ program. At the global level, the international development
community has reaffirmed the importance of learning outcomes as a cornerstone of quality
education. The “Incheon Declaration” and the associated framework for action stressed the
importance of stronger evaluation and measurement processes.

This is aligned with the Sustainable Development Goal of ensuring “inclusive and equitable
quality education” and promoting lifelong learning for all (United Nations, 2015) .

At the cross-national level, the international trend surveys continue to be powerful tools for
mobilizing resources and political interest in better quality learning for all. PISA and TIMSS are



                                                                                                  7
useful comparative tools that constitute “public goods” by making data about learning outcomes
openly accessible and useable by all.

There is much to be gained from using the SABER-Student Assessment framework to guide and
monitor development in the area of student assessment systems and to identify areas where
good practices should be documented and disseminated. The continued investment in the
creation of knowledge products that illuminate different
ways of measuring learning outcomes to guide resource
allocation and appraise strategies is a worthwhile              “The global public goods
strategic investment. A lot of the knowledge products           element is an essential part of
                                                                READ. The products gave shape
created through READ concentrated on national and
                                                                and coherence” to many
international large-scale assessments and produced              country activities and
admirable studies of different practices. There is a need       underpinned the successful
for a similar investment in the field of high-stakes            international partnerships.
student examinations where READ 2 could “create a
critical mass of products” that could inform practice and
policy at the national and provincial levels and support
a global conversation about integrity, fairness, and transparency in the design, conduct, and uses
of exit and completion examinations. These knowledge products should also examine how
educational leaders can use and interpret data from different types of assessments to inform
policy and practice and to communicate to stakeholders.




                                                                                                8
What is READ?

Overview
In October of 2008, the Government of Russia and the World Bank agreed to collaborate, for an
initial period of five years, on the Russia Education Aid for Development (READ) Program to
facilitate Russia's effort to expand its role as an emerging donor, and to focus that effort on the
education sector. The original conception was to pursue two high-level objectives:

   (1) To assist countries with well-designed plans for improving access to basic education to
       also improve education quality and learning outcomes; and
   (2) To build Russia’s capabilities as a provider of robust and reliable technical assistance on
       education issues to low-income countries.

The first objective would be addressed by establishing “the READ Trust Fund,” a single-donor
trust fund in the World Bank to finance analytical work, build capacity, and fund countries' efforts
to measure and improve learning outcomes.

These activities were aligned with the World Bank’s education strategy established in 2005, which
included an emphasis on “more results-oriented" projects and products that maintained the
quality of educational services as participation in primary and secondary schooling increased
under “Education for All” initiatives.

This linkage ensured that the READ activities would be aligned with the multi-donor partnership,
“The Education for All - Fast-Track Initiative” (FTI), which was supposed to help countries make
rapid progress towards the Millennium Development Goal of universal primary school
completion by 2015. To complement countries' efforts to increase enrollment and successful
school completion, READ funds would enable the World Bank to deliver research and analytical
services, technical assistance, training, and materials development which would support the
“design, implementation, and evaluation of interventions to improve education outcomes in
developing countries.” As well as aligning with global education priorities and with the World
Bank sector strategy, the READ program was connected to the Russia/World Bank Country
Partnership strategy, which envisaged co-operative endeavors that would help establish Russia’s
Official Development Assistance program.

READ constituted a multi-year, multi-million-dollar endeavor. It was envisioned as a five-year,
US$50 million commitment that would be relatively tightly focused to ensure that there was a
greater chance of real, observable impact.

Basic Organization
The funds for the READ program were provided by the Russian Government. The Trust Fund
program was overseen by the READ Council, which was made up of Russian and World Bank

                                                                                                  9
leaders. The Council set broad strategic directions for the program and established the leadership
of the program. The program was implemented at the global level by World Bank central staff
who worked on many of the global initiatives discussed in this report. In the target countries,
programs were overseen by World Bank education specialists and operations officers who
worked closely with country officials and staff. The evaluation team was not directly involved in
the implementation of the program.

Operational Goals
The READ program had different goals and activities at the global and country levels.

At the global level, the primary goals of the program were to contribute to the overall knowledge
of countries in the field of educational assessment through the development and dissemination
of tools, analytical reports, and case studies on ideal assessment practices and strategy.

At the country level the goal was to address key gaps in assessment capacities that were
identified in countries’ initial action plans. These plans and activities varied significantly as
countries were at different stages along the continuum of assessment development.

Seven countries were initially selected to participate in the READ Trust Fund program. These
countries were Angola, Ethiopia, Kyrgyz Republic, Mozambique, Tajikistan, Vietnam, and Zambia.
In 2011, Armenia was invited to join the READ Trust Fund group of countries at the request of
the donor. Although Armenia was added late in the program, it was still able to access significant
technical services and financial resources to build up its assessment capacity and expertise.
Armenia also had immediate access to the suite of global knowledge products.

Each country was assigned at least one World Bank Task Team Leader for the execution of the
funds. These staff worked closely with national ministry of education officials to determine needs
and priorities, understand the local context, and identify appropriate interventions or activities
to build up existing capacity and improve assessment quality. Most of the funds were disbursed
through procedures requiring direct authorization by World Bank officials, making READ a
predominantly “Bank-executed” rather than recipient- or client-executed program.



Why Evaluate READ?
The scale and length of the commitment is sufficient justification for an external review, but a
more compelling reason is the emphasis on the quality of education and an attendant focus on
learning outcomes. This emphasis was an important addition to the global focus on the goal of
universal basic education, which rightly invested resources in increasing access and participation.
READ’s attention to quality and measurement of student learning presaged future development
goals of high-quality educational outcomes and greater attention to evidence-based policy.

                                                                                                10
It is equally important to document the experience of a large institution working with and
adapting to a new, significant donor with its own needs, priorities, and norms of practice. What
lessons can be learnt for future relations between the Government of Russia as an active
participant in Official Development Assistance and development agencies like the World Bank?
Might the experiences of both parties be informative for other emerging donors, both
governmental and private?

Finally, it is of value to observe and learn from how this well-conceived and thoughtfully-designed
program was implemented, noting how it evolved and developed and what was more successful
and what was problematic. This would inform the development community in general, but would
also offer guidance to the donor and the World Bank on the merits of further investments in this
area through a similar mechanism.


Nature of the Evaluation

Our Task
With these rationales in mind, we were asked to review the READ program, document its
strengths and weaknesses, and offer advice on the need for further work in the area of learning
outcomes and the shape and direction of a possible second phase of the READ program. The
review explores eight broad themes:

      Global Achievements of the READ Program;
      Country-Level Achievements of the READ Program;
      Donor-Side Achievements of the READ Program;
      World Bank-Side Achievements of the READ Program;
      Strengths of the READ Program;
      Weaknesses of the READ Program;
      Opportunities for More Global Work on Learning Outcomes; and
      Shape and Design of READ 2.

The Terms of Reference for the work is in Appendix 1. The review does not cover READ
Reimbursable Advisory Services, which supported Russia’s Center for International Cooperation
in Education Development (CICED) and offered opportunities for Russian nationals to share their
expertise in assessment and quality management. There was some interconnection between the
Advisory Services and the READ projects supported through the World Bank-administered Trust
Fund, particularly in the use of two assessment tools; one addressing technology use by
secondary students and one that assesses mathematics, science, and language in primary
schools. The funds for the development of these tools were administered separately and fall
outside the scope of this survey.

                                                                                                11
Review Process
Development projects of this kind are not amenable to quantitative analysis, and causality
between investment and verifiable learning outcomes is difficult to establish. The time scale of
the READ Trust Fund is relatively short, especially in a policy environment where design and
implementation takes years. In some cases, the full effects of a change in assessment technology
can only be discerned after a full cycle of schooling has been completed. Even then, the
performance of a single cohort is not enough to determine unequivocal success or failure.

Aware of these limitations, the review relied principally on qualitative methods, collecting data
and observations through interviews and document review. Where possible, individual’s
experiences and opinions were triangulated with the views of others and with formal records.
The work plan for the review is attached as Appendix 2.

As with any project involving a number of countries with differing capacities in data collection
and presentation, it is difficult to standardize data across countries. This issue is especially
pertinent when working with dispersed teams and countries with different priorities and
traditions. For example, there are at least four different approaches to the assessment of learning
embedded in the educational history of the eight READ nations. The Russian scientific and
positivist approach shapes practice in Armenia, Kyrgyzstan, and Tajikistan. The Russian traditions
have influenced assessment in Vietnam, which also draws on Chinese and French traditions.
Examination and inspection regimes are legacies of British colonial rule in Zambia. Mozambique
inherited a weak education system from Portugal, with significant regional and gender
imbalances, which catered for a minority of the population (Eduardo, 2012, 26). Assessment of
learning was fragmented and inspection systems needed strengthening. Angola had a similar
legacy from its years of Portuguese rule; low participation, limited infrastructure, and no national
examination after any level of education (World Bank, 2013, 4). Ethiopia’s education system was
initially influenced by the French model and French was the language of instruction up to 1935.
The Italian occupation (1935-1941) had little impact on the structure of the school system, but
the British model was important in the first decades of national independence, with English
becoming the mode of instruction and English approaches shaping the evaluation system (Bishaw
& Lasser, 2012).

Conscious of these differences in context and traditions, the interviews conducted during the
review were semi-structured. A list of general themes or questions to be explored in interviews
was generated from the Terms of Reference, and further informed by a review of the key
program documents and the prior experience of the lead reviewer. This was discussed with the
World Bank’s team leader, and then refined and finalized. These questions and themes (see Box
1) were shared with potential participants prior to interview or email exchange, with the proviso
that other issues were likely to be explored and that participants could raise any topic of interest.

                                                                                                  12
Box 1: List of Questions and Themes


1. What worked well in the READ program?

2. What did not and why not?

3. What gaps have been identified in the program coverage that should be addressed in future
READ-funded work?

4. What processes and procedures should be refined to increase effectiveness?

5. How do the participant countries perceive the READ work and how have they integrated it into
ongoing activities?



The reviewers formally interviewed 20 people in total over a three-month period. Interviews
were conducted in-person at the Washington, D.C. offices of the World Bank, remotely via phone,
and via email. These included members of the READ Council, members of the Global Program
team, Country-Level Program team members, and other experts.

There are certain analytical benefits to interviewing an administratively diverse group of people
related to a program. Current and former members of the READ Council provided strategic,
transversal perspectives across the program and covered its inception, execution, and
completion. They also offered insights into the initial organizational strategies of the program
and pointed to the different motivations and goals of the various actors in the development and
delivery of the READ program.

 The Global Program team members provided insight into the design and structure of the cross-
national activities and the challenges of coordinating a program that crosses different regions
and deals with countries in different parts of the World Bank’s organizational structure. They also
contributed to an understanding of how the program differed within the eight target countries,
including differences in timing, initial entry points, and client relationships. There was an unusual
level of staffing continuity or stability among the Global Program staff in the later years of the
program, which enabled them to act as an institutional memory.

Country-level teams dealt most closely with the implementation of the programs, and shared
highly-specific knowledge about the effectiveness and outcomes of the program at the country
level and at the institutional and sector levels. Some program staff members were engaged with
only one nation while others had experience in two READ target nations. Some had relatively
short engagements while others initiated the first READ activities in a nation and saw the program


                                                                                                  13
through its first cycle. These differences in intensity and length of engagement enrich the
qualitative data while adding complexity to the task of analysis.

A full list of those interviewed can be found in Appendix 3.

Document Review
Various documents were reviewed as part of the formative aspect of this evaluation. This yielded
a seemingly objective viewpoint on official READ Trust Fund outcomes. The principal documents
ranged from initial concept notes and a cross section of knowledge products to successive READ
Annual Reports. These reports provided a comprehensive listing of the tangible activities
conducted during the course of the program. Other documents reviewed included the READ Trust
Fund Administrative Agreement; the READ Trust Fund Concept Note and Results Framework;
similar Trust Fund program documents separate from the READ program; a benchmarking
assessment created by Julia Lieberman; a report on “Strengthening Education Quality in East
Asia” produced by the World Bank and UNESCO; and the Statement by the head of the delegation
of the Russian Federation at The Third International Conference on Financing for Development,
Deputy Finance Minister S. Storchak.

Limitations
While the analysis presented in this report is independent, it is not without its shortcomings.
These shortcomings are related to a reliance on qualitative data drawn in large measure from
participants in the READ program who might be expected to see only the successes of their work.
This potential for respondent bias is tempered by the professionalism of the participants and by
the reviewers’ assurance that respondents would not be identified with particular observations
or critical comments.

In addition, there were inconsistencies in the type and quality of data collected across the
different countries and different activities. These differences are apparent both at a global level
and at the country level. As a result, it is difficult to make quantifiable statements about the
outcomes of READ that go beyond overall trends. For example, a metric that would have been
highly useful as a proxy for measuring program reach is the number of people trained through
READ funds. However, the data available on this topic varied greatly across countries and READ
Annual Reports. This makes it difficult to reliably compare training outputs across countries.
Another limitation in this area is likely differences across countries in training quality. It is difficult
to say that one specific instance of training would be analogous to training in another country
since standards for such activities are highly varied. An obvious illustration is the differences
between training that led to the award of Master’s degrees and a short intensive course, tailored
to needs of a particular agency, which did not result in a formal credential.




                                                                                                        14
These differences in part reflect the country-specific customization of many of the READ-funded
activities. The benefits of crafting activities based on individualized needs analyses of the
assessment systems in nations with different challenges and priorities can limit ready
comparisons and constrain the accuracy of summary reviews of different types of activities like
the number of people trained in student assessment issues. Nonetheless, we have developed an
approach to aggregate and report on the scope and reach of READ-funded activities, which we
present below.


How Much Money Went Where?


In its final form, the READ Trust Fund held US$32 million. The final financial commitment to global
activities was US$11.6 million (36.4 percent) and the country-level programs and projects had a
total financial commitment of US$18.7 million (58.5 percent), with the balance of US$1.6 million
(5.1 percent) being applied to the World Bank’s management fee.

Global-Level Allocations
The global allocations supported four main streams of work: new knowledge products about
student assessment systems and techniques, disseminating this knowledge and country
experiences to a global audience, building and participating in partnerships with other donors
and development agencies, and convening the READ country teams and other assessment
practitioners and experts to strengthen connections and networks in the assessment field.

The global allocation was split between SABER framework development costs (US$5.4 million)
and knowledge sharing and program coordination (US$6.2 million).

Country Allocations
Individual country allocations were based on action plans, which countries submitted to the Bank
early in the program. Allocations ranged from just over US$1 million in Ethiopia and Armenia to
a little more than US$4 million in Tajikistan. In all cases, most of the allocation was disbursed by
the time the program was completed. There were some adjustments between initial and final
allocations as needs changed and as some countries were slower to disburse. These adjustments
indicate prudent management and sound fiscal oversight and also show a welcome element of
flexibility in the implementation of the Trust Fund.




                                                                                                 15
Chart 1: Allocation Amount for All READ Countries


                        Allocation Amount for All READ Countries

                                                   11%                    Angola
                                             12%
                                                                          Armenia
                                                           7%
                                                                          Ethiopia
                                 15%
                                                                6%        Kyrgyz Republic
                                                                          Mozambique
                                                           12%            Tajikistan
                                                                          Vietnam
                                       21%
                                                                          Zambia
                                                   16%




These global-level and country-specific allocations do not show the diverse array of activities
supported through the READ program or the detail of disbursements by year or final expenditures
by country or global program. More detailed financial reporting and commentaries illustrating
the diversity of country activities are set out in the final report of the READ team. Here our
interest is in understanding the nature of the activities that were financed and the geographies
and topics covered to get a sense of what was attempted and achieved.




What Did READ Achieve at the Global Level


While a significant percentage of the money allotted to the global program was allocated for
certain objectives, it is important to analyze where this money ended up in terms of the different
types of activities that were funded. What follows is an analysis of the READ-funded global
activities.

Methods
All of the activities listed in the READ Annual Reports were appraised independently by the two
reviewers and categorized by type. The two categorizations were compared and any differences
were discussed and resolved.


                                                                                               16
 The categorization is independent of the magnitude of expenditure as the countries vary
significantly in scale and size. Rather, it attempts to capture the array of discrete activities or
accomplishments. The categorization does not necessarily reflect the time, effort, or funding put
into a specific area.

The activities were categorized using the following definitions:

      Training, Workshops, and Conferences: Activities in which information was disseminated
       in person. These activities are broken down later in the report by constituency.
      Materials Development: Activities that created discrete tools, frameworks, usable data,
       and knowledge that could inform assessment practice. Rather than overall studies and
       “lessons learned” types of analysis, these are usable tools that can be implemented.
      Analysis: Includes activities such as country and regional reports and empirical research.
       This category covers the development of knowledge in the field of educational
       assessment as a whole, rather than the creation of any specific frameworks or tools.
      Partnerships and Convening: Activities that were sponsored or initiated through the
       creation of a partnership with a non-READ organization.
      Implementation and Execution: Activities in which assessment systems and examinations
       were implemented as a result of READ-based work.

Activity Types at the Global Level
This meta-analysis of activities revealed a number of interesting insights into the workflow of the
READ program at the global level.

As can be seen in Chart 2, activities were not uniformly distributed across the categories. The
largest category is analytical activities. These made up nearly one third of all READ activities at
the global level. The next biggest category is materials development, 29 percent of all activities.
These findings are in line with the stated global-level goals of the READ program. The basic
analytical work, which was provided at the global level, underpins the development of a global
dialogue about educational assessment. This intellectual work adds to the body of knowledge
and the global pool of expertise on student assessment. These increases are of strategic
importance as demand for these skills and a deeper knowledge base is increasing as attention is
turning to evaluating reforms and policies in terms of learning outcomes.

The materials development work was also strategically important; it increased the set of
internationally-validated tools available to country policymakers. This increase in the repertoire
of materials suitable for use in a range of contexts and assessment regimes is one of the more
significant outcomes of the READ program and contributed to the overall success of the program.




                                                                                                17
The third biggest category of READ activities globally was training, workshops, and conferences.
This category comprised a fourth of the total number of completed activities. This is a direct result
of the program’s goal of building up educational assessment capacity and expertise globally and
legitimizing it as a field that can lift educational quality.

Chart 2: Activity Type at the Global Level




Training Constituency at the Global Level
Although training made up a relatively small portion of activities at the global level, it is useful to
analyze who was being trained at this level, as demonstrated in Chart 3. All of the training
activities listed in the READ Annual Reports were appraised independently by the two reviewers
and categorized by type. The two categorizations were compared and any differences discussed
and resolved. The categorization does not capture where the training took place; nor does it
capture the quality of the training delivered.

There are three discernible approaches to READ-funded training activities.

      Large-Scale Training: general efforts to either disseminate information, spread best
       practices, or facilitate trainings that involve large groups of practitioners.




                                                                                                    18
      Specialized Technical Expertise: trainings for small numbers of individuals who need to
       acquire distinct skills necessary for the successful conduct of assessment activities in their
       home countries.
      Policymakers and Opinion Formers: trainings geared towards elite policymakers and
       other stakeholders to foster the use of learning outcomes data to improve education
       quality.

Large-scale training activities and specialized technical expertise trainings make up 92 percent of
all training funded under READ at the global level. Only 8 percent of activities were solely for
policymakers and opinion formers. Practitioner-focused training was by far the most common
activity; aimed at equipping local people with assessment skills as well deepening understanding
of the importance of assessment as a way to lift educational quality. Many of the global READ
events served multiple constituencies and in these cases, they were simply labeled as large-scale
training.

Chart 3: Training Constituency at the Global Level




Scope and Depth of Global Knowledge Products.
The global activities funded by the READ Trust Fund reached well past the eight target countries
and covered many aspects of assessment. The geographic sweep of activities covered countries
at all stages of economic and educational development. For example, the World Bank team used
READ-financed tools to benchmark countries in East Asia and the Middle East and North Africa.
These activities also involved UNESCO and ALESCO, further extending the scope of READ’s
activities. This work is captured in two regional publications covering thirteen economies in Asia
and seventeen in the Middle East and North Africa.




                                                                                                  19
The World Bank team also studied and produced county reports on 29 nations, in addition to the
core group of eight. These country studies included nations from Africa, Central Asia, and the
Pacific.

To capture the lessons of practice across a range of assessment traditions, the World Bank team
also commissioned thirteen case studies of distinctive elements of assessment policy and practice
in eleven nations ranging in size from under 10 million people in New Zealand and Singapore to
over 100 million people in Brazil and the Russian Federation.

Regional and global meetings also engaged a broader group of countries to further build up
assessment expertise and quality. In all, 51 countries were involved in READ activities or were
the subject of READ case studies or reports. A visual illustration of the scope is given in Figure 1.

Figure 1: Countries Participating in SABER-Student Assessment Activities (as of 6/30/2015)




The “Global knowledge products,” covered a range of policy and technical issues. The country
case studies, for example, were commissioned to deepen understanding of how nations have
purposefully gone about the complex task of improving their assessment systems. One set of
studies examined what sets of policies and processes are likely to create more effective systems
and another set looked at how to use assessment information to improve instructional design.
The studies draw on a range of different assessment practices and strategies in an array of
contexts, ensuring that the READ countries had access to a diverse set of good practices.

                                                                                                  20
Collectively, the global knowledge products are a significant net addition to the knowledge base
on assessment. This was a recurring theme in our interviews. READ “created a lot of value
through global public goods,” deepening understanding of different approaches to national and
international assessment techniques, and documenting and sharing instances of good practice.
The SABER-Student Assessment framework is widely regarded as a useful tool for diagnosing the
state of a national assessment system. The “generalizability and reliability of the knowledge
products” are enhanced by the breadth of countries, assessment traditions, approaches to
quality assurance, and governance structures they cover. The READ global products were
“Russian funded and READ branded, but the quality is World Bank assured”.


What Did READ Achieve at the Country Level?

Methods
Activities at the country level were categorized using the same process that was applied to the
global activities. All of the activities listed in the READ Annual Reports were appraised
independently by the two reviewers and categorized by activity type and training constituency.
The two categorizations were compared and any differences discussed and resolved.

Again the categorization is independent of scale of expenditure as the countries vary significantly
in size and available resources. Rather, it attempts to capture the array of discrete activities or
accomplishments. The categorization does not necessarily reflect the time, effort, or funding put
into a specific area.

Activity Types at the Country Level
At the country level, READ activities were focused on practitioners (see Chart 4). Trainings,
workshops, and conferences made up the bulk of READ-financed work at the country level. This
is as expected given the hands-on nature of country-level activities. Also to be expected,
materials development, analysis, and partnerships and convening activities were less prevalent.




                                                                                                21
Chart 4: Activity Types at the Country Level




Training Constituency at the Country Level
The same definitions and categorization process used to show the distribution of global training
activities were applied to the country-level training activities. This revealed a slightly different
pattern (see Chart 5). While large-scale and specialized training still made up the majority of
country-level activities, 29 percent of activities were directed at policymakers and stakeholders.
This possibly reflects the need for more broadly-based policy dialogue within countries to build
a wider base of support for change in assessment practice.

Chart 5: Training Constituency at the Country Level




                                                                                                22
The categorization of the different activity types and the distribution of training opportunities
across different populations are good descriptive indicators of inputs and processes that might
contribute to improvements in a national assessment system. To gauge the general direction of
country-specific developments, we looked at the movement of each country along the continua
in the SABER-Student Assessment Framework. The World Bank team used the key indicators in
the framework to make baseline determinations of where each target country was on the four
main domains of an assessment system when the READ activities were being initiated.

They repeated the exercise in 2014 to determine the extent of development of these countries’
assessment systems over the course of the READ program. These changes should be interpreted
with care and a realistic sense of how much can be achieved in this field in a short time.
Establishing a high-performing, reliable assessment system takes years. The best-performing
systems are based on years of experience and are underpinned by significant financial and
personnel resources. They have usually been in place and operating in a stable policy and
resource environment for multiple cohorts of students so that benefits and changes are
discernible and enduring. The second caveat is the complexity of the field; there are multiple
variables or processes that need attention before significant change is realized. The SABER-
Student Assessment framework seeks to account for complexity by breaking key stages into
definable, discrete tasks. This allows progress to be
acknowledged within a stage even when action is not
complete. With these caveats noted, the final report of
                                                             The Tajikistan team built an
the READ Trust Fund captures the country-level changes
                                                             ambitious program, blending
as shown in the summary table below. In all, six of the      READ money with funds from
initial seven READ countries made significant progress       the Open Society institute,
on at least one domain. The exception, Tajikistan,           USAID, Education for All, and a
showed progress on some of the indicators and is well        World Bank credit to support a
                                                             “whole reform agenda that
placed to continue to develop. Armenia, as a later
                                                             included building a secure
addition to the READ target group, had less time to gain     testing facility. It was a
momentum and was also already operating a relatively         coordinated approach, which
well-established assessment system.                          leveraged the READ funds to
                                                               great effect” to create a better
Two nations, Vietnam and Ethiopia, made progress on            university entrance examination
more than one domain; both strengthening classroom             and improve the school
assessment and one of the large-scale assessment               curriculum.

domains. Vietnam also made progress with its
examination system, an area where Ethiopia was
already well established.




                                                                                                  23
Notably, Kyrgyzstan elected to step back from participation in International large-scale
assessments, a decision that is understandable given resource constraints and the efforts
required in developing other aspects of its student assessment system.

Overall, the changes made in a short time constitute a very substantial achievement. Compared
to the baseline survey, six of seven cases made measurable improvement against clearly-defined
criteria with a relatively modest but necessary financial investment.

The fact that the SABER-Student Assessment framework was able to track progress and capture
movement in both directions is testament to the quality and utility of the framework itself. It is
a good approximation of the steps or actions that constitute the evolution of an assessment
system. It is a considerable intellectual achievement in its own right and a valuable outcome of
the READ Trust Fund program. The framework can be easily applied to national and sub-national
systems in countries at all stages of economic and social development, increasing its significance
still further.




                                                                                               24
 Table 1: Summary of the Benchmarking Results for Student Assessment Activities in READ




               Classroom            Examinations               NLSA                    ILSA
               Assessment


             2009       2014      2009       2014       2009          2014    2009            2014


 Angola     Emerging Emerging Emerging Emerging        Latent    Emerging     Latent          Latent


Armenia Established Established Established Established Emerging Emerging Established Established


 Ethiopia    Latent   Emerging Established Established Emerging Established   Latent          Latent


 Kyrgyz      Latent   Emerging Emerging Emerging Emerging Emerging Emerging                   Latent
  Rep.


Mozambiq Emerging Emerging Emerging Established Emerging Emerging Emerging Emerging
   ue


Tajikistan Emerging Emerging Emerging Emerging         Latent     Latent      Latent          Latent


Vietnam Emerging Established Emerging Established Emerging Emerging           Latent     Emerging


 Zambia     Emerging Emerging Established Established Emerging Established Emerging Emerging




                                                                                              25
Illustrative Country-Level Activities
While the benchmarking results summarize the system-level changes in the various student
assessment programs, they do not offer a picture of the variety of activities developed and
implemented at the country level. These are described in appropriate detail in the final report
from the World Bank READ team. Interviews with country team members highlighted some of
the national achievements. These ranged from piloting new assessment exercises to building
local technical capacity and training large numbers of classroom teachers.

These brief observations do not capture the detailed design and development that went into the
country activities. For example, in Mozambique, the Ministry of Education developed a reading
comprehension test that teachers could administer at the start and end of the academic year. It
was aligned with the national curriculum and designed to show progress over time. The strategy
helped create robust pedagogical programs by giving teachers a basis for setting annual goals,
identifying strategies for various learning levels, and grouping
students within grades. End-of-year results were shared with
parents and the wider community, increasing transparency
                                                                   “Representatives from all
and strengthening accountability. After a successful pilot in      teacher education institutions
68 schools, the strategy was rolled out in two stages to cover     in Angola received training in
over 200 schools in five provinces. READ supported the             classroom assessment.”
design of the intervention, the development of materials, and      “Nearly 28,000 schools in
the pilot phases. It also funded the evaluation of the pilots      Ethiopia participated in school
and joined with the Strategic Impact Evaluation Fund to            inspections.”
assess the impact on student learning using a control group
                                                                   Zambia used five different
of schools and a quarter of the schools that participated in       mechanisms to disseminate the
the pilot project.                                                 results of a national Grade 5
                                                                     assessment.
Rather than recount all the details of countries’
achievements reported in the various READ Annual Reports,            Kyrgyzstan trained 15,000
                                                                     teachers in formative
brief vignettes of these country-level activities, drawn from
                                                                     assessment.
the various documents and our interviews, are included as
Appendix 4. Some of the vignettes also include illustrative
quotes from interviewees.


How to Appraise READ’s Achievements?
It is difficult to assess innovative development strategies like the READ program. READ and similar
programs are not amenable to large randomized controlled trials or even to simpler measures of
those served or supported. The goals can sometimes be underspecified, making them difficult to
measure. One way to capture what the READ Trust Fund has tangibly produced is to examine its


                                                                                                 26
outputs through a “field-building” versus “field-supporting” framework. This language comes
from the philanthropic community where it has been used to describe efforts that go past funding
individual projects or interventions and instead look to support a range of activities and
organizations in a more strategic fashion. A popular example is the standardization of U.S.
medical education in the early 1900’s, which followed from the financial support of the Flexner
report. Philanthropies see a number of benefits in “field building.” It tends to reduce duplication
and inefficiencies while drawing attention to a particular issue or legitimating efforts to improve
a situation. Ideally, it creates new knowledge, encourages the exchange of information between
domains, and provides incentives for collaboration. By its very conception, it tends to involve
multiple actors or agencies and takes a holistic approach to problem solving.

Drawing on the writings of Bernholz, Seal, & Wang (2009), we define field building as those
actions that meet many or all of these characteristics:

      1. They recognize and address a specific gap or development opportunity in a domain;
      2. They establish a research base, creating new knowledge or advancing thinking in that
          domain;
      3. They prioritize sets of actions and networks that apply or lay the basis for application
          of new policies or practices;
      4. They develop and adopt the right standards;
      5. They build a network infrastructure; and
      6. They share knowledge.

These steps do not have any particular order and each serves a unique purpose, but one of the
common first steps in field building is the development of common terms and standards. This,
for example, has been true of various attempts to improve initial teacher education and the
certification of teachers.

Similarly, field-supporting activities are those that scale up an existing process or program by, for
example, increasing frequency of action or reaching more people or sites. They tend to be
activities that are or will become the ongoing responsibility of an agency or organization.

Our assessment reveals that much of the READ global-level activity is field building. This is not
surprising given the theory of change implicit in the original conception of the Trust Fund and in
how it was expressed in the SABER-Student Assessment Framework, with its field-building
continuum; a four-step process of latent, emerging, established, and advanced. The first three
phases are essentially field-building phases. It is not until the processes and policies are in place,
supported by sufficient, appropriately-trained people and repeated routinely that we can move

                                                                                                   27
into field-supporting activities. These might include spreading expertise to provincial and local
levels, training additional cadres of experts, or reviewing and updating existing programs.

Much of the READ-funded work at the global level was oriented towards field building while many
of the country-level activities, especially in the more established schools systems, were field
supporting. This is corroborated by a codification of the various READ activities.

Field Building or Field Supporting?
All of the activities that were categorized by type were further categorized as either field building
or field supporting, using the same process of independent coding, comparisons, and
reconciliation and the definitions set out above.

It is not surprising then that a majority of READ activities were related to field building (Chart 6).
This is one of the trademarks of a high-impact, non-profit
program. Activities that are field building add intellectual
                                                                    The READ Trust fund was a
capacity and technical capabilities that will have a longer-
                                                                    “knowledge builder,” investing
term impact, reaching people and systems beyond those
                                                                    in the development of a
directly involved in the project. Field building also               diagnostic framework which
strengthens the foundations underpinning new                        could be applied to many
approaches to persistent problems; in this case, it added           different national assessment
                                                                    systems.
credence and credibility to a focus on learning outcomes
as a way of assessing educational quality. It broadened the
repertoire of development assistance professionals,
allowing them to intervene in the processes of teaching
and learning and in the design and calibration of assessment strategies.




                                                                                                   28
Chart 6: Activity Purpose at the Global Level




Activity Purpose at the Country Level
The activities at the country level skewed towards field-supporting. Whereas more than half of
the activities related to field-building at the global level, only a quarter were related to field-
building at the country level. This shows the different nature of activities at the country level.
Seventy-five percent of the activities were field-supporting. Clearly, the goals of the READ Council
for global activities to be focused on knowledge creation and dissemination were carried through
all the way down to the country level.



Chart 7: Activity Purpose at the Country Level




                                                                                                29
The lens of field building also lets us look at what has still to be done to make assessment a more
robust part of the education systems in many developing economies. Field building also
underscores the need for sustained investment – the length of time
it takes to see the results of this sort of intervention.
                                                                                READ “surpassed initial
What Did READ Achieve for the Donor?                                            expectations;” added to
                                                                                country programs, created
While READ was certainly a program that accomplished the goals it
                                                                                an impressive set of global
was established to achieve in relation to strengthening developing              products and “put
countries’ educational assessment systems, it also produced a                   assessment into play in the
number of benefits for the donor. Firstly, it established the donor             post-2015 aid architecture”.
as a global leader committed to the improvement of education in
developing countries. This is evidenced by the continued
monitoring and interaction between the senior leadership of the
READ Council and the rest of the program team.

It further established the donor as an expert in the field of international educational assessment.
As a key and necessary part of the program, the donor expended resources in developing this
specialty in order to disseminate it to member countries through the fee-based services
component of READ (which is not included in this review). It drew
on the body of expertise and specialist knowledge that Russian
academicians and experts have in the area of test development
                                                                            Russia’s main interests were in
and assessment and, on occasion, used materials and testing                 being a global leader that made
strategies developed by these Russian experts that looked at                a “visible contribution to
different skill domains. It also linked those Russian technical             international development”
                                                                            and in showing that it was
experts to the wider international assessment community,
                                                                            committed to “international
enriching both sets of professionals.
                                                                              competiveness in education.”

Lastly, it proved that Russia was committed to working
collaboratively with the World Bank to improve educational
achievement, equity, and quality across the world.


What Did READ Achieve for the World Bank?
READ financed important knowledge-creating activities that contributed to the intellectual
foundations of the World Bank’s wide-reaching SABER initiative. SABER now covers over 100
countries and helps national decision makers and advisers benchmark their education policies
and evaluate key policy choices.

Three specific themes stand out in the READ-funded global activities. First, and most enduring, is
the creation of a world-class set of knowledge products about identifying and evaluating policy
                                                                                                       30
choices in the assessment of learning outcomes. These products cover assessment of the
individual student, assessment to inform and improve teaching practices, and national and
international assessment strategies and opportunities. Looked at as a set, the READ publications
are a very substantial and significant contribution to the field of student assessment.

The most important contribution has been creating and codifying a repertoire of accessible terms
and concepts for the evaluation of national assessment regimes. It has developed a common
language for talking about the systematic appraisal of learning outcomes. This has facilitated the
exchange of ideas and experiences among nations, which is the second distinctive theme of the
global activities funded by READ. The eight recipient nations learnt from each other and shared
their experience more broadly. READ activities generated data on fifty-nine countries, there are
29 national studies and two important regional surveys.

This intellectual productivity laid the basis for knowledge sharing with donor groups,
development agencies, and professional associations of education assessment experts.

The global knowledge products also had a practical outcome. They equipped the World Bank’s
education specialists with an array of tools and with a level of confidence to initiate a policy
dialogue about student assessment with their country counterparts. The World Bank staff was
also given renewed confidence that they could sustain a technically-substantive relationship in
this area and support important development work in the field. In the relatively short life of
READ, this led to new relationships with Ministries of Education in some countries in sub-Saharan
Africa and to new lending and credit opportunities that addressed learning outcomes. These
constitute net additions to resources applied to lifting the quality of education for thousands of
young people.

The World Bank’s stewardship of the READ Trust Fund illustrated that the World Bank is able to
be a good intellectual partner and reliable fiscal agent for a “new donor.” Its staff mad e sure the
program activities were well focused and of the highest quality. The funds were prudently and
appropriately managed and when necessary re-allocated to meet new country priorities or to
support those nations that were moving ahead more quickly than others. The Trust Fund closed
with less than US$ 20,000 unexpended.

At the country level, READ investments offered the World Bank the opportunity to open a policy
dialogue with the Ministry of Education in Zambia, developing a relationship that been dormant
for some time. READ investments also generated new lending and credits for the education
sector in Angola and saw assessment components included in Ethiopia’s General Education
Quality Improvement Project (2014-2018). In both cases, the goal was to bring new resources to
improve learning outcomes.

In summary, the READ Trust Fund allowed the World Bank to:
                                                                                                 31
   1. Leverage its limited supply of world-class assessment expertise by creating accessible
      materials in the domain, including a global template for diagnosing the strengths and
      weaknesses of national and provincial assessment systems, by developing training
      programs, and by marshalling an international network of assessment experts;

   2. Shift the focus of the development community towards issues of quality and learning
      outcomes;

   3. Diversify the donor community interested in global education;

   4. Equip World Bank operations staff with skills and products for more effective policy
      dialogue with country counterparts about measuring learning outcomes; and

   5. Establish a basis for new lending operations and, in at least one case, opened a new
      relationship with the education ministry.




What Did READ Achieve for the Field?
The field-building activities conducted with support from the READ Trust Fund were a
significant contribution to the intellectual architecture in the discipline or science of
educational assessment. As we noted above, the substantial corpus of knowledge products
from READ was shared with many actors and agencies in the field of educational development
and assessment of learning outcomes. The World Bank team was very active in disseminating
reports and publications as the basis for knowledge sharing with other donors, multilateral and
national development agencies, and technical experts. Some of this knowledge management
was embedded in the existing global partnerships and alliances and these were strengthened
by relatively modest allocations of READ funds to support meetings and to convene technical
and policy experts. In addition to modest financial contributions, the rich body of analytical
materials and case studies as well as the expertise and international reputation of key World
Bank READ team members made READ a welcome partner and participant in regional and
global forums and networks.

READ contributed to large-scale, cross-national assessment exercises, such as PISA for
Development, providing technical expertise to the project’s steering group, and funding country
participation in technical workshops as well as Zambia’s overall participation in the pilot survey.
READ also commissioned a background paper on the cumulative fifteen years of PISA activities
and another paper on ways of aligning different international assessments to maximize their
utility for developing nations.



                                                                                                32
The READ Trust Fund supported and co-sponsored important international assessment forums
with the Global Partnership for Education, the US Agency for International Development, the UK
Department for International Development, and UNESCO.

World Bank officers involved in READ also developed and maintained effective collaborative
relationships with staff at the OECD, at UNESCO’s Institute for Statistics, and with assessment
experts at Brooking’s Center for Universal Education. They also contributed to important regional
forums in East Asia and Africa.

These partnerships, sponsorships, and collaborative endeavors added to READ’s visibility in the
international aid community and its importance in the field of educational assessment. It added
to the reach and depth of READ’s contribution to the field and further legitimated the strategic
investment in the global knowledge products. The involvement of officials from the READ target
countries in some of these activities also helped maintain reform impetus at the county level as
well as inform the design and development of national activities.

READ contributed to an improved policy dialogue about the importance of assessing learning
outcomes in the global development community. This is reflected in the work leading up to the
newly-adopted Sustainable Development Goals. It also fostered policy dialogue at the national
and regional levels about evidence-based decision-making and the value of a more systematic
approach to measuring and comparing.

Further, READ generated greater investments in the development of professionals in the field.
These took place both at the global knowledge leader-level and at the country practitioner-level
as READ financed training opportunities for national officials working directly on assessment
practices and for teachers grappling with notions of formative assessment. These investments
strengthened the technical capacity in the target nations.




                                                                                              33
What Were READ’s Strengths & Weaknesses?
THE READ Trust Fund program had important strengths. Three stand out for simplicity and
importance. First, READ focused on a specific field, assessment of learning outcomes. This helped
target financial resources from READ, the country, and other donors, and direct intellectual
capital and time at factors instrumental in improving
student achievement. Second, much of READ’s
resources were concentrated on a small number of                “READ activities provided a
countries. This created a reasonable span of control for        focal point so that other donors
the small number of central staff who were managing             can channel their money to
                                                                greater impact, knowing that
and coordinating the program. It also ensured that the
                                                                the intervention had been well
available financial resources were not too widely and           designed and would be
thinly disbursed. Similarly, it enabled the few World           effectively monitored”.
Bank experts in this area to focus their expertise on a set
of countries and on the creation of global products.
Third, both country and global-level work programs
were relatively well resourced. This enabled countries to undertake substantial initiatives, like
conducting a large-scale Early Grade Reading Assessment exercise in Mozambique that when
proven could be built into the national assessment program financed by the government. But the
total funds available both globally and at a county level were still constrained, which ensured
that discipline and rigor were involved in deciding what to fund.

READ had other strengths. It was purposefully and thoughtfully planned. The initial design took
into account existing international development and aid initiatives and targeted an area that
needed strengthening in many countries as they worked towards reaching Millennium
Development goals. The program design channeled a new international donor’s funds into an
area where they could have some observable impact in the short term and lay the basis for
sustained improvement. The READ Council was also flexible, responding positively to proposals
from countries that took different approaches to building better assessment systems. It
supported large-scale short courses for teachers as well as intensive formal degree programs for
technical experts. It supported pilot projects as well as infrastructure and equipment. The
unifying theme was better assessment of learning outcomes.

READ is also unusual in its support for global public goods that serve broad and somewhat diffuse
audiences as well as financing practical activities that help practitioners. The design and
implementation struck an appropriate balance between creating global public goods, the READ
knowledge products, and supporting country context-specific activities that were grounded in a
good appreciation of the needs and priorities of a particular nation.



                                                                                              34
The early identification of target countries was seen by some as an advantage. It allowed for a
quick start in planning and implementing activities in those countries where there was already
an effective relationship between the education ministry and the World Bank. This welcome
speed also carried some costs. When some nations are moving ahead quickly, the task of
developing and coordinating appropriate and consistent monitoring procedures can be
overlooked or left for later stages. When that happens, it can produce uneven data sets because
information on, for example, training participants was not collected at the time an activity took
place. The monitoring and data collection processes in READ were not ideal, especially in the
early stages of implementation. Subsequent efforts to establish good baseline data and collect
information on training participants overcame some of these shortcomings. The existence of the
robust SABER-Student Assessment framework should assist future efforts to quickly establish a
baseline diagnosis of a nation’s assessment system and to ensure that data collection commences
with the first funded activities.

The pre-selection of the target countries by the donor concerned many World Bank staff. It was
an issue raised in most interviews. Some expressed the view that it created a sense of entitlement
to resources in the national Ministry of Education. This impeded serious dialogue about what
changes needed to be made with the application of READ
funds. The apparent promise of funds, implied by being
identified as a READ target country, acted as a                 “Like any development project,
disincentive to search for and identify actions or              there are some agencies that
strategies that would strengthen the national                   have little capacity and some
assessment system. A number of World Bank education             that are non-responsive.”
                                                                When you have a pre-
specialists suggested there should be a more competitive
                                                                determined set of countries
approach to distributing READ resources to countries as         you end up with either “sunk
this would produce better plans with more highly-               costs,” wasting limited
committed local partners. Others argued that the                resources, or you have to
donor’s intention in nominating eligible recipients was         “reallocate to countries with
                                                                greater impetus and
akin to other donors identifying particular themes, like
                                                                momentum.
clean water or communicable diseases, which should be
addressed through a particular trust fund.

This issue is more complex than that. The donor, in
choosing countries to receive READ funding, is attempting to ensure that the influence of the
program will maximize its geo-political impact. Countries are selected by the donor using a
process that balances variables such as the donor’s strategic interests, its history of economic
and diplomatic relations with the other country, and some cultural affinity. As a newer member
of the international development assistance community, it may also have been seeking to ensure
that the visibility of its efforts was safeguarded by concentrating on old friends and allies.

                                                                                               35
It is highly likely that the donor will continue to select a list of “eligible countries”, or at least a
majority of them, that can seek support from any future Russian-financed trust fund for
education. It is not likely to adopt an open application process, making the funds available on a
competitive basis to any developing country as this would either dilute the value of support to a
level where it would have little country-level impact or leave many applicants unfunded.

 The fact that READ was almost completely a “World Bank executed” trust fund where
commitments and disbursements required specific approvals by a World Bank official
contributed to the tension around the sense of entitlement. Some World Bank operational staff
also caviled about the delays and impracticability of “World Bank execution” arrangements for
activities like short training courses in remote locations with few vendors. Others saw direct
involvement in approvals as a way of ensuring the appropriate quality of materials and timeliness
of events. This is a longstanding area of debate about ideal modes of implementation in
development and is not particular to READ. In the context where it is the first Trust Fund for a
new donor targeted at countries with a range of managerial capabilities, “World Bank execution”
seems prudent.

While there was a sense amongst some country team members that READ was established and
became operational relatively quickly, aided in part by the early identification of target countries
and the tight thematic focus on assessment, some of the World Bank’s managers and
representatives of the Russian Government felt that READ had a slow start. This perception
comes in part from the time it took for the parties to develop and agree on the shape and
structure of the Trust Fund and to sign the necessary
legal and financial instruments.

The complexity of the READ program, the involvement         “The slow rollout of the
                                                            realization at the initial stage of
of countries in three different regions, the need to
                                                            the program forced the few
establish operational procedures and to determine           prolongation of the program
initial national and global financial allocations all       and can be pointed as its
contributed to the gradual start of the READ program.       vulnerability.”
While a faster start would have been welcomed by all
parties, there are reasonable causes for the actual rate
of implementation. With procedure and protocols
established the start of a second READ program should be smoother and a little faster.

There were also some staffing discontinuities in the early years of the World Bank’s
administration of READ and there was some staff turnover in the READ country teams. These are
hard to avoid in large organizations where personnel are reassigned to meet changing
circumstances and where career advancement is often dependent on mobility. That aside, there
were noticeable increases in the quantity and quality of global activities once the leadership was

                                                                                                     36
stabilized and a core team of people with solid assessment expertise was in place. The delays in
determining the future of a second cycle of READ will see some of this expertise dispersed to
other immediate projects.

On the donor side, participation from some key players was sporadic although other senior
figures were clearly very committed and applied great time and energy to steering READ’s
activities to a fruitful end for all parties. It also took time for both parties to adapt to differences
in operating style, and to recognize that shifts in priorities and changes in the wider geo-political
context would influence the program’s operations. These were largely resolved by time and
experience. Nonetheless, the Russian Government’s representatives commented that the flow
of information between the World Bank and the donor could be improved in both quality and
quantity with “more detailed information about the implementation process”.

 A few people raised some implementation concerns that are related to the design of READ. One
or two people observed that training activities dominated a lot of the country-level activities.
Chart 4 above shows that in terms of frequency, training was nearly half of all activities at the
country level. Some countries did offer many training events and aimed to reach significant
numbers of classroom teachers, especially when the express purpose was to promote formative
assessment at the classroom level. If training seems to be consuming too much of a Trust Fund’s
resources, limiting opportunities for innovation, piloting, and evaluation of initiatives, the
proportion of funds for some types of activities could be “capped.” Alternatively, if there is a
competitive or semi-competitive process, the selection criteria can be weighted to favor
development and experimentation rather than recurrent or large-scale training, which would be
more appropriately seen as a national budget item. Another design constraint was that the initial
seven target countries developed national “action plans all at the same time so they didn’t get to
learn about” innovative or creative elements in other plans until the global READ conferences,
by which time plans had been approved, expectations established, and resources committed. For
example, a number of country teams admired Mozambique’s investment in Master’s degrees for
a small number of assessment specialists rather than numerous short courses and workshops
that did not result in a formal, internationally-recognized credential. Any subsequent cycle of
READ investments could ameliorate this insularity by sharing the action plans from “READ 1” and
by investing a little more in communication across national teams.

These design issues, the pre-determined target nations and sense of entitlement; the balance
between innovative, experimental, and reform activities and large-scale, recurrent training; and
national insularity in the initial planning phases should be addressed in the design of subsequent
trust funds. At the heart of these concerns is the selection of eligible countries. There is a
difference between a donor-determined closed set of target countries and a “donor informed”
list of eligibility criteria for applicants. The first has the problems of entitlement and reduced

                                                                                                     37
motivation. The second raises country expectation and tends to diffuse resources and diminish
donor commitment. The middle ground may be in determining a list of eligible countries with the
active engagement of the donor and inviting applications in a form akin to the action plans
developed to commence READ. Eligible countries might request through a “letter of intent” a
modest base allocation to underwrite the preparation of a national improvement plan that is
assessed competitively by a central team, with
allocation decisions made by the READ Council.

                                                                “The global public goods
                                                                element is an essential part of
Is There a Need for READ 2?                                     READ. The products gave shape
                                                                and coherence” to many
There is still much to be done in the broad area of
                                                                county activities and
learning outcomes globally and in the eight countries in        underpinned the successful
the initial READ program. At the global level, the              international partnerships.
international development community has reaffirmed
the importance of learning outcomes as a cornerstone
of quality education. The “Incheon Declaration” and the
associated Framework for Action stressed the importance of stronger evaluation and
measurement processes: “We commit to quality education and to improving learning outcomes,
which requires strengthening inputs, processes and evaluation of outcomes and mechanisms to
measure progress” (Item 9 Education 2020).

This is aligned with the Sustainable Development Goal of ensuring “inclusive and equitable
quality education” and promoting lifelong learning for all (United Nations, 2015). The Education
2030 Framework (paragraphs 97-103) sets out the importance of “effective monitoring and
accountability mechanisms” in the systematic pursuit of Sustainable Development Goal 4.
Recurring themes in the Framework for Action include the importance of “evidence based
policies,” of “quality frameworks in national education plans,” and the “centrality of teaching and
learning quality.” All are embedded in the work of READ to date and in the SABER framework.
They form a solid foundation for further investments in developing better national practices and
creating more global knowledge products that continue to advance our understanding of what
works in national and international assessment systems. These shifts in the broad architecture of
international development assistance reinforce the centrality of good assessment systems,
policies, and practices in the pursuit of better learning outcomes and high-quality education for
all.

At the cross-national level, the international longitudinal surveys continue to be powerful tools
for mobilizing resources and political interest in better-quality learning for all. PISA and TIMSS
are useful comparative tools that constitute “public goods” by making data about learning
outcomes openly accessible and useable by all (Wagner 2012). But the high entry costs of
                                                                                                  38
international studies can exclude less-well-developed nations and limit involvement in the design
and calibration of assessment instruments. This, in turn, orients the content covered by such
assessments towards the concerns and norms of more advanced economies. This reinforces the
importance of READ investments in the work of international assessments to ensure that the
needs of emerging nations are addressed (Carton & Jakovleski, 2015). The OECD’s education
director is conscious of the need for PISA to evolve its
methods and surveys to “cater for a larger and more
diverse set of countries” if PISA is to be a relevant
                                                               In many of the target countries
“global yardstick for measuring success in education”
                                                               “there is a momentum to build
(Schleicher, A & Costin, C., 2015). Adjusting the PISA         upon, but we must remember
instruments, revising the context surveys, and piloting        this is an area where success
the modified tools in a cross-section of middle- and           takes time to materialize” so
lower-income economies requires intellectual and               some continuity of action and
                                                               investment is necessary.
financial resources, some of which could come from
Russian experts and a second READ Trust fund.

While these types of international comparative studies
are important in providing reference points and aligning
national performance with the performance of others,
they do not in themselves point to desirable changes in policy or practice. To identify and design
effective intervention strategies, they need to be supplemented by more finely-grained and more
sharply-focused case studies and analytical work. As Fang and Gopinathan (2009: 569) observe,
“the research frameworks guiding large-scale international studies cannot reveal the elements
that lead to differences in student performance. More fine-grained discourse analysis…is
needed.” This argues for continued investments in illustrative case studies of good assessment
practices in developed and developing nations as well as continued engagement with the
agencies and partnerships involved in international and regional comparative studies of student
performance.

There is much to be gained from using the SABER-Student Assessment Framework to guide and
monitor development in the area of student assessment systems and to identify areas where
good practices should be documented and disseminated. The continued investment in the
creation of knowledge products that illuminate different ways of measuring learning outcomes
to guide resource allocation and appraise different strategies is a worthwhile strategic
investment. A lot of the knowledge products created through READ concentrated on national
and international assessments and produced admirable studies of different practices. There is a
need for a similar investment in the field of school examinations where READ 2 could “create a
critical mass of products” that could inform practice and policy at the national and provincial
levels and support a global conversation about integrity, fairness, and transparency in the design,

                                                                                                39
conduct, and uses of exit and completion examinations. These knowledge products should also
examine how educational leaders can use and interpret data from different types of assessments
to inform policy and practice and to communicate to parents and the public about the learning
outcomes of different levels and modes of schooling.

At the country level, there is still much to be done, especially in those initial READ countries that
had “latent” assessment systems. There are two views about the direction of future activities.
Some favor a “future-oriented” approach, with READ 2 supporting innovation and
experimentation, acting as an “incubator for new ideas” and evalu ating pilot projects. READ 2 in
this model is a “dedicated budget for innovation.” Others favor a more linear approach , with
READ 2 supporting the roll out or scaling up of practices and policies that have been developed
with support from READ 1. In the case of the Kyrgyz Republic, this would mean a suite of
“activities to support the spread of formative assessment techniques, capacity building for staff
at the National Testing Center, modelling improved instructional practices, participation in an
international comparative survey like PISA or TIMSS or even possibly PIRLS.” The aim would be
to “maximize the return on investment from both the initial READ Trust Fund and round two.”

The two approaches are not mutually exclusive and both reflect different approaches adopted
by different ministries and agencies in READ 1. Some, like Mozambique, piloted new approaches.
Others, like Tajikistan, invested in more comprehensive, integrated strategies which took longer
to come to fruition. Both have merits and the choice of appropriate approach is shaped by
capacity, local priorities, and need and by the presence or absence of other donors and the
policies being pursued by those donors. Given the value many actors found in READ’s flexibility ,
both approaches should be able to attract support from READ 2.

The geographic reach of READ 2 was a recurring theme in interviews. The most forceful comment
was that the eligible or target counties should not be confined to Eastern Europe and Central
Asia. A few people noted that the inclusion of Francophone nations might further enrich the
conceptual work and provide new opportunities for innovation and experimentation. One of the
benefits of READ 1, only partly realized, was that the involvement of countries from very different
assessment traditions increased opportunities for cross-national learning. Another is the wider
visibility and recognition of the donor’s commitment to improving education. These are valuable
and should be continued.

Similarly, the scope and reach of READ at the global level has come in considerable measure from
the breadth of countries at all levels of economic development and with various forms of
governance covered by the knowledge products and included in the SABER database. This is most
clearly illustrated by the field-building characteristics of READ’s public goods, the suite of
intellectual materials produced, validated, and disseminated in a few years. In short, there are


                                                                                                  40
very real benefits in terms of effectiveness, visibility, and impact from breadth and engagement
at the country and global levels in programs like READ.


Synthesis
The READ Trust Fund was a surprisingly good investment; “it surpassed expectations.” It built up
the field of educational assessment and laid the foundation for a more rigorous approach to
learning outcomes in the international development assistance community. One recent
expression of the importance of measuring learning outcomes is in the latest United Nation’s
Sustainable Development Framework. Another is the OECD’s PISA for Development project.

READ supported a range of activities in eight targeted countries, with discernible positive effects
in most cases. This is well illustrated by the progress in the development of their national
assessment systems, captured in the SABER-Student Assessment framework.

The activities and materials supported by READ investments reached well past the eight target
nations. There were more than 50 countries directly involved.

The global educational assessment community benefited from READ activities, from the creation
and dissemination of new knowledge to widening and strengthening of alliances and professional
partnerships. This is illustrated by the involvement of various national aid agencies, international
agencies, cross-national organizations, and some private donors in READ-related activities that
focus on measuring and improving learning outcomes.

The donor nation benefited by showcasing its unique capabilities and techniques in assessment,
by displaying its willingness to be a member of good standing and repute in the international
development community, and building closer links between its own experts and the international
assessment community.

The World Bank benefited by showing that it is a good intellectual partner and reliable fiscal agent
for a “new donor as well increasing its investments in learning outcomes and supporting its
operations staff in policy dialogue around monitoring student achievement to inform quality
improvement.”




                                                                                                 41
Appendices


Appendix 1: Terms of Reference

                                     TERMS OF REFERENCE

Consultancy to Conduct Final Evaluation of the Russia Education Aid for Development (READ)
                                    Trust Fund Program


BACKGROUND

Established in October 2008, the Russia Education Aid for Development (READ) program is a
collaboration of the Government of the Russian Federation and the World Bank that focuses
on improving education quality in low-income countries. The READ Trust Fund is part of this
program, with an amount of US$32 million to be executed over a seven-year period, 2008 to
2015.

The World Bank’s Education Sector Strategy 2020 highlights the importance of “Learning for
All.” The proven economic gains and poverty reduction tied to education are only obtainable
when children actually learn. All actors in an education system need to know whether or not
learning is taking place so that they can use this information to improve education quality.

The READ Trust Fund’s main purpose has been to help low -income countries improve their
student learning outcomes through the design, implementation, and use of robust systems for
student assessment. It has supported analytical work and technical assistance to help countries:

      establish systems or institutions—or strengthen existing ones—that formulate learning
       goals and carry out assessments of student learning;
      improve existing or develop new instruments to measure student learning outcomes; and
      strengthen existing or develop new mechanisms (policies) to use learning outcomes data
       to improve teaching and learning.

The main outcome of the READ Trust Fund is expected to be increased institutional capacity of
countries to develop, carry out, and use data from student assessments to improve education
quality and student learning. Armed with information on how well students are performing,
teachers, policy makers, and international donors alike will be better able to determine where to
focus their energy and resources for the greatest improvement in learning outcomes.

The READ Trust Fund has been operating under the guidance of the READ Council, a group of
key Russian and World Bank officials (Annex 3). This group has provided strategic direction for
the work carried out at the global and country levels. At the global level, the focus has been
primarily on generating and sharing knowledge and good practices in the form of tools, analytical

                                                                                              42
reports, and case studies. At the country level, World Bank teams and country stakeholders have
worked together to develop and implement a set of READ Trust Fund-supported activities that
address gaps in the country’s learning assessment system. Ultimately, the READ Council selected
eight countries to be direct beneficiaries of READ Trust Fund support – Angola, Armenia, Ethiopia,
the Kyrgyz Republic, Mozambique, Tajikistan, Vietnam, and Zambia.

The READ Council adopted a results framework to systematically monitor progress at the
country level (see Annex 1). The indicators used in the results framework draw heavily on
knowledge and tools developed at the global level under the program. The READ Trust Fund
program has been using this results framework to monitor implementation and results at the
country level on an annual basis. After the country-level programs ended in October 2014, the
READ Trust Fund team in Washington, DC collected additional data on each country to ensure
that progress against this framework was fully captured.

2015 is the final year of the READ Trust Fund program. It was agreed at the outset that an
external evaluation of the program’s activities and outputs would be conducted upon its
completion. Based on the Russian Government and World Bank’s satisfaction with the program
to date, negotiations are already underway for a second READ Trust Fund program. Hence, a
primary purpose of this final evaluation will be to capture major lessons learned under the first
READ Trust Fund so that the READ Council can consider them in the design and implementation
of a second program. The proposed evaluation will therefore be both summative (looking back
at READ 1) and formative (looking forward to READ 2) in nature.

GOAL, SCOPE, AND PRODUCTS OF PROPOSED WORK

The goal of this consultancy is to undertake an external evaluation of the READ Trust Fund
program as it nears its completion date of June 30, 2015 . The primary audience for the
evaluation report is the READ Council. Secondary audiences include World Bank management
and staff, and select government/local officials responsible for implementing the program in their
respective countries. Key questions to be addressed by the evaluation include the following:

   1. To what extent did the READ Trust Fund program achieve its stated purpose (i.e., to help
      low-income countries improve their student learning outcomes through the design,
      implementation, and use of robust systems for student assessment)?
         a. To what extent did global-level activities contribute to this result?
         b. To what extent did country-level activities contribute to this result?

   2. What are some lessons learned that can be applied to the design and implementation of
      a future READ Trust Fund program?

The Consultant is expected to undertake the evaluation in a rigorous manner, and to make
recommendations based on valid, reliable, and sound data collection and analysis. It is

                                                                                               43
expected that the Consultant will conduct the evaluation through a combination of (i) desk
review of various materials and (ii) interviews with those actively involved in the work of the trust
fund. Existing program documents and deliverables will be shared with the Consultant, in
addition to a list of possible contacts to be interviewed (see Annexes 2 and 3).

The final product will be a well-designed and detailed evaluation report (50-70 pages, 12-point
font, excluding annexes) that captures lessons learned under the first READ Trust Fund and
which may be used to inform the design and implementation of a second program.

To accomplish these tasks the Consultant will:

      Assess the program’s overall success in achieving its purpose, drawing on key stakeholder
       views, completed products, activity records, and other evidence sources to make this
       determination;
      Assess the global knowledge products produced under the program with the intent of
       making recommendations for future work in this area;
      Assess overall program performance in terms of the relevance of results, sustainability,
       appropriateness of design, resource allocation, and general structure and organization;
      Identify lessons learned and provide recommendations for guiding a second READ Trust
       Fund;
      Based on feedback from the READ Council and READ Management Team, finalize and
       submit the evaluation report.

OUTPUTS

The Consultant will prepare: 1) a draft and final evaluation work plan, and 2) a draft and final
evaluation report. The report will describe the purpose, methodology, and findings of the
evaluation and offer evidence-based recommendations and lessons learned.

The Consultant will begin by preparing an evaluation work plan that provides a conceptual,
methodological, and logistical framework for carrying out the evaluation. The work plan will
provide sufficient detail in each of these areas so that it is possible for the READ Trust Fund
Program Manager to make a solid determination as to the likelihood of the evaluation producing
sufficient evidence to make the aforementioned ‘assessments’ as to the success of the program,
overall and at the country and global levels. The work plan must be approved by the READ Trust
Fund Program Manager and will act as the agreement for how the evaluation is to be conducted.

The evaluation work plan (5-10 pages) will, at a minimum, address the following key elements:

      Primary objective(s), questions, and audience(s) for the evaluation
      Program evaluation methodology to be used – e.g., logic model, theory-based model,
       objectives-oriented, CIPP (context/input/process/product), IPO (input/process/output),
       discrepancy, other

                                                                                                  44
      Data sources and data collection methods to be used
      Analytical procedures to be used, including approaches to ensuring validity and reliability
      Detailed Table of Contents for the evaluation report
      Suggested communication/dissemination strategies for final report
      Work schedule, including dates for delivery of draft and final evaluation report
      Any issues or concerns regarding the evaluation, along with suggestions for how to
       address them



Four phases are proposed for delivery of the final product:

   1. Draft Evaluation Work Plan: To be submitted by the Consultant to the READ Trust Fund
      Program Manager within one (1) week of signing the contract.

   2. Evaluation Work Plan: Within three (3) days of receiving comments on the draft work
      plan, the Consultant will produce a final evaluation work plan.

   3. Draft Evaluation Report: The Consultant will submit a draft evaluation report for review
      on a date jointly agreed in the evaluation work plan.

   4. Evaluation Report: Within ten (10) days of receiving comments on the draft evaluation
      report, the Consultant will submit a final evaluation report, including an
      abstract/executive summary.

REPORTING ARRANGEMENTS

The Consultant will complete this assignment under the overall direction and guidance of the
READ Council. Day-to-day supervision and questions will be coordinated by the READ Trust
Fund Program Manager, Marguerite Clarke (mclarke2@worldbank.org). The Consultant will
submit draft and final versions of the work plan and the evaluation report to the READ Trust Fund
Manager for review and comment/approval. The draft and final versions of the evaluation report
also will be shared with the READ Council for their comment/approval. The Consultant will use
feedback from these groups to revise and finalize the evaluation report.

REQUIRED SPECIALIZED SKILLS OF THE CONSULTANT

The Consultant should have the following qualifications:

          At least five years of practical and successful work experience in the area of program
           evaluation;
          Demonstrated technical skills in the collection and analysis of qualitative and
           quantitative data, including qualitative interviewing;
          Prior successful experience working with World Bank projects;

                                                                                               45
          Knowledge and expertise in the area of student assessment;
          Fluency and excellent writing skills in English;
          Excellent interpersonal skills and ability to work constructively and productively with
           others.

LOCATION OF ASSIGNMENT, TIMING, DURATION, AND PAYMENT

The Consultant will conduct interviews with relevant World Bank and Russian representatives
remotely or in person, based upon the location of the Consultant. This may involve travel to
Washington, DC to interview relevant World Bank staff as well as possible travel to Moscow,
Russia to interview relevant Russian representatives and stakeholders. Any travel is subject to prior
discussion with, and approval by, the READ Trust Fund Program Manager. Remuneration will
be based on satisfactory deliverables and the READ Trust Fund Program Manager’s
approval of Requests for Payment submitted by the Consultant and processed by the World
Bank in line with World Bank policy. Travel expenses will be handled separately.

SAFEGUARD

The Consultant will make evidence-based recommendations without fear or favor as the
Consultant is independent of the World Bank.




                                                                                                  46
                   ANNEX 1: READ Trust Fund Results Framework

GOAL: Support the improvement of student learning outcomes through the design, implementation, and
use of robust student assessment systems
KEY INDICATORS:
                                            Enabling Context
EC1 – Setting clear policies
   There is a formal document(s) that provides guidelines for assessment activities
   The formal document(s) is available to key stakeholders and the public
EC2 – Having strong leadership
     Key stakeholders support the assessment activities
     There is key stakeholder support for continuous improvement of assessment activities
EC3 – Having regular budget/funds for assessment activities
     There is a line item in the government education budget for assessment activities
     The budget provides adequate funding in major areas -- design, administration, reporting
EC4 – Having strong organizational structures
     There is an agency, institution, or unit with the mandate to carry out assessment activities
     The assessment agency, institution, or unit is accountable to a clearly recognizable body
EC5 – Having effective human resources
     There is a team of people with the requisite skills/capacity to carry out assessment activities
     There are opportunities available to build assessment capacity; e.g., courses/training
                                              System Alignment
SA1 – Aligning the assessment with learning goals
     There is a clear, common understanding among key stakeholders of what the assessment activities
measure
     Assessment activities are aligned with an official curriculum/learning standards that outlines what
students are expected to learn
SA2 – Providing opportunities to learn about assessment activities
     There are training sessions/courses for teachers to learn about the assessment activities
     Teachers are involved some aspect(s) of assessment-related activities
                                              Assessment Quality
AQ1 – Ensuring quality
     There is formal documentation about the technical aspects of the assessment activity
     Assessment results are deemed by key stakeholders to be valid and reliable
AQ2 – Ensuring effective use of assessment results
     Assessment results are disseminated in meaningful ways to key stakeholders
     Assessment results are used to promote and inform students' learning


                                                                                             47
                 ANNEX 2: List of Documents To Be Reviewed

1.  READ Trust Fund Concept Note
2.  READ Trust Fund Administrative Agreement with Amendments
3.  READ Trust Fund Annual Reports (2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014)
4.  READ Trust Fund Comprehensive Report 2012
5.  READ Council Meeting Aide Memoires
6.  READ Countries – Final Benchmarking Report (2015)
7.  SABER-Student Assessment Conceptual Framework Paper – What Matters Most for
    Student Assessment Systems
8. SABER-Student Assessment Benchmarking Tools – Questionnaires, Rubrics, and
    Country Reports
9. National Assessments of Educational Achievement Series (Volumes 1-5)
10. READ Working Papers (1-12)
11. READ Video
12. Country-level Products/Reports (10-12 in total)
13. READ Website
14. READ Global Conference and Regional Workshop Materials




                                                                                  48
Appendix 2: Evaluation Work Plan



Overview
The goal is to evaluate the overall impact of the seven years of work under the READ Trust Fund
program. The evaluation will focus on what has been achieved through the READ-funded
program. The first audience for the evaluation’s findings is the READ Council , to inform it of
accomplishments achieved and challenges still to be addressed. In addition to assessing the
impact of work to date, the evaluation will make observations and suggestions for future activity
in this domain. The World Bank’s senior leaders and technical experts may also find the
evaluation informative and instructive for ongoing work in education and in co-financing and
donor relationships. Government officials from participating countries and from other donor
governments may also find the evaluation useful as a tool to reflect on their own activities and
programs.


Operationalizing the Terms of Reference
The Terms of Reference helpfully set out the following “key questions to be addressed”;


                1. To what extent did the READ Trust Fund program achieve its stated purpose
                   (i.e., to help low-income countries improve their student learning outcomes
                   through the design, implementation, and use of robust systems for student
                   assessment)?
                        a. To what extent did global-level activities contribute to this result?
                        b. To what extent did country-level activities contribute to this result?
                2. What are some lessons learned that can be applied to the design and
                   implementation of a future READ Trust Fund program?


These questions and the detail in the Results Framework for READ point to the need to evaluate
the array of funded activities against the explicit purpose of the program, which is to support the
development and operation of better student assessment systems through national and global
projects and activities. It also distinguishes two levels of activity - global and country; a distinction
which we will attend to in data collection, in the analysis, and in reporting. This is essentially the
summative part of the evaluation.

The Terms of Reference are also forward looking, envisaging a future READ program in broadly
the same domain of activities. To guide the design and operation of a second program of work,


                                                                                                      49
the evaluators are asked to identify “lessons learned”. This is the formative piece of the
evaluation.

These key questions will be used to structure the final report and to organize the main
conclusions. This will guide interviews with the main informants and enhance consistency in data
collection and analysis. Similarly, these questions need to be broken into some smaller discrete
themes to provide a common framework for the review and analysis of the program
documentation, which runs for many pages.


Some Open-Ended Guiding Questions

We see five overarching questions shaping the study and guiding data collection and analysis. We
believe that they can be used with most informants and in reviewing the READ program products
and documents. They should also allow us to test the viability of the theory of action, the logic
model that was embedded in the Results Framework and administrative agreements. That model
assumed that providing accurate, timely, and accessible information on how well students are
performing to teachers, policy makers, and international donors alike would lead them to focus
their energy and resources for the greatest improvement in learning outcomes. The seven-year
span of READ-supported activities, while commendable, is still too short to see the full effect, or
even the full realization, of all of the steps in the logic model. We will endeavor to lay out the
steps and offer an assessment of how far the READ Trust Fund’s efforts have progressed to date.
This should also point to areas for further work or greater investment.

The five broad questions we will pursue are:

   1. What worked?
   2. What did not and why not?
   3. What gaps have been identified in the program coverage that should be addressed in
      future work?
   4. What processes and procedures should be refined to increase effectiveness?
   5. How do the participant countries perceive the READ work and how have they integrated
      it into ongoing activities?


Framing questions in this way allows the same themes to be pursued across different types of
artefacts, in interviews with people from various institutional and cultural contexts, and across
different levels of authority. They should generate insights into broader issues like sustainability
and impact as well as specific topics like increasing institutional capacity, data usage, and
improvements in systems of student assessment without leading informants to address
particular topics. The use of open-ended questions in interviews also allows participants to offer
fresh insights into the topic by raising subjects not anticipated by the evaluators.


                                                                                                 50
Should additional interview prompts be required, we will use some or all of the following set of
questions to deepen our coverage of the issues. They will be adjusted depending on the particular
responsibilities of the interviewee when they were part of the READ program. Prompts are by
nature a little more directive. We might ask;

       (a)     What were your expectations for the READ-funded work?
       (b)     How did it add to the effectiveness of your (assessment system/technical
               assistance/Bank-client dialogue)?
       (c)     What is your assessment of the value and impact of READ-funded work
               (nationally/regionally/globally)?
       (d)     With hindsight, what would you have done differently?
       (e)     What would you set for the national or global priorities for a further cycle of READ
               programming?


To encourage candor, we will not record the interviews but take contemporaneous field notes.
We will also advise informants that the final report will only identify respondents by position or
area of responsibility. In the case of a direct quote, our intention is to give the informant the draft
of the relevant section to see if it was interpreted accurately. This should only be an issue when
the individual's comment is an outlier, an N of 1, or particularly apt for the point being made.

We will of course make this clear in requests for interviews and at the beginning of each
interview. We will also ensure that our notes are held securely and destroyed after the formal
completion of the project.


Audience

The audience of this evaluation will primarily be the READ Council. They have a natural interest
in the summative aspects of the study and how effective it has been in supporting the
development of better student assessment systems. And as the entity likely to be responsible for
any further similar program, the Council will benefit directly from the forward-looking, formative
work.

Other audiences include Bank staff, policy makers in client countries, and technical experts in the
areas of student assessment and examination systems. It may also be of interest to people
interested in international development assistance and donor-led programming.

A subsidiary audience might include third parties interested in organizing similar programs, and
academics conducting research related to development or education policy.




                                                                                                    51
Program Evaluation Methodology

The study will utilize a qualitative methodology based on the triangulation of documentation and
interviews. We will begin with a desk review of the materials stipulated in Annex 2 of the Terms
of Reference. We will take the READ Trust Fund Administrative Agreement, Concept Note, and
Results Framework as the foundation documents and use them as an organizing framework for
the analysis of the materials and products generated throughout this cycle of the program. We
will look for alignment between the main elements of these documents, particularly the Results
Framework and subsequent activities, noting variations, discontinuities, and where observable,
the reasons for changes in approach and how they contributed to or influenced program
effectiveness. This will reveal how robust the initial foundation documents were and also provide
a sensible basis for identifying and acknowledging the challenges of implementation that arise in
any cross-national, large-scale, multi-year, multi-actor program.

Using this organizing framework for reviewing the program’s documentation should also
strengthen the reliability and consistency of analysis. There is a common set of terms and
concepts, a common technical language to guide the reviewers. More importantly, the Results
Framework uses a set of terms and concepts that are known by the potential interviewees and
has been used to report the progress of the program for many years. This should increase the
quality of the data collected.

The document review will also look for common themes in the content of program activities,
common challenges in design and delivery of program activities, and common constraints on
implementation. It will also identify successes, intended and unintended benefits, and any
notable shortfalls. Finally, the desk review will note any distinctive or singular country or global
activity that yielded significant impact or was particularly disappointing.

We would hope to interview many, if not all, of the actors identified in Annex 3 using the
framework described above and augmented where relevant by specific questions about products
or programs that may emerge from the document review. Consistent with our plan we will start
with the foundation documents, the READ Trust Fund Concept Note, Administrative Agreement,
and Results Framework and then follow the cascade of materials.

Our intention is to start with at least some of the core team program managers and READ Council
members and then move on to actors on the various programs and country teams.


Analytical Procedures

Evaluative work of this kind faces significant challenges in ensuring that conclusions and
judgments are grounded on good data. This challenge is heightened by the diversity of data
sources, especially given the different vantage points of the various actors: some with a global
perspective and some with a single-country focus. To address this, we will follow the basic
principle of triangulation: “Good research practice obligates the researcher to triangulate, that

                                                                                                 52
is, to use multiple methods, data sources, and researchers to enhance the validity of research
findings” (Mathison 1988:13).

We will also follow a “systematic and essentially taxonomic process of sorting and classifying
data” as it is being collected as this plus immersion in the data, coding data, categorizing and
identifying themes lead to good evidence in qualitative research (Green et al, 2007:546).
We will start coding using an inductive method as we undertake the interviews and review
documents. This is in the grounded theory tradition of qualitative research, but its benefits are
well summarized by Thomas (2003): “The primary purpose of the inductive approach is to allow
research findings to emerge from the frequent, dominant or significant themes inherent in raw
data, without the restraints imposed by structured methodologies. Key themes are often
obscured, reframed or left invisible because of the preconceptions in the data collection and data
analysis procedures imposed by deductive data analysis such as those used in experimental and
hypothesis testing research.”

The inductive approach is well suited to both the formative and summative aspects of the
evaluation. While we are looking at the effectiveness of a particular theory of change, we are not
elevating it to the level of an empirically-testable hypothesis.

We will also pay careful attention to the views of different groups, noting that global team
members, country team members, and country client participants are likely to have different
perspectives and experiences.


Communication/Dissemination Strategies

While the main audience for the report is the READ Council, we would also propose that the
report be readily accessible to all those interviewed. This will encourage co-operation in the data
collection process and possibly add to the fulsomeness and veracity of responses.

Given the range of audiences we identify above (pages 1 & 4) and the fact that most of them
would have access to the World Bank’s home page, an e-publication strategy is likely to reach all
cost-effectively. Reach would be maximized if all those interviewed and any other relevant
stakeholders were contacted by the READ Trust Fund Program Manager to inform them the
report is available for download. The report should be available for download in a variety of file
types and, if appropriate, in languages other than English.

It may be valuable if the lead evaluator orally briefed the READ Council, but that is a matter for
the Council’s leadership.

There are additional qualifications and addendums that may be necessary to include depending
on how public the READ Council decides that the report will be.



                                                                                                53
Work Schedule

We plan to present a draft evaluation plan by 26 May and finalize it by 1 June 2015.

We will then begin the document review, starting with extant documents and taking into account
key documents that will be completed during June. This analysis will continue into July.

Our intention is to begin interviews with key program staff in the first half of July.

This will be followed by interviews with World Bank technical and program staff and any client
country informants they identify. These will run through August given likely constraints of
individual’s travel and vacation schedules.

A brief progress report on emerging themes will be submitted by 21 August for comment and
identification of any areas for further inquiry or analysis.

The suggested delivery date for the draft final report is 30 September, with a final report due
after discussion and necessary revision by 21 October.


Report Outline


While the structure of the report will evolve with the marshalling of evidence, analysis of data,
and the emergence of themes, we expect it to contain the following:

   1.   Executive Summary
   2.   Overview of the READ program (to ensure the evaluation report is self-contained.)
   3.   Purpose of the Evaluation
   4.   Evaluation Methodology
   5.   What was Achieved Globally
   6.   What was Achieved Nationally
   7.   Overall Conclusion: a summation
   8.   Looking Ahead
           a. Lessons learned about design and implementation
           b. Lessons learned about the domain of student assessment
           c. Opportunities for further work in this domain
           d. The scale and direction of such further work.


Annexes

                     A. TOR
                     B. Documents examined

                                                                                              54
                     C. Interviews
                     D. Acknowledgments
                     E. References.



References

Green, J., Willis, K., Hughes, E., Small, R., Welch, N., Gibbs, L., & Daly, J. (2007). Generating best
evidence from qualitative research: the role of data analysis. Australian and New Zealand journal
of public health, 31(6), 545-550.

Mathison, S. (1988). Why triangulate? Educational researcher, 17(2), 13-17.

Thomas D. R., (2003). A general inductive approach for qualitative data analysis, School of
Population Health, University of Auckland, Published later as Thomas, D. R. (2006). A general
inductive approach for analyzing qualitative evaluation data.          American journal of
evaluation, 27(2), 237-246.




                                                                                                   55
Appendix 3: List of Interviewees

The review team would like to thank all those who were interviewed as a part of this project.
Their insights and observations, coupled with experience and candor, added greatly to the team’s
understandings of the complexities and successes of the READ project. Errors of fact and failure
to appreciate the nuances of the various national circumstances are our responsibility, not theirs.

READ Council
Cristian Aedo
Andrey Bokarev
Luis Benveniste
Robin Horn
Alberto Rodriguez
Andrei Volkov

Program Management/Global Team
Marguerite Clarke
Emily Gardner
Julia Liberman

Country Teams
Michael Crawford
Dingyong Hou
Sophie Nadeau
Jem Heinzel Nelson
Anush Shahverdyan
Mai Thanh
Girma Woldetsadik

Others
Andrei Markov
Tigran Shmis
Anna Valkova




                                                                                                56
Appendix 4: Vignettes of READ Country Activities and Achievements

Angola

After a 25-year civil war, Angola had to re-build in 2009. Angola had no culture of assessment in
the education system and no staff dedicated to assessment. READ activities began with two
objectives: 1) to improve the assessment capacity of
Angola’s Ministry of Education, and 2) to develop a
culture of evidence-based decision making. Initial
                                                                “The knowledge
                                                                “Angola             base
                                                                           needs more      of
                                                                                          education
interest in READ activities was muted. Angola was               assessment
                                                                data           issues makers,
                                                                      so the policy    in Armenia
benefiting from high oil prices and there was no World          was small-
                                                                teachers   and   parents
                                                                              about        can talk
                                                                                      ten people.
Bank education program in the Ministry. READ helped             READ helped
                                                                about   education    outcomes.
                                                                                 build  up by
open a policy dialogue on the importance of measuring           involving
                                                                They  didn’t   want   to
                                                                            international   experts
                                                                                         share  their
                                                                to train local
                                                                assessment       people,
                                                                               results     the very
                                                                                        inMinistry
learning outcomes. By the end of the READ program, the
                                                                officials in things
                                                                beginning”.           need
                                                                               They like    a “plan
                                                                                          item
Ministry had created clear policies mandating regular           banks,
                                                                for      future related
                                                                    the reporting    to thetopublic
Early Grade Reading Assessments and a National                              analysis.” data, and
                                                                and dataassessment
                                                                national
Longitudinal Survey of student achievement. The                 that will not happen well
technical expertise of Ministry staff had been                  without outside help.”

strengthened; a regular budget line-item for
assessment, in the amount of US$1 million, had been
created; and a National Assessment System Technical
Group (NASTG) had been formed with permanent staff. At the same time, there is still much to
be done and the nation would benefit from READ 2 resources and technical assistance.



Armenia

Education has been a priority of the government in Armenia since Independence. Despite
significant advances in the education system, issues
persist about reliable measurement of learning outcomes
and inequities in educational outcomes between rich and   In Armenia, “there is still a lot to
poor. The goal for READ in Armenia was threefold: 1)      be done, to follow up, to
                                                          consolidate, to strengthen the
enhance capacity to design and implement national and
                                                          in-country educational
international assessment systems, 2) strengthen in-       opportunities for teachers and
classroom assessment exercises, and 3) provide channels   officials to learn about
for feedback, policy analysis, and recommendations for    assessment.”
actions to improve student learning outcomes. The 2012
SABER-Student Assessment baseline study showed a
pressing need to improve national assessment capability.

                                                                                                  57
In a relatively short time, Ministry officials were trained in aspects of educational assessment; a
Master’s degree program in education at State Linguistic University with specific courses on
assessment was developed, and formative and summative assessment strategies were
introduced into pre- service and in-service teacher education programs.



Ethiopia

Quality is the biggest issue facing the education system. The primary goal for READ in Ethiopia
was to improve educational assessment to provide reliable information to guide the design and
implementation of strategies to improve student learning outcomes. The main strategy was to
strengthen existing institutions and develop some new
agencies and processes by coordinating READ activities with
work financed by other donors. Major accomplishments                   “The READ project was a
included creating an autonomous National Educational                   catalyst for establishing a
Assessment and Examinations Agency, training its staff in              system for National
                                                                       Longitudinal Assessment and
various aspects of assessment, and supporting the
                                                                       School Inspection activities and
development of sustainable item banks for both National                for improving Ethiopia’s
Longitudinal Assessments and national examinations. By the             existing examination system.”
end of READ 1, a Directorate of School Inspection had been
established and national and regional officials had been
trained in how to use the framework. Implementation
commenced with a pilot phase reaching 28,000 schools. School inspection activities are
continuing with support from a large World Bank loan. With technical assistance, self-diagnosis
in each area was undertaken, which identified gaps and areas of improvement. There has been a
lot of progress in building up the assessment system in Ethiopia, but “while a lot has been
achieved, there is still a lot to be done and a READ 2 would accelerate progress. Main three areas
for future work are international benchmarking - TIMSS or the African cross-national program;
school graduate employability; better analysis and use of national assessment results and Grade
10 and 12 exam results.”



Kyrgyz Republic

The low quality of education in the Kyrgyz Republic was highlighted by the 2006 and 2009 PISA
surveys. The Kyrgyz Republic ranked last out of all participating countries. The government
responded with reforms aimed at strengthening the system and improving the monitoring of
student learning outcomes, especially through better formative assessment at the classroom
level, with over 6,000 primary school teachers being trained. At the system level, the government
                                                                                                    58
developed and adopted a new national assessment strategy that includes a reliable and secure
summative assessment process. This led to the creation of a new Grade 11 exit examination and
a Grade 4 large-scale assessment. The independent Center for Educational Assessment’s work on
improving the quality of national sample surveys was supported by READ funds and the results
of the 2014 survey were disseminated to key stakeholders. This was a marked increase in public
availability of assessment findings, with greater transparency on test specifications and scoring
criteria, which lays a basis for improving teaching methods. Overall the “READ Trust Fund was
useful in building capacity -- both technical and physical”. The results have shaped and informed
future investments in learning. “New grant projects will target preschool because of low access,
and the another grant is focusing on high schools and improving student learning.”



Mozambique

National examinations, NLSA, and ILSA were all occurring in Mozambique when READ activities
began. However, they were disconnected parts of an inchoate system and were not used
effectively to improve the quality of learning outcomes. The primary goal of READ activities in
Mozambique was to improve the technical and institutional capacity of the Ministry of Education
to assess student learning outcomes at all levels of schooling. READ financed training activities in
various forms, ranging from study tours and conferences to formal degree programs. Further,
READ funds “lifted the profile of classroom assessment”. One of the most visible results of the
READ work was the funding of Provinha, an early grade
reading assessment which included communication
materials for teachers, school administrators, and parents.        In Mozambique “READ
After an initial pilot was successful, the program was             produced some very good
expanded to other provinces. Results of Provinha                   outcomes, it built the internal
assessments were used at national policy forums and                capacity on assessment in the
                                                                   exam council, in universities
increased public debate about learning outcomes. Other
                                                                   and in the Ministry of
achievements attributed in some measure to READ                    Education; a cohort of trained
activities include an annual budget allocation for a national      people who are still in
learning assessment program and wider and more                     government service.”
meaningful engagement of civil society in the development
of the national education strategy. READ activities also
attracted the attention of other donors who found the
assessment projects solid and safe investments.



Tajikistan

                                                                                                 59
Educational quality and access to higher levels of education are the most pressing education
issues in Tajikistan. The primary goal of READ activities was to increase capacity for assessment
in the country.

 Training events and study tours supported by READ funds enabled key Ministry of Education
officials to develop a critical understanding of best practices and issues in assessment. The
Tajikistan country project team built an ambitious program, blending READ money with funds
from the Open Society institute, USAID, Education for All resources, and a World Bank credit to
support a “whole reform agenda that included building a secure testing facility. It was a
coordinated approach, which leveraged the READ funds to great effect” to create a better
university entrance examination and improve the school curriculum.

A centerpiece of the strategy was the new University Entrance Examination (UEE). The READ
program assisted in the development of clear policies, in workshops for leaders on how to
administer the new examination procedures, in setting a new budget for the UEE, in overhauling
the organization of the National Testing Center (NTC), in capacity building for NTC and Ministry
of Education and Sciences officials, aligning of UEE policy with university goals, in communicating
the new UEE plan to a broad range of stakeholders across the country, and in ensuring the
integrity of the new UEE.



Vietnam

With near-universal primary education achieved, officials in Vietnam had begun to focus on
educational quality. With a system of nearly 40,000 schools and 20 million students, designing
and implementing assessment activities is challenging in
terms of scale alone. An additional and equally
significant challenge is to transform the country’s          “In Vietnam the World Bank’s
curriculum and assessments from a focus on the recall of     curriculum loan was improved
knowledge to a focus on the application of knowledge: a      by the READ project. It helped
competency-based system. The goal of READ activities in      the client think through
                                                             standards, draw from global
Vietnam was to improve the effectiveness and scalability
                                                             expertise and build capacity
of the nation’s assessment activities. READ-funded           nationally and locally- the
activities were a vital element in attempts to strengthen    school level champions –
the assessment system. These activities included             aligning trained people with
training programs, study tours, and national and             message and materials.”
regional workshops for Ministry of Education and
Training officials and specialists, and conferences,
coursework, study visits, and workshops for regional and

                                                                                                60
district administrators. Thus, in the area of national examinations, NLSA, and ILSA, READ was
critical in building up technical capacity, knowledge of the system’s needs, system alignment,
quality assurance, and clear policy practices. Vietnam was successful to the point where READ
funds were reallocated to other countries in order to make a larger impact. Thus, it is likely that
if the education and assessment systems continue to improve at this rate, Vietnam will be fully
prepared to enter the global knowledge economy. READ funds were used to explore Vietnam’s
participation in PISA 2012 and the findings from this work provided the basis for the Asia
Development Bank financing the full cost of the survey in Vietnam. Other assessment activities
were supported by a World Bank school quality assurance project and by the Global Partnership
for Education, adding to the impact of the READ Trust Fund’s investment in the country.



Zambia

While Zambia has nearly universal primary education, there were still significant gaps in
education quality and learning outcomes that could be addressed by the READ program. The
2012 national assessment study found that only four out of ten fifth graders were meeting basic
literacy and numeracy standards. READ-funded activities concentrated on strengthening the
institutions responsible for monitoring student outcomes and devising strategies to improve
classroom practice. Much of the capacity building involved conferences, trainings, workshops,
study visits, and university courses and reached over 1,600 stakeholders. Other activities were
undertaken in order to ensure system alignment in classroom assessment and national
examinations, ensuring quality of assessments of all types, and in disseminating knowledge of
assessments to the general public. READ also financed the initial costs of Zambia’s participation
as one of seven pilot countries in the PISA for Development project. Ongoing costs of
participation are being financed by the national budget and the United Kingdom’s governmental
aid program.




                                                                                                61
Appendix 5: References

Blue Print research + Design, inc. (2009). Building to last: Field building as philanthropic strategy.
Bernholz, L., Seal, S.L., & Wang T.

Bishaw, A. & Lasser, J. (2012). Education in Ethiopia: past, present and future prospects. African
Nebula, 5. Retrieved from: http://nobleworld.biz/images/5-Lasser_s_paper.pdf

Carton, M. & Jakovleski, V., (2015). Learning Assessments as Public Goods? Norag NEWSBite,
Retrieved from: https://norrag.wordpress.com/2015/11/19/learning-assessments-as-public-
goods/

Fang, Y., & Gopinathan, S. (2009). Teachers and teaching in eastern and western schools: A critical
review of cross-cultural comparative studies. In Saha, L.J., & Dworkin, A.G. (eds). International
handbook of research on teachers and teaching. Vol 21. (557-572), New York Springer.

Foundation Center. (2004). Hirschhorn, L. & Gilmore, T.N., Ideas in philanthropic field building:
Where they come from and how they are translated into action. Retrieved from:
www.Foundationcenter.org/gainknowledge/practicematters/

Schleicher, A., & Costin, C., (2015). The Challenges of Widening Participation in PISA. Retrieved
from: http://blogs.worldbank.org/education/challenges-widening-participation-pisa

United       Nations.        (2015).      Sustainable                   Development            Goals.
http://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/

Wagner, D.A., (2012). “What should be learned from learning assessments?” Compare 42, (3),
510-512.

World Bank, (2013). Angola – learning for all project. Washington DC: World Bank.

World Bank, (2013). National Testing Center Inaugurated in Dushanbe. Press release. The World
Bank December 20. http://web.worldbank.org




.




                                                                                                   62
