                                                                                 103247
             Lao Poverty Reduction Fund II Impact Evaluation Pre-Analysis Plan
                                        Sept 2015


I. Introduction

       1.      This pre-analysis plan outlines the methods to be used and specifications to
       be employed to test a set of hypotheses concerning the impact of the Lao PRF Phase
       II program over the period 2012-2015 on access to health and education services,
       clean water, all-weather roads, and perception of and satisfaction with the above
       services and local development planning. The stated Project Development Objective
       for PRFII (Additional Financing) is to improve the access to and the utilization of
       basic infrastructure and services for the Project's targeted poor communities. This
       PDO would be achieved through inclusive community and local development
       processes with an emphasis on ensuring sustainability.
       The set of hypotheses considered in this evaluation are directly relevant to the
       indicators established in the Results Framework of the PRF II Project Document and
       reflect what the program will be evaluated on. Additional hypotheses pertaining to
       impacts on other indicators (chiefly household welfare and social
       capital/governance), which are not included in the Results Framework will be
       considered and enumerated at a later date in an annex to this plan. However, this
       additional set of hypotheses and accompanying indicators should not be viewed as
       impacts PRF II will be held accountable for.

II. PRF II Implementation During the Period of Evaluation (2012-2015)

       PRF II Treatment Activities

       The primary intervention component to be evaluated by the IE is the use of
       kumbanh-based block grants for community development planning and subsequent
       construction of infrastructure sub-projects. The kumbanh planning process is
       undertaken on a four year rolling basis. Villagers prepare development plans that
       are integrated at the kumbanh level through an inclusive process led by elected
       village representatives. Kumbanh facilitators assist communities to develop plans
       and also monitor progress. Sub-projects are then implemented at the village level.
       Village meetings with facilitators were held during the first cycle of implementation,
       in cycles when subprojects were implemented (generally only 1 per village over the
       period of evaluation) and occasionally in non-subproject implementation cycles.

       Each targeted kumbanh receives upfront a four-year budget to inform its planning
       and prioritization. An average annual budget allocation of US$35,000 is provided to
       PRF II target kumbanhs, for a total average investment amount per kumbanh of
       US$140,000 over four years with sub-projects financed and implemented on an
       annual basis. Sub-projects are selected for financing at the kumbanh level by the
       PRF kumbanh committee (consisting of elected villagers including women and,

                                                 1
where feasible, members of all ethnic groups present in the village). PRF district
staff, district local government and sector officials provide technical validation of
proposals. The final decision for sub-project financing is made at the kumbanh level
by the PRF kumbanh committee based on transparent criteria and process as
specified in the Project Operations Manual including:
     75% of sub-projects must benefit directly the poorest communities within
         the kumbanh.
     Sub-projects must meet appropriate technical standards for infrastructure
         agreed upon with relevant sector ministries.

It should be noted that not all villages in a given kumbanh necessarily receive
subprojects. Second, these subprojects may vary in type, e.g. water, roads, schools
etc. This variation presents challenges to the impact measurements.

PRF II was implemented during Cycles IX-XII of the overall PRF program and
corresponding to the period November, 2012 to August 2015. The table below
details the extent of sub-project construction during this period:

Table 1: Number of sub-projects constructed by type


                             Sub-projects                 Total Kumbanh
 Roads and Bridge                                    18                               12
 Schools                                             16                               12
 Water                                               15                               12
 Health                                               2                                2
 Kindergarten                                         3                                3

Table 2 below details when meeting were held with PRF facilitators over the period
of evaluation:


Table 2: PRF facilitated meetings held by Cycle

                        Planning Stage        Subproject          No Subproject
                        (Cycle IX Attapeu,    Construction        Construction
                        Cycle X others)                           during the cycle
 Attapeu                Yes                   Yes                 1 out of 3 cycles
 Luang Prabang          Yes                   Yes                 1 out of 2 cycles
 Oudomxai               Yes                   Yes                 1 out of 2 cycles
 Phongsaly              Yes                   Yes                 1 out of 2 cycles




                                          2
III. Hypotheses

      Overview

      The stated Project Development Objective for PRFII (Additional Financing) is to
      improve the access to and the utilization of basic infrastructure and services for the
      Project's targeted poor communities. This PDO would be achieved through
      inclusive community and local development processes with an emphasis on
      ensuring sustainability

      The IE is designed to address the following set of Project Development Objective
      level indicators from the Results Framework:

            1. Greater than 75% satisfaction levels reported by beneficiaries in targeted
               villages regarding improved services and local development planning
            2. Improved access to and utilization of basic economic and social services in
               kumbanhs supported by PRF
                   • % increase in access to and utilization of health services
                   • % HHs with improved access to and utilization of safe water resources
                   • % increase of HHs with access to all weather roads
            3. Lowest two quintiles benefit from above services

      The analysis will be structured to test a set of hypotheses to provide estimates of
      impact for indicators directly relevant to the Results Framework. In addition, the
      pre-analysis plan proposes a hypothesis for school sub-projects (to be discussed
      below) due to the face that approximately a third of investments are for schools or
      kindergartens and roads/bridges.

      Table 5: Hypotheses and indicators (indicators requiring new questions for
      the endline survey instrument are in red)

Hypothesis        Indicators                                                        dir   so   secq      lvl   fo
I. PRF II         i.     access to protected water source in the dry season         +     HH   WS-8      HH    B
increases         ii.    access to protected water source in the rainy season       +     HH   WS-10     HH    B
access to         iii.   distance to reach water source                             _     HH   WS-9      HH    R
protected         iv.    time to reach water source                                 -     HH   WS-N      HH    R
water sources
II. PRF II          i. months of the year access to road                            +     V    IV-N      V     R
increases          ii. villages with access to roads in the rainy season            +     V    IV-3      V     B
accessibility     iii. villages with access to roads in the dry season              +     V    IV-4      V     B
                  iv.  time to district center and nearest two villages by car or   -     HH   MA-3, N   HH    R
                       truck                                                        -     HH   MA-2, N   HH    R
                   v. cost to district center
III. PRF            i. times per months goods are sold outside the village          +     HH   MA-18     HH    R
increases          ii. quantity of goods sold outside the village                   +     HH   MA-11     HH    R
                                                                                    -     HH   MA-15     HH    R


                                                       3
access to              iii. price differential for goods sold in the village and market            MA-16
markets                     outside the village
IV. PRF II               i. seeking care at medical facility if sick                    +    I     H-9       I    B
increases               ii. time to nearest point of health care service                -    I     H-13      I    R
access to health       iii. cost of transport to nearest point of health care service   -    I     H-14      I    R
care services
V. PRF II                i. perception of school quality (categorical scale)            +    HH    E-N       HH   C
increases               ii. satisfaction with school quality (primary school)           +    HH    E-N       HH   C
perception of          iii. perception of quality of school building and facilities     +    HH    E-N       HH   C
school quality
and quality of
school
infrastructure
and facilities
VI. PRF II
increases                i. satisfaction with planning process to select village projects+   SC    SC-N      HH   C
satisfaction            ii. satisfaction with capacity of subprojects constructed to meet+   SC    SC-23     HH   C
with loc                    village needs
al development         iii. perception of influence of community over village affairs +      SC    SC-25     HH   C
planning               iv. perception of community participation in decision-making +        SC    SC-24     HH   C
processes
VII. PRF II             i. satisfaction with and access to education services           +    SC    SC-N      HH   C
increases
satisfaction            ii. satisfaction with and access to health services             +    SC    SC-N      HH   C
with and               iii. satisfaction with and access to safe water                  +    SC    SC-N      HH   C
perception of
services
VII.                   Consumption quintiles created via consumption aggregate               HH    CF, CNF   HH   R
Households in          from HH module and Market Price survey.
the lowest two
quintiles across
all households
benefit from
access to roads,
health care and
safe water

       dir Direction   of Hypothesized Effect: +: positive, - : negative
         so Source of Indicator: HH: Household module; I: Individual module; SC: Social dynamic and
       governance module; V: Village module
         lvl Level of Indicator: HH: household; I: individual (sub-household); V: village
         for Format of Indicator: B: binary; R: real number; C: categorical
       secq Section and Question Number: WS: Sanitation-Water; IV: Part IV of village questionnaire; MA:

       Roads, Transport and Market Access; H: Health, E: HH Roster and Education; SC: Social Capital and
       Government; CF: Consumption-Food; CNF: Consumption Non-Food; N: new question.




                                                           4
Discussion of Hypotheses Selection

Hypotheses and indicators were selected based on the needs identified in the
Results Framework. With respect to Hypotheses I, II and IV, this is
straightforward, utilizing indicators directly related to indicator 2 from the Results
Framework. For Hypothesis II, additional questions were asked on access, mode of
transport and time to the nearest and second nearest villages to capture the fact that
many projects are only able to improve certain sections of roads rather than the
entire link to the district center.

With respect to Hypothesis III, access to markets, the concept of the most
immediate impact of new roads aside from accessing services was developed for the
baseline survey to look at the extent which communities were able to sell goods in
markets and the price they receive external to the village. While not specified in the
Results Framework, impacts are potentially detectable via the IE at the household
level.

For Hypothesis V, education, although not explicitly stated in the Results
Framework, stakeholders (including the World Bank and the PRF Management
Team) felt that since a third of investments throughout the program were in schools
and kindergartens, some approach to measuring their impact should be developed.
It is important to note that at baseline 95% of villages had a primary school and
enrollment rates across grades was at 90% or above. The majority of school projects
involved expansion of an existing building or replacing an existing building with a
new building. Thus, school projects were not providing a new school where none
had existed before for the majority of cases. A number of indicators were then
considered:
      Enrollment: rejected due to already high enrollment rates and the perception
        that remaining lack of enrollment is not due to infrastructure conditions.
      Completion rate and Attendance: while a new building might provide a
        greater perception of school quality and of benefit in attending from the
        parents’ perspective, it is not clear that this effect could be strong enough to
        be detected. For attendance, there are significant measurement difficulties
        for households to recall absences and administrative data may be hard to
        access and unreliable. For completion rate, given the longer term nature of
        indicator, there are more factors outside the control of the project, such as
        teaching quality and curriculum which are likely to be more important than a
        building.
      Perception of quality: the indicator proposed is perception of overall quality
        and perception of quality of facilities. It should be possible to capture impacts
        from the new school building via perception questions. These questions are
        currently placed in the new Services Satisfaction module to be answered by

                                           5
       the designated randomly assigned male or female respondent so that the
       results can be disaggregated by gender.

For Hypotheses VI and VII, local development planning and services, new
questions will be added (see below) to capture satisfaction with service access and
quality, and the planning process, with new questions to address the former placed
in a new Service Satisfaction module. Indicators derived from existing questions
from the baseline survey around the community’s role in and influence over
planning will also be evaluated.

Additional Questions to Be Added to the Endline Survey
    Household Instrument Water and Sanitation Module:
           o How long does it take to fetch water?
           o How many times per week do you fetch water?
    Village Instrument Part IV
           o How many months of the year does this village have access to a road
              by car or truck?
           o How long does it take to reach the nearest and 2nd nearest villages in
              the dry and rainy seasons by car or truck? (intended to capture
              changes in location where roads to do not eventually lead to the
              district center)
    Household Instrument Road, Transport and Market Access Module
    Household Instrument Social Capital and Governance Module
           o How would you rate your satisfaction with the development planning
              process in the village? (5 point scale, to be added to the end of the
              Social Capital module)
    Household Instrument NEW Service Satisfaction Module
           o Are you satisfied with the quality of the school building and facilities?
              (5 point scale)
           o Are you satisfied with the overall quality of the school? (5 point scale)
           o Are you satisfied with your ability to access health care services? (5
              point scale)
           o Are you satisfied with the quality of health care services? (5 point
              scale)
           o Over the past three years, has your access to health care services
              improved, declined or stayed the same? (5 point scale)
           o Are you satisfied with your ability to access education services
              (primary school)? (5 point scale)
           o Are you satisfied with the quality of education services? (5 point
              scale) (primary school)
           o Over the past three years, has your access to education services
              improved, declined or stayed the same? (5 point scale)
           o Are you satisfied with you ability to access safe water? (5 point scale)
           o Are you satisfied with the quality and availability of safe water? (5
              point scale)

                                          6
                 o Over the past three years, has your access to safe water improved,
                   declined or stayed the same? (5 point scale)?
                 o What is your perception of the quality of the school building and its
                   facilities ? (Six point step using show card)
                 o What is your perception of the overall quality of the school? (Six point
                   step using show card)



III. Experimental Design

       The impact evaluation employs a randomized controlled experimental design to
       estimate the impacts of the Lao PRF II program on access to health and education
       services, clean water, all-weather roads, and perception of and satisfaction with the
       above services and local development planning. The evaluation compares changes
       in outcomes between 22 treatment kumbanh (sub-districts), receiving funding and
       activities through PRF II and 22 control kumbanh, which have not yet participated
       in the program. For indicators where no baseline data is available, the evaluation
       will compare differences between treatment and control kumbanh at baseline.


       Treatment Assignment

       For the purpose of the impact evaluation, participation in Lao PRF II for the eleven
       districts in the four provinces was assigned randomly by kumbanh, the unit of project
       implementation. The sampling frame of kumbanh was limited by the number of
       districts and kumbanh planned for the four new provinces joining PRF for Phase II.
       The plan for implementation was for 14 districts and 114 kumbanh in Phongsaly,
       Oudomxai, Luang Prabang and Attapeu provinces. Selection of the initial 114
       kumbanh was made by taking all kumbanh in the 14 districts with poverty rates
       greater than 40%. Of these 114, forty-four kumbanh were selected to participate in
       the evaluation - 22 of these being assigned to the treatment group and 22 to the
       control group. The sampling frame consisted of all 114 kumbanh with an estimated
       poverty rate greater than 40% . All districts were newly beginning participation in
       Lao PRF II and were not a part of the original PRF I project.

       Sampling Design

       Sample selection was then conducted via the following steps:
           District Selection: a total of 11 out of the 14 districts were selected for the
             sample, apportioned to each province based on population. Phongsaly and
             Attapeu each contained only two PRF II districts, each of which was assigned
             automatically to the sample; for Luang Prabang and Oudomxai, 4 and 3
             districts respectively were selected randomly from the planned five in each
             province, giving a total of 11 districts.


                                                 7
               Kumbanh Selection: two treatment and two control kumbanh were selected
                randomly from within each of the 11 selected districts for a total of 44
                kumbanh. Control kumbanh will not receive project support during the period
                of evaluation.
               Household Selection: within each Kumbanh, 100 households were selected
                randomly, for a total of 4400 households. The 100 households are distributed
                evenly across all villages in the kumbanh by dividing the 100 households by
                the number of villages.1 Households were then selected randomly using lists
                constructed in each village with the assistance of the village government. The
                same households will be reinterviewed during the endline survey, with
                tracking of households remaining in the district.
               For the qualitative component, 16 villages were chosen to be surveyed under
                the qualitative component. Within each province, 2 districts were selected
                with one treatment and one control village in each district. Districts and
                villages were chosen purposively to reflect geographical, ethnic and socio-
                economic variation.2

IV. Data

      Data required to estimate impacts for PRF is provided by two quantitative surveys
      and two qualitative research studies:

                Baseline Survey and Study: conducted between September 12th and October
                31st 2012 prior to all activities in the sample kumbanh with the exception of
                some initial planning meetings held in Attapeu province at district and
                kumbanh levels by PRF staff (but not in villages).

                Endline Survey and Study: to be collected between September 12th and
                October 31st 2015.

      The surveys and studies utilized the following instruments:

           i.      Household Questionnaire: containing individual modules (to be answered
                   by individuals or an adult best able to answer), household modules (to be
                   answered by the head of household or adult best able to answer), and a
                   social dynamics and governance module consisting of 50% female and
                   50% male adults best able to answer, with gender randomly assigned.
                   Summarized in Table 3 below.

      1 Post selection weights using population data were created to ensure estimates reflect equal
      probability of selection for each observation. See Section 3.3 below.
      2 Discussions were held between the research team and PRF II district teams given the limited
      information on village characteristics at the national level. Villages which demonstrated higher
      poverty rates, remoteness from district and village centers and ethnic group variation were selected
      by the field teams in consultation with the World Bank evaluation team. Every effort was made to
      ensure that the treatment and control villages in each district had similar profiles with respect to the
      characteristics discussed above.

                                                         8
   ii.     Village Questionnaire: village head is the respondent.
   iii.    Market Price Survey: prices of goods from consumption module at
           nearest market.
   iv.     Qualitative Instrument: administered to focus groups and key informants
           as outlined in Table 4 below

Table 3: Survey Instrument Modules and Corresponding Respondents
 Module                  Instrument Section             Respondent
 Household               Household Roster, Housing Head of Household (or
                         Conditions. Access to Markets, adult best able to
                         Consumption                    answer)
 Individual              Access to Education, Health Individuals (or adult
                         and Employment                 best able to answer in
                                                        the case of children)
 Social Dynamics and Social          Dynamics      and One respondent per
 Governance              Governance                     household: 50% male,
                                                        50% female
 Village                 Village Survey                 Village Head

Table 4: List of Key Informant Interviews and Focus Group Discussions
 Key informant              District Government Head                       1
 interviews                 Village head                                   1
 (at district, kumbanh      Other village official                         1
 and village levels)        PRF District Head and Staff (other             3
                            development project staff in control areas)
                            PRF Kumbanh Facilitator (other development     1
                            staff in control areas)
                            Other community leaders/elders (including 1    3
                            woman and 1 member of a minority group at
                            village level)
                                                                           10
                            Total Interviews:
 Focus group                Poorer villagers – male                        1
 discussions                Poorer villagers - female                      1
 (in each village)                                                         1
                            Ethnic Minority villagers – male
                            Ethnic Minority villagers – female             1
                            Ethnic majority villagers – male               1
                            Ethnic majority villagers - female             1
                            Formal groups (village associations, women’s   4
                            groups, savings groups etc.)                   10
                            Total FGD’s:


                                         9
V. Methodology


     The impact evaluation seeks to test the seven hypotheses listed in Table 5 above to
     determine whether PRF has had a statistically significant impact on access to health
     services, water and roads, and satisfaction with local development planning
     processes and quality of services. The results will be examined for villages,
     households and, separately, for households in the lowest two quintiles of per capita
     consumption. Indicators to test these hypotheses are created using data collected in
     the baseline and endline surveys.

     Two different specifications will be used to test the hypotheses:

          1. Impact of treatment effect across the entire sample: the IE will test the
             overall impact on indicators for all hypotheses using a standard difference-
             in-differences estimator. Baseline data will be used when available, and an
             alternate ANCOVA specification will be tested for robustness.
          2. Impact of specific sub-project types: due to the smaller sample size
             associated with a given type, hypotheses seeking impacts deriving from
             infrastructure sub-projects (I-V) will utilize an approach designed to identify
             the impact of that particular type for the relevant treated locations: in some
             cases it is likely that construction was not widespread enough to generate
             detectable impacts across the entire sample.



     Estimation of Treatment Effects for the Entire Sample (Hypotheses I-VII)


     All hypotheses with indicators for which baseline data is available will be tested
     using a standard difference-in-differences estimator of the following form:

     (1) Ytvi = a + tr1Tv + tr2Tvtt +tt + gv + uvi

     Where Ytvi is the outcome of interest at time t (0= baseline, 1 = endline), in village v
     and household i, Tv is a dummy representing PRF treatment, tt is a dummy
     representing t, g are village fixed effects and u is the error term. The coefficient of
     interest representing the impact of PRF is represented by tr2. All specifications will
     include village level fixed effects with standard errors clustered at village level.



                                                     10
In cases where baseline data is unavailable, the following specification will be used,
where tr1 represents the impact of PRF on the indicator of interest:

(2) Y1vi = a + tr1Tv + gv + uvi

The standard difference-in-differences method was chosen given the relatively
immediate and consistent impact that new infrastructure is expected to have on the
indicators of interest. In particular the assumption of parallel time trends between
treatment and control groups in stronger for impacts of this type. For robustness,
an ANCOVA approach which allows for random variation in the time trend and
which sometimes provides greater statistical power in comparison with difference-
in-differences will be employed.3


Estimation of Effect of Specific Types of Projects on Individual Indicators4 (Hypotheses
I-V)5

As noted above in Section II, Lao PRF II funds the implementation of subprojects
selected by the village community. Given that for all but two villages in the sample,
only one type of sub-project was built over the period of evaluation, detection of
overall treatment effects across the entire sample which are directly related to
specific infrastructure subproject types is less feasible. Thus, for hypotheses
pertaining to specific infrastructure types (I-V), estimation of the overall treatment
effects of the program is supplemented by estimating the treatment-on-treated
effect of particular infrastructure types in villages where each type has been located
or villages which stand to benefit from such infrastructure constructed in other
villages in the kumbanh.

To undertake this approach, the choice of project type needs to be accounted for as
it is endogenous to the treatment assignment: the choice is only revealed for villages
which receive the project. Once treatment status is determined the choice of project
type is driven by a set of unobserved variables. These unobservables may not be
distributed equally between the entire control sample and the subset of villages
choosing a particular infrastructure type, potentially biasing results in a comparison
of a subset of households in treatment villages with the entire control sample.

In order to control for such unobservables, we need to compare the villages from
the treatment group that have chosen a project of a particular type to villages in the
control group that would have chosen the project of the same type if they received

3 McKenzie, D. (2012). Beyond Baseline and Follow-Up: The Case for More T in Experiments. Journal
of Development Economics.

4 This section closely follows the methods used in the NSP Impact Evaluation and can be found at the
following web address:
5 For a detailed discussion, see Annex 1 below


                                                11
support from PRF II. Formally, denote by Cvj a dummy that indicates that a village v
will choose the project of type j, if given a chance and the corresponding outcome of
interest by Yvj. Denote by Y0vj and Y1vj potential outcome Y in village v without
treatment and with treatment respectively. Cvj is only observed in treatment
villages in the case where Tv =1; the realized value of Yvj is thus:

(3) Y1vj if Tv = 1 and Cvj =1
    Y0vj otherwise

The estimate of interest is the treatment on the treated effect:

(4) ttot = E[Y1vj - Y0vj | Cvj =1]

It can be demonstrated that the treatment on the treated effect can be estimated
using an instrumental variable regression with Cvj as the endogenous variable and Tv
as the instrument.6 The treatment assignment is uncorrelated with unobserved
variables in the error term driving project choice because treatment was
randomized and not conditioned on such variables. However, it is correlated with
Cvj as project selection only occurs in villages where treatment is received.

To then estimate the effect of particular infrastructure subproject type, the
following IV regression is used:

(5) Y1vi = a + tivj Cvj + gp + uvi

Where Cvj is instrumented by Tv. Standard errors are clustered at the village level.




6   See, http://www.nsp-ie.org/paps.html Appendix A for formal proof.

                                                 12
Annex 1: Minutes of Lao PRF II Endline Survey Revision Workshop Minutes

                          World Bank Office, Vientiane
                             June 10th, 9am-12pm

                                    Minutes

The workshop was held on Wednesday June 10th. Participants included key PRF
staff, DFAT and WB IE team staff. The following topics were discussed:

   1. Review of IE Process: a brief review of the methods (including randomized,
      mixed methods approach), content of the survey instruments, research
      questions and key findings from the baseline survey.

   2. Review of interventions by PRF and subproject construction in control
      kumbanh: number and type of subprojects built (see table below in Meeting
      with PRF Staff) to reach a common understanding of what PRF II has
      implemented in treatment kumbanh. In addition, the number of subprojects
      built in control and treatment areas (non-PRF) were presented to confirm
      lack of threat of resource diversion, confirming the viability of the
      randomized design.

   3. Review of PRF Results Frameworks and relevant indicators to be
      collected by the IE:
       Greater than 75% satisfaction levels reported by beneficiaries in targeted
         villages regarding improved services and local development planning
       Improved access to and utilization of basic economic and social services
         in kumbanhs supported by PRF
             o % increase in access to and utilization of health services
             o % HHs with improved access to and utilization of safe water
                resources
             o % increase of HHs with access to all weather roads
       Lowest two quintiles benefit from above services

   4. Module by module walk-through of the survey instrument by sector
      (Education, Health, Road and Market Access, Water, Social
      Capital/Governance). The following five questions were discussed for each
      sector.
              o What has PRF built?
              o What types of impacts can we expect from this type of subproject?
              o Do we have indicators which capture these impacts in the IE
                survey instrument?
              o Do these indicators fulfill RF reporting requirements?



                                       13
            o What additional indicators should be added to the IE survey
              instrument (including the qualitative component)?

     The following tables review the discussion by sector:

  5. Education

What was built 21 primary schools and 3 kindergartens. The PRF team
               indicated that over 90% of primary school construction
               projects are reconstructions where old facilities are replaced by
               new facilities or expansion to existing facilities.
Types of       Discussion centered around whether this kind of project could
Impacts        produce greater enrollment or attendance rates 1) via parents
               perceiving that the school was of better quality and therefore
               providing better learning and 2) via increase in capacity or
               grades offered. It was noted that the new infrastructure likely
               creates a positive perception among parents, as the projects
               were selected by villagers. Other potential impacts mentioned
               were attendance, teacher attendance and incidence of sickness
               among students (due to cleaner facilities). It is not clear that
               the former two can be measured accurately via HH responses.
               For the health indicators, given the addition factors influencing
               illness it is unlikely that impacts will be detected.
RF indicator   Currently, none. Listed at output level
Relevant       % of children enrolled in appropriate age cohort (7-11)
indicators     years of schooling completed by age cohort (7-11)
from the
baseline
Feasibility of It was noted the already high rates of enrollment in primary
new indicators schools (over 90%) may make the detection of impacts difficult
               as the constraints to the remaining 10% not enrolled are likely
               not due to infrastructure quality. With respect to attendance,
               there are difficulties in accuracy of measurement in the field
               due to recall. For something like completion rate which
               measures attendance and enrollment over time, other factors
               such as teaching quality and curriculum will play a larger role,
               reducing the potential for detectable impacts from the new
               facilities.

                 There was agreement that a short module on motivations for
                 and perceptions of infrastructure that was built should be
                 included. For primary school construction, this would involve
                 asking:
                         satisfaction with the outcome of the project


                                       14
                             perception with the quality of facilities and
                              overall quality of the school
                             whether the project has addressed identified
                              needs

                 It was noted that given that 30% of subproject funds went to
                 school projects, having an outcome indicator beyond
                 perception would be preferable. However, the WB IE team does
                 not recommend pursuing non-perception impacts as they are
                 likely not detectable given the capabilities of the IE design.
Additional       Perception and satisfaction questions (to be developed by the
indicators       World Bank IE team) as described above.
needed in the
survey
instrument


  6. Health

What was built   4 dispensaries in kumbanh centers. Two of these are new and
                 two are replacing old facilities.
Types of         Increased seeking of care, reducing travel times and cost to
Impacts          reach facilities.
RF indicator     % increase in access to and utilization of health services

Relevant RF      % of those sick seeking care
Indicators       time to point of health care service
from the         cost of transport to health care service
baseline
Feasibility in   No issues.
addressing RF
Additional       None needed.
indicators
needed in the
survey
instrument


  7. Water Systems

What was built   16 clean system renovations, spring gravity constructions and
                 wells. Water sources are protected.
Types of         Access to protected water source.
Impacts          Reduction in travel time to access water source.


                                        15
RF indicator       % HHs with improved access to and utilization of safe
                   water resources

Relevant           % of households with access to protected water source in
indicators         dry season
from the           % of households with access to protected water source in
baseline           rainy season
                   Distance to water source
Feasibility in     No issues.
addressing RF
Additional         Time needed to fetch water and number of trips per week to
indicators         allow for calculation of time savings.
needed in the
survey
instrument

  8. Roads

What was built         19 road projects including repair, improvement and spot
                       improvement. One was a bridge project.
Types of Impacts       Reduced travel time to markets and services.
RF indicator           % increase of HHs with access to all weather roads

Relevant               % of villages with access to roads in the rainy season
indicators from        % of villages with access to roads in the dry season
the baseline           access to district and kumbanh markets
Feasibility in         Sufficient. However, it was noted that not all roads are
addressing RF          intended to connect to the network leading to the district
                       center and may have other intended purposes including
                       access to fields and nearby villages. The 19 projects were
                       placed in four categories:
                                   o Road to village closer to Kumbanh Center
                                      (KBC) or District
                                   o Road to village away from KBC or District
                                   o Road to village closer to other KBC or District
                                   o Road within village
                       Measuring impact via access to all-weather roads should be
                       based on the intended destination rather than only looking
                       at access to district centers. The survey will construct a
                       map to identify which communities benefit from the PRF
                       road and how they benefit in terms of destination. The
                       evaluation will consider impacts for the villages which can
                       benefit in terms of access to roads and markets.




                                        16
 Additional            Modifying existing road and market access questions in the
 indicators needed     HH module with the intended destination rather than only
 in the survey         district center.
 instrument            Months of the year with access to roads




   9. Social Capital, Participation and Satisfaction Levels

 What meetings          Planning meetings were held in the first Cycle of
 were held              implementation (Cycle IX for Attapeu, Cycle X for other
                        provinces). Implementation meetings are held frequently
                        in villages targeted to receiving funding during the
                        subproject construction process. Meetings are held
                        occasionally in other years for non-funding receiving
                        villages.
 Types of Impacts       Participation in planning and subproject construction
                        processes.
 RF indicator           Greater than 75% satisfaction levels reported by
                        beneficiaries in targeted villages regarding improved
                        services and local development planning

 Relevant indicators    Receipt of information on PRF and other development
 from the baseline      planning processes
                        Participation and influence of the community local
                        development planning
                        Satisfaction with local government response to
                        identified problems
 Feasibility in         The survey instrument does not contain explicit questions
 addressing RF          asking about perception of quality of services or local
                        development planning. There is some concern that only
                        two meetings period over 3 Cycle is not sufficient to
                        generate impacts.
 Additional             Perception of and satisfaction with access and quality of
 indicators needed      services, and perception of change in quality and access
 in the survey          over time.
 instrument


   10. Summary of additional research topics

The following additional research topics were suggested by participants:


                                        17
Topic               Discussion
O&M                 Determining how successful the project is at maintaining
                    infrastructure in comparison with control areas due to the
                    incorporation of O&M into project process. This is likely be
                    addressed via a planned dedicated study which will not only
                    look at perception and participation but quality and
                    frequency of maintenance.
Use of PRF          Understanding to what extent local development actors
planning process    (local government, NGOs, donor supported projects) are
in local            utilizing PRF planning mechanisms for resource-targeting
development         and planning. This should not be addressed via a HH-based
decision-making     IE as survey teams have limited time in the field to collect the
                    data from government officials. A separate dedicated study
                    on PRF influence on local development planning should be
                    undertaken which will have an explicit focus for data
                    collection on planning and resourcing at the district and
                    kumbanh levels.
Capacity to         To what extent are PRF kumbanh/villages able to attract
attract resources   additional resources, both in the form of infrastructure
                    projects, and staffing/materials for existing facilities? It is
                    not clear that a limited number of planning and
                    implementation meetings are sufficient to create sufficient
                    capacity and motivation to draw in additional resources for
                    impacts to be detected via the IE. A separate study (in
                    coordination with local development planning process
                    above) should be conducted to look at this issue.
Livelihoods         What kind of impact are PRF subprojects having on
                    livelihoods opportunities? As the project is not designed to
                    address these issues directly and the typical impact on
                    consumption/household welfare in CDD projects is 4-6
                    years, the potential to detect impacts is unlikely. However,
                    data on market access, movement of agricultural outputs and
                    sale of outputs at different locations outside the village is
                    included in the survey and can be used in other research
                    activities to look at the issues.

  11. Next Steps
       Pre-analysis plan and draft of new questions circulated to stakeholders
         (July 1st)
       Plan and instrument draft are revised (July 8-10th)
       Field test of new questions (July 13-14th)
       Survey preparation (August)
       Data collection (September-October)


                                       18
      Data cleaning, analysis and report writing (November 2015- January
       2016)
      Final report (February 2016)

12. PMT support for the IE process
     The PMT will review all pre-analysis plans and survey instruments to
      ensure that questions are properly formatted and translated.
     The PMT will provide support during the field test, survey preparation
      and data collection to properly supervise the contracted survey firm.
     The PMT will provide a permit letter to facilitate data collection by the
      survey firm (WB will provide an initial letter explaining the IE process to
      assist the PMT with obtaining the permit letter)




                                      19
