             Role of Institutions in
         River Basin Management




The Mississippi Experience
Informs the Brahmaputra



                                       1
    Role of Institutions in River Basin Management: The
        Mississppi Experience Informs the Brahmaputra




2
              Table of Contents




Study Tour to the Mississippi River Commission,
November 18-20, 2015	                             5


Highlights	                                        5


Overview	                                          5


Learning from the Mississippi Experience	          6


Agreements and Follow up Action	                   8


Annex 1: Tour Highlights	                          9


Annex 2: Participant List	                        10




                                                       3
    Role of Institutions in River Basin Management: The
        Mississppi Experience Informs the Brahmaputra




4
Study Tour to the Mississippi River
Commission, November 18-20, 2015
   Highlights

   n	A high-level delegation comprising the Minister of Water Resources, Bangladesh and Secretary
     of Economic Affairs, Bhutan, came together to discuss cooperation on the management of the
     Lower Brahmaputra Basin using the experience of the Mississippi River Basin.

   n	Delegates appreciated the role institutions play in maintaining and managing the river and
     mediating positions taken by the different states involved .

   n	The study tour was well received and a follow-up meeting has been proposed in early 2016,
     preferably on the Brahmaputra River.




Overview
As part of its knowledge exchange activities in the Brahmaputra basin, the South Asia Water
Initiative (SAWI) convened a Lower Brahmaputra Cooperation Forum from November 16-20,
2015 comprising formal and informal discussions at the World Bank headquarter followed by
a study tour to the Mississippi River Basin. SAWI is a multi-donor partnership between the World
Bank and the governments of United Kingdom, Australia and Norway. The initiative is working
to increase regional cooperation in the management of the major rivers of the Himalaya in
South Asia. The objective of the study tour was to share lessons in river basin management,
specifically focusing on flood management, bank erosion, navigation, and integrated water
resource management, and to share best practices within basins. The study tour included visits
to the US Army Corps of Engineers, St Francis Levee District, Mississippi River Commission (MRC)
and Engineering Research and Development Center.




Study tour participants in Memphis.


                                                                                                    5
                                                                    Role of Institutions in River Basin Management: The
                                                                        Mississppi Experience Informs the Brahmaputra




    The participants included high level representations from Bangladesh and Bhutan including the
    Minister of Water Resources and Minister of State for Water Resources, Bangladesh. The Indian
    delegation had confirmed participation but was unable to attend due to last minute procedural
    constraints.

    The activity was a follow up to the study tour conducted in June 2015 wherein mid-level government
    officials and technical staff from India, Bangladesh, Bhutan and China had participated.

    Learning from the Mississippi Experience

        n	River basin management in the Mississippi is primarily focused on addressing flood risk
            and ensuring navigability, for which river training and dredging has been important.

        n	Successful flood management depends on robust institutions which have precedence
            and experience as well as support of laws and policies that empower institutions.

        n	Effective flood management requires a combination of structural interventions as
            well as softer initiatives such as river flood and hurricane forecasting, communication
            strategies and evacuation plans.

        n	A suite of decision support tools are required to make informed decisions and plans at a basin
            scale.

        n	Adaptive management requires resilience and coordination at all levels at all times.

        n	Active engagement with communities and coopting them in the planning process is integral to
            flood risk management and building resilient systems.

        n	Water resource management requires a multidisciplinary approach using a
            combination of engineering, technological, social, economic and legal expertise.
           For details, please refer to the Mississippi River Commission Study Tour, June 2015 Report


    The Mississippi is the largest river in the United States and third largest in the world, draining
    approximately 41 percent of the country. It extends from the continental divide in the Rocky
    Mountains to the Appalachian Mountains, and from just south of the Great Lakes to the Gulf of
    Mexico. The Mississippi River Basin is a good example of how the role of the federal government
    has evolved with regard to flood control, and illustrates the different objectives for which it is
    managed. Federal involvement started with the need to make the river navigable for which
    dredging and river training were necessary. As a result, the US Congress had established the
    MRC to ensure the river’s navigability. In 1927, following the Mississippi flood, the mandate of
    the MRC increased to include flood management as well. Today, the MRC works in conjunction
    with the US Army Corps of Engineers to ensure that an integrated and holistic approach is
    adopted to manage the basin.

    The delegates noted similarities in addressing challenges and optimizing opportunities between
    the Brahmaputra and Mississippi River Basins and the avenues for technical and policy learnings
    on basin cooperation in flood management, integrated water resources management, and
    opportunities in navigation.

    While there was considerable opportunity for participants to gain technical capacity and learn
    modern approaches to river basin management, a significant takeaway from the tour was
    to assess good practices that could be applied to the Brahmaputra basin. There were also

6
Left: Mr. Stephen Gambrell, Director, Mississippi River Commission, describing the flood risk
management system to the delegates at the US Army Corps of Engineers office, Memphis;
right: a view of the overflowed areas in the alluvial valley during the 1927 flood.


  “The Mississippi had its worst floods in 2011. Yet, not one life was lost and
  not one acre of land that wasn’t designed to flood, flooded. We take that
  as one of the greatest achievements of the Mississippi River Commission”
                                                                          Stephen Gambrell
                                                       Director, Mississippi River Commission


focused technical discussions with experts on best practices and strategies to address common
key challenges in managing large river basins. These discussions also provided insight on river
training, which is seen as a precondition to ensuring a navigable river, as well as the benefits
and costs of dredging. The learnings from these discussions are directly transferable to the
Brahmaputra Basin and help in thinking through some of the challenges that can be encountered
should Bangladesh follow a path similar to that of the Mississippi.

For the participants from Bangladesh, one of the most important sessions was on the training
regime of the Mississippi, as this has significant potential for replication in the Brahmaputra basin
as well. The Prime Minister of Bangladesh has identified the need for narrowing the width of the
Brahmaputra and reclaiming land for human habitation as one of the country’s key priorities.
Thus, the delegates felt that these lessons from the Mississippi could prove useful in achieving
the aforementioned objectives. The Minister also spoke about deepening the channel to improve
navigation, and said that developing a strong communication strategy to minimize flood damage
was a key focus for Bangladesh. Bangladesh is keen to preserve its water ecosystem while, at the
same time, provide livelihoods to the millions of people inhabiting the basin areas.

For the Bhutanese delegation, the primary areas of interest included the potential of levee network
systems as protection against glacial lake dam bursts, and the challenges that were encountered
while training the Mississippi upper reaches, where the terrain was similar to that of Bhutan.
The delegates also noted the need for a collaborative arrangement to optimize management
of residual waters that come down from the Chinese slopes, and the need for factoring in
appropriate safeguards.


                                                                                                        7
                                                           Role of Institutions in River Basin Management: The
                                                               Mississppi Experience Informs the Brahmaputra




    Left: Delegates at the Observation Deck, Bass Pro Shops Pyramid, Memphis; right: Mr. Anisul
    Islam Mahmud, Minister of Water Resources, Bangladesh, in discussion with MRC officials.



       “Brahmaputra is one of the widest rivers in the world. We need to narrow
       the width to a 10th of its present, at its widest”
                                                                         Anisul Islam Mahmud
                                                        Minister of Water Resources, Bangladesh



    Both delegations appreciated the critically important role of the MRC, not only for maintaining
    and managing the river but in mediating the positions taken by different states within the US
    federal construct; a situation similar to South Asia where the waters of the Brahmaputra are
    shared between four different countries.

    Agreements and Follow Up Action
    Delegates agreed that the study tour to the MRC provided a conducive platform for them to
    jointly discuss and identify areas of collaboration and activities that may be undertaken to better
    manage the water resources of the Brahmaputra basin.

    As a follow up, it has been proposed that a Knowledge Conclave should be organized in South Asia,
    preferably on the Brahmaputra River in India/Bangladesh, bringing in senior-level participation
    from all three countries to discuss the applications of the learnings from the Mississippi and
    identify potential synergies on effective management of the Brahmaputra basin.

    The Bangladesh Minister of Water Resources also expressed interest in inviting the MRC officials
    to Dhaka to make the same presentation to the Prime Minister.




8
Annex 1: Tour Highlights
Study Tour to the Mississippi River Commission
November 18-20, 2015

District Office, MRC, Memphis               Observation Deck, Bass Pro Shops
                                            Pyramid, Memphis




Headquarters, St. Francis Levee District,              Lower Mississippi River
West Memphis                                           Museum, Vicksburgh




Engineering Development and Research Center, Vicksburgh




                                                                                 9
                                                                 Role of Institutions in River Basin Management: The
                                                                     Mississppi Experience Informs the Brahmaputra




     Annex 2: Participant List

     Country         Name                         Title                          Organization
     Bangladesh      Mr. Anisul Islam             Honorable Minister             Ministry of Water Resources
                     Mahmud
     Bangladesh      Mr. Muhammad                 Honorable State Minister       Ministry of Water Resources
                     Nazrul Islam
     Bangladesh      Mr. Zafar Ahmad              Secretary                      Ministry of Water Resources
                     Khan
     Bangladesh      Md. Ismail Hossain           Director General,              Bangladesh Water
                                                                                 Development Board
     Bangladesh      Md. Habibur Rahman           Project Director, ECRRP        Bangladesh Water
                                                                                 Development Board
     Bangladesh      Ms. Suraiya Begum            Bumthang Forest Division       Prime Minister’s Office
     Bhutan          Mr. Dasho Yeshi Wangdi       Honorable Secretary            Ministry of Economic Affairs
     Bhutan          Mr. Kinzang Gyeltshen        Chief Forestry Officer         Bumthang Forest Division,
                                                                                 Dept. of Forest &
                                                                                 Park Services
     Washington DC   Mr. Param Iyer               Practice Manager               World Bank
     Washington DC   Mr. Abedalrazq Khalil        Senior Water Resources         World Bank
                                                  Specialist
     Washington DC   Mr. Bill Young               Lead Water Resources           World Bank
                                                  Specialist
     Washington DC   Ms. Christina Leb            Senior Water Resources         World Bank
                                                  Specialist
     Washington DC   Ms. Cecilia Belita           Senior Program Assistant       World Bank
     Washington DC   Ms. Priyanka Chaturvedi Consultant                          World Bank
     Bangladesh      Mr. Rafiqul Islam            Consultant                     World Bank
     Washington DC   Mr. Tariq Ahmad Karim        Consultant                     World Bank




10
11
     Role of Institutions in River Basin Management: The
         Mississppi Experience Informs the Brahmaputra




12
