                                                                           Y
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                              Responsible Financial Access
                                                         Finance & Markets Global Practice



                                      Diagnostic Review of
                                   Consumer Protection and
Public Disclosure Authorized




                                         Financial Literacy
                                        (Insurance, Private Pensions and Securities)


                               Volume I: Key Findings and Recommendations

                                                          Mozambique
Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                         November 2015
DISCLAIMER

This Diagnostic Review is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development/The World Bank. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed herein do
not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments
they represent.


                                                                               FINANCE & MARKETS | I
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Abbreviations and Acronyms .................................................................................................... iii
Acknowledgements .................................................................................................................. v
Preface ................................................................................................................................... vi
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY .....................................................................................................7
FINANCIAL SECTOR CONTEXT FOR CONSUMER FINANCIAL SERVICES AND FINANCIAL
LITERACY ............................................................................................................................ 12
  SUPPLY OF FINANCIAL SERVICES ........................................................................................ 12
  DEMAND FOR FINANCIAL SERVICES .................................................................................... 16
FINANCIAL CONSUMER PROTECTION IN MOZAMBIQUE ................................................ 18
  INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS ....................................................................................... 18
  LEGAL AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK .............................................................................. 22
  TRANSPARENCY AND DISCLOSURE ..................................................................................... 25
  BUSINESS PRACTICES ........................................................................................................ 28
  COMPLAINTS HANDLING AND DISPUTE RESOLUTION .......................................................... 32
  FINANCIAL LITERACY/CAPABILITY ...................................................................................... 35
ANNEX: List of Overall Recommendations ................................................................................ 37


Table   1:   Summary of High Priority Recommendations................................................................. 9
Table   2:   Financial Institutions in Mozambique .......................................................................... 12
Table   3:   Regional Comparison of the Insurance Sector ............................................................. 13
Table   4:   Pension System in Mozambique* ............................................................................... 14
Table   5:   Stock market capitalization as % of GNP (end of year) ................................................ 15
Table   6:   Financial Consumer Protection Regulators and Supervisors .......................................... 19
Table   7:   List of Overall Recommendations ............................................................................... 37

Figure 1: Usage of Different Financial Institutions in Mozambique ............................................. 16
Figure 2: Percentage of Mozambicans that have ever used financial institutions ......................... 17
Figure 3: Usage of Sophisticated Saving Products in Rural and Urban Areas............................... 17




                                                                                                                   FINANCE & MARKETS | II
            Abbreviations and Acronyms

AML      Anti-Money Laundering
AMOMIF   Mozambican Association of Microfinance Institutions (Associação
         Moçambicana de Instituições de Microfinanças)
ATM      Automatic Teller Machine
AUM      Asset under Management
BAM      Mozambican Association of Banks (Associação Moçambicana de Bancos)
BdM      Bank of Mozambique
BID      Basic Information Document
BVM      Mozambique Stock Exchange (Bolsa de Valores de Moçambique)
CAMC     Center for Arbitration Mediation and Conciliation
CIS      Collective Investment Scheme
CSD      Central Securities Depository
CTA      Confederation of Business Associations (Confederação das Associações
         Económicas)
DECOM    Consumer Protection Association
DFID     UK Department for International Development
DI       Deposit Insurance
DIF      Deposit Insurance Fund
EIOPA    European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority
GDP      Gross Domestic Product
GNI      Gross National Income
HR       Human Resources
IFC      International Finance Corporation
IMF      International Monetary Fund
INSS     National Institute of Social Security (Instituto Nacional de Segurança Social)
IOPS     International Organisation of Pension Supervisors
IPEME    Institute for the Promotion of Small and Medium Enterprises (Instituto de
         Promoção de Pequenas e Médias Empresas)
ISSM     Institute of Insurance Supervision of Mozambique (Instituto de Supervisão
         de Seguros de Moçambique)
KYC      Know Your Customer
MFI      Microfinance Institution
MIC      Ministry of Industry and Commerce
MOE      Ministry of Education
MoEF     Ministry of Economy and Finance
MOJ      Ministry of Justice
MOL      Ministry of Labor
MOPH     Ministry of Public Works
MOU      Memorandum of Understanding
MSEs     Micro and Small Enterprises
MSMEs    Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises
MTC      Ministry of Transport and Communications
MTR      Real Time Gross Settlement (Metical em Tempo Real)
OPSG     EIOPA Occupational Pensions Stakeholder Group
PAYGO    State Owned Pay-as-You-Go Pension Scheme


                                                                    FINANCE & MARKETS | III
POS            Point-of-Sale
PROCONSUMERS   Association for Consumer Study and Defence
SMEs           Small and Medium Enterprises
UNCDF          United Nations Capital Development Fund
USAID          US Agency for International Development
WB             World Bank




                                                            FINANCE & MARKETS | IV
                                        Acknowledgements
This report contains the findings and recommendations from a World Bank mission to Mozambique
from November 17 to 25, 2014, conducted for the purpose of a diagnostic review of the Consumer
Protection and Financial Literacy/Capability (CPFL) laws, institutions and practices applicable to
certain regulated financial services in Mozambique (2014 CPFL Review). Mozambique’s insurance,
pensions and securities sectors were considered alongside relevant financial literacy/capability
programs. This CPFL Review complements the CPFL Review of the banking and non-bank credit
institutions sectors, which was conducted in 2012 (2012 CPFL Review).1
This CPFL Review was conducted as a component of Mozambique’s Financial Inclusion Support
Framework Program (FISF Program). The FISF Program is a World Bank Group (WBG) initiative
supported by the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, which
provides technical assistance and capacity building support to countries to help them accelerate the
achievement of their financial inclusion commitments and targets. The WBG’s Good Practices for
Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy/Capability were used as a benchmark for the review.2
CPFL Reviews against Good Practices have been conducted by the WBG in more than thirty countries
worldwide, including in many African countries.3
This CPFL Review was undertaken by a team led by Rosamund Grady (Senior Financial Sector
Specialist, GFMDR, and Technical Lead). Other members of the team included Peter Wrede (Senior
Insurance Specialist, GFMDR), Fiona Stewart (Senior Financial Sector Specialist, GFMDR, Pensions
Expert), Richard Symonds (Consultant, Securities Expert), and Jorge Joao Faria (Consultant and
Mozambique financial sector expert). Research and drafting support was provided by Marco
Traversa (Financial Analyst, GFMDR). Editing assistance was provided by Solvej Krause (Consultant,
GFMDR) and administrative support was provided by Suran Kc Shrestha (Program Assistant,
GFMDR), Clarisse Nhabangue (Team Assistant, AFCS2) and Oxana Shmidt (Program Assistant,
GFMDR). The mission team worked closely with the concurrent Financial Inclusion Strategy mission
team lead by the co-TTLs Mazen Bourie, Senior Private Sector Development Specialist, GFMDR and
Bujana Perolli, Financial Sector Specialist, GFMDR.
Extensive consultations were held with relevant stakeholders for the purposes of this review. They
included the Insurance Supervision Institute of Mozambique (ISSM), the Mozambique Stock
Exchange (BVM) and the Bank of Mozambique (BdM), other government entities and public
agencies, financial institutions, industry associations, consumer associations, and professional
bodies.
The mission team is grateful for the support and collaboration extended by all stakeholders. In
particular, the team wishes to express its appreciation to the Mozambique authorities for their strong
support for the CPFL Review and for their assistance during this mission, and after its conclusion.




1 http://responsiblefinance.worldbank.org/diagnostic-reviews
2 Good Practices for Financial Consumer Protection (World Bank, 2012), available at: responsiblefinance.worldbank.
org /~/media/GIAWB/FL/Documents/Misc/Good-practices-for-financial-consumer-protection.pdf.
3 Recent CPFL Diagnostic reviews are available at: http://responsiblefinance.worldbank.org/diagnostic-reviews.




                                                                                                FINANCE & MARKETS | V
                                                  Preface
The existence of a sound financial consumer protection framework is fundamental to
increasing access to and usage of financial services, and the quality of those financial
services, along with supporting further financial sector deepening. Financial consumer
protection is a necessary precursor to building trust in the formal financial sector and thus in
encouraging financial inclusion. Further, consumer protection helps ensure that expanded access
benefits consumers and the economy as a whole. While increased access can result in significant
economic and societal benefits, it can be neutral or even harmful if consumers: (i) cannot exercise
their rights as consumers, (ii) cannot select the financial products that suit them best; and (iii) are
not protected from mis-selling, fraud, and other market abuses.

A sound financial consumer protection regime needs to be complemented with
prudential regulation and supervision, as well as a stable macroeconomic environment.
Prudential requirements are intended to ensure that the financial system remains sound and stable,
while the financial promises made by financial institutions are met. Proper supervisory oversight and
adequate resources are essential to ensure adherence to these standards. Further, even the
soundest legal, regulatory and supervisory framework for financial consumer protection will not be
effective in an unstable macroeconomic environment.

The World Bank’s Good Practices for Financial Consumer Protection are an assessment
tool for diagnostic reviews of a country’s consumer protection and financial literacy
framework (Good Practices).4 More than 30 such reviews have been conducted worldwide. The
Good Practices were developed using international benchmarks and take account of the legal and
regulatory frameworks in developed and developing countries.5

The main objective of a CPFL Review is to assess the legal, regulatory, and institutional
frameworks for financial consumer protection in a country, with reference to the Good
Practices. The following areas are addressed: (i) Institutional Arrangements, (ii) the Legal and
Regulatory framework, (iii) Transparency and Disclosure, (iv) Business Practices, (v) Complaints
Handling and Dispute Resolution Mechanisms and (vi) Financial Literacy/Capability. All parts of a
financial sector can be considered, including banking, non-bank credit institutions, insurance,
securities, private pensions, and credit reporting.

There is an increased international focus on consumer protection in the financial sector.
As shown by the World Bank’s 2013 Global Survey on Financial Consumer Protection, a legal
framework for financial consumer protection exists in 112 out of the 114 countries surveyed. The
most common approach is to have a financial sector-specific consumer protection regulatory
framework (as exists in 103 countries). The Global Survey also showed that the number of
regulatory agencies with a specific responsibility for financial consumer protection increased from
74 in 2010 to 97 in 2013.




4    Good     Practices      for   Financial   Consumer      Protection   (World   Bank,     2012),   available  at
http://responsiblefinance.worldbank.org/~/media/GIAWB/FL/Documents/Misc/Good-practices-for-financial-consumer-
protection.pdf (last visited on December 11, 2014).
5 Relevant international standards include the principles released by the Basel Committee, IOSCO and IAIS and OECD

recommendations for financial literacy and awareness on pensions, insurance and credit products.


                                                                                            FINANCE & MARKETS | VI
                                     EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
1. Key Findings and Recommendations presented in this report are based on the World
   Bank’s Good Practices for Financial Consumer Protection and consider the insurance,
   pensions, and securities sectors in Mozambique. The report reflects the legal and
   regulatory framework and relevant aspects of the financial sector at the time of the CPFL Review,
   with limited reference to existing and proposed significant changes the authors of the report
   were aware of at the time of writing.

KEY FINDINGS
2. The key 2014 CPFL Review findings are summarized below. Further details are
   provided in the following sections of Volume 1 of this report. Many of the findings are
   unique to the insurance, pensions, and securities markets but those of general application are
   consistent with the 2012 CPFL Review, where the status quo has remained unchanged in most
   respects:
    •    The authorities have demonstrated a deep interest in CPFL in the insurance,
         pensions, and securities markets. Among other factors, this has been shown by: (i) the
         request for the CPFL Review as part of the FISF Program; (ii) the new consumer-oriented
         laws for the insurance and pensions sectors; (iii) the work on financial literacy conductedby
         ISSM and BVM; and (iv) importantly, the emphasis on consumer protection in the Financial
         Sector Development Strategy 2013 -2022. For example, one of the Government’s areas of
         focus for the insurance industry is “Developing a consumer protection framework to
         encourage fair business practices and to deepen the market by increasing confidence in the
         insurance products”.6
    •    Significant progress has been made in the development of the consumer
         protection legal and regulatory framework for the insurance and pension sectors,
         but there are significant gaps in the securities sector laws. The legal framework for
         both the insurance and pensions sectors have been updated relatively recently (Insurance
         Act 30/2011 and Pension Act 25/2009) and provide a sound basis for the fair treatment of
         consumers. However, given the newness of ISSM, not all regulations required to implement
         the law have been issued yet (for example, in relation to micro insurance). The legal and
         regulatory framework for consumer protection in the securities sector is underdeveloped in
         comparison, presumably due to the lack of a retail market for securities. In particular, the
         Securities Code is written in very general terms on issues concerning investor protection.
     •   The Consumer Protection Law 22/2009 (CP Law) also contains comprehensive
         protections for consumers but it does not appear to have been implemented or
         enforced (as also noted in the 2012 CPFL Review). However, implementing
         regulations are being prepared and are expected to be approved in 2015, with the
         establishment of the Consumer Institute to follow.




6
 Section 3.3, Development of the Insurance Sector and see also Section 3.4, Developing the Pensions Sector and Section
5.2 Developing the Capital Markets.

                                                                                               FINANCE & MARKETS | 7
       •    As with the 2012 CPFL Review, there is also a concern about the interaction
            between sector-specific laws and consumer protection laws of general
            application. For example, the abovementioned CP Law, the Advertising Code, the
            Insurance Act and the Pensions Act all contain provisions on misleading advertising with
            different enforcement authorities. Other common areas between the CP Law and sector-
            specific laws include disclosures of information and complaints.
       •    The insurance and pensions sectors are regulated by the ISSM which, while
            widely respected, appears to have limited capacity to supervise and enforce
            consumer protection laws, and it does not have a specific consumer protection
            mandate7. ISSM currently only has two out of ten supervisory staff focusing on the pensions
            sector, with the remainder focusing on the insurance sector. None of these staff focus on
            financial consumer protection issues. ISSM are seeking to hire another seven staff. Although
            ISSM is widely respected, there appear to be clear need forsupervisory capacity building, as
            well as a need to develop consumer protection specific supervisory tools and procedures.
       •    The securities market appears to be supervised by a small number of staff located
            within the BdM Licensing and Regulation Department, while the BVM oversees
            trading on the Stock Exchange. All financial intermediaries in this market are currently
            banks and supervised by BdM. Accordingly, the supervision and enforcement of
            consumer/investor protection laws in the securities sector applying to intermediaries appears
            to be undertaken in conjunction with supervision of the relevant bank.
       •    Although retail markets are still small in most relevant sectors, there is an
            indication that some business practices need to be monitored or prohibited as
            markets are likely to develop rapidly. For example, attention needs to be paid to the
            adequacy of governance arrangements and the level of fees charged in the private pensions
            sector. As with any new, small pension systems, costs can initially be high and governance
            experience will be limited. It will be important to monitor these issues and for ISSM to issue
            appropriate guidance covering issues of concern (such as training of trustees and potential
            limits on fees). Further, securities sector laws only contain a few specific forbidden practices,
            such as churning and front running client orders. The law is lacking specific provisions on
            sales fraud.
       •    There are no industry codes of conduct in place. Such codes can provide a mechanism
            for industry to police itself and, importantly, can build consumer confidence in the industry,
            which can in turn assist with low levels of financial inclusion. This conclusion is consistent
            with the 2012 CPFL Review.
       •    There are limited rules relating to internal complaints resolution processes, and
            no provision for regulators to monitor complaints. Insurers are required to advise
            consumers about their internal complaints resolution process but there is no requirement for
            standardization of procedures or to report statistics to ISSM. The Supervisory Committee of
            a private pension fund is responsible for representing members’ interests in disputes. For
            externally managed occupational funds, disputes would be handled according to the fund
            manager’s internal processes. Financial entities regulated by BdM (including securities
            intermediaries) are required to have internal complaints resolution processes.


7
    See Article 5.


                                                                                         FINANCE & MARKETS | 8
        •    There is no formal external dispute resolution scheme for consumers. Complaints
             about insurance policies are handled by ISSM, but they are very limited in number (around
             10 per year) and ISSM does not maintain, or publish, any statistics on such complaints. ISSM
             has not yet had to deal with pensions complaints. The Consumer Law provides for the
             establishment of consumer arbitration centers but no action has been taken in this regard
             to date. The Center for Arbitration, Conciliation and Mediation, which organizes arbitrations,
             is used mainly for larger disputes for cost reasons.
        •    Although a variety of financial literacy programs relevant to the insurance,
             pensions, and securities sectors exist, there is a need for coordination. ISSM has
             developed a Financial Literacy Strategy for the insurance sector and is in the process of
             developing programs to implement this strategy. BVM also has a long term education
             program on the characteristics and benefits of the securities markets for a broad range of
             entities from schools to businesses. The Center for Arbitration, Conciliation and Mediation,
             together with the Bar Association, also has a literacy course covering available procedures
             for in-court and out-of-court dispute resolution. While these initiatives are welcome, there is
             an apparent need for better coordination with the financial literacy strategy and programs
             developed and implemented by BdM.
3. A summary of the High Priority Recommendations is outlined in Table 1 below.
   Implementation of these high-priority recommendations should commence as soon as possible,
   while acknowledging that some may take longer to implement than others. These are
   recommendations in respect of which it is considered implementation activities should commence
   as soon as possible, while acknowledging that some may take longer to implement than others
   (see the reference to the relevant Term). All recommendations are summarized in Annex 2 to
   this Volume I. Further detail is provided in Volume II of this report.

Table 1: Summary of High Priority Recommendations8

    RECOMMENDATION                                                                               RESPONSIBILITY          TERM9
    INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS
    Insurance and Pensions: Develop proportionate consumer
    protection-specific supervisory arrangements, tools, and training for                                 ISSM                  ST
    ISSM, increase specialist supervisory resources.
    Securities: Create an independent unit in BdM and equip it with the
                                                                                                           BdM                  MT
    required consumer protection tools, capacity, and budget.
    LEGAL AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
    Cross Cutting: Clarify interaction between Consumer Protection Law
                                                                                                       MoEF, MIC                MT
    and sector-specific legislation.
    Insurance: Require all insurers and intermediaries to prominently
                                                                                                          ISSM                  ST
    publish their regulatory status.
    Insurance: Assess current training practices for intermediaries and
                                                                                                          ISSM                  MT
    mandate training for intermediaries as required.


8
    A reference to “laws” includes a reference to Acts, regulations and other forms of subordinate legislation
9
    ST (short term) = 1 year, MT (medium term) = 2 years, LT (long term) = 3 years


                                                                                                                 FINANCE & MARKETS | 9
RECOMMENDATION                                                             RESPONSIBILITY       TERM9
Pensions: Enforce licensing requirements for pension funds.                     ISSM                   ST
Pensions: Enforce investment limits under Ministerial Decree                    ISSM
                                                                                                       ST
261/2009.
Pensions: Provide guidance on good governance of pension funds                  ISSM
                                                                                                      MT
and standards for supervisory committees.
Securities: Require securities intermediaries to be licensed, to
undertake a qualifying exam and be trained, and to disclose their status         BdM                  MT
at point of sale.
TRANSPARENCY AND CONSUMER DISCLOSURE
Cross Cutting: Develop short form, clearly expressed Key Facts                                   ST (insurance)
Statements for commonly used insurance and pensions products and                                 MT (pensions
                                                                              ISSM, BdM
for investment fund products.                                                                          and
                                                                                                  investments)
Insurance and Pensions: Collect, analyze and publish standardized
industry data on website and in annual reports in a clear and timely            ISSM                   ST
way.
Pensions: Require pension fund and individual member information
                                                                                ISSM                  MT
to be made available to members online and on request.
Securities: Develop specific requirements on disclosures for point of            BdM
                                                                                                      MT
sale documents, contract notes, and professional relationships.
Securities: Develop detailed requirements for rules about transaction            BdM
                                                                                                      MT
notices and account statements.
BUSINESS PRACTICES
Cross Cutting: Issue detailed regulations on product suitability (Fact
Finds) requirements for insurance, pensions and relevant                      ISSM, BdM               MT
intermediaries, funds and investment fund managers.
Insurance and Pensions: Monitor advertising and sales materials in
                                                                                ISSM                  MT
retail markets.
Insurance: Review extent of tying and bundling of insurance and
                                                                                ISSM                  MT
credit products with a view to developing fair treatment standards.
Pensions: Support INSS in contribution collection efforts.                    ISSM, INSS               ST
Pensions: Monitor fees levied by pension fund managers.                         ISSM                  MT
Securities: Strengthen law relating to fraudulent sales of securities to
                                                                              MoEF, BdM               MT
make it more specific; introduce tougher sanctions.




                                                                                       FINANCE & MARKETS | 10
DISPUTE RESOLUTION
Cross cutting: Require all relevant entities to develop standardized
procedures for dealing with complaints, ensure customers are aware
                                                                              ISSM, BdM                 MT
of them and that all relevant entities report complaints statistics to
relevant regulator.
Insurance and pensions: Ensure ISSM has dedicated and trained
staff responsible for considering consumer complaints, and that ISSM             ISSM                   MT
analyzes and publishes complaints statistics.
FINANCIAL LITERACY/CAPABILITY
Cross cutting: Coordinate financial literacy programs and strategies      ISSM, BVM and BdM
(especially between ISSM, BVM and BdM), in the context of the            and public and private
                                                                                                        MT
development of the Financial Inclusion Strategy and ISSM Finanical         sector stakeholders
Literacy Strategy.
Insurance and Pensions: Finalize financial literacy initiatives for
                                                                         ISSM and public and
insurance and pensions sectors and develop related programs, taking
                                                                            private sector              ST
into account international experiences (e.g. Philippines, Peru, Brazil
                                                                            stakeholders
and Ghana).




                                                                                        FINANCE & MARKETS | 11
 FINANCIAL SECTOR CONTEXT FOR CONSUMER FINANCIAL
         SERVICES AND FINANCIAL LITERACY
                                 SUPPLY OF FINANCIAL SERVICES
1. Mozambique’s economy has grown rapidly since the end of the Civil War in 1992, but
   the need for inclusive growth is still recognized. Annual GDP growth averaged 7.4 percent
   over the past two decades. Robust growth was made possible by sound macroeconomic
   management, a number of large-scale foreign-investment projects focused on the extractive
   industries, and significant donor support. Nevertheless, the Government has recognized the need
   for inclusive growth in its Financial Sector Development Strategy 2013 -2022 and, in particular,
   has a clear goal to “Put in place a consumer protection framework both to protect consumers
   and to encourage new consumers to enter the market”. 10
2. The pension, insurance, and securities sectors are still fairly small. The pension sector
   is dominated by the obligatory, state-run pay-as-you-go (PAYGO) system, although a few private
   pension companies offer pension funds. The insurance sector is also small, with premiums of
   less than 1 percent of gross domestic product (GDP), and consists of five private and one majority
   state-owned company. The stock market is in its infancy, with 16 listed securities, two of which
   are corporate equities and the remainder bonds.11
Table 2: Financial Institutions in Mozambique
     INSTITUTION                                                                           No.
     Banks                                                                                 18
     Microbanks                                                                             8
     Credit Cooperatives                                                                    7
     E money Institutions                                                                   1
     Investment & Risk Capital Companies                                                    1
     Savings and Loan Organizations                                                         11
     BDM registered Microfinance Operators                                                 202
     Local Based Foreign Credit Institutions                                                1
     Foreign Exchange Houses                                                               21
     Insurance Companies                                                                   17
     Insurance Brokers                                                                     44
     Pension Funds (including INSS)                                                         5
Sources: Bank of Mozambique (February 2012), Global Credit Rating Company (March 2010) and ISSM
(2012)




10
     Mozambique Financial Sector Development Strategy, 2013– 2022 , June 2013.

11
     Mozambique Financial Sector Development Strategy, 2013–2022, June 2013.


                                                                                 FINANCE & MARKETS | 12
Insurance Sector
3. The insurance market is not very developed in Mozambique, as compared to
   neighbors in the region. Table 3 below provides further details.
Table 3: Regional Comparison of the Insurance Sector




Source: AXCO Insurance Reports – WB Africa is made up of Angola, Benin, Botswana, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Ivory Coast data from 2011 and 2012.

4. Insurance in Mozambique is predominantly focused on commercial insurance, with a
   limited focus on the retail sector. The sector consists of: commercial insurance (fire, theft,
   natural disasters property insurance), mandatory insurance (most notably motor third party
   liability and workers’ compensation, which together account for 42% of all premiums), and
   insurance required to obtain a loan. More than half of the business is transacted by brokers: the
   mission team were told that the largest firm accounts for a quarter of the brokerage market, and
   95% of its business is commercial. Insurance companies make little effort to target individuals,
   and advertise little. This is reportedly because of the large scale required to profitably underwrite
   the relatively low value insurance policies held by individuals, households, and small enterprises
   coupled with the apparently limited retail market potential for growth.
5. In the last five years, six new insurance companies have entered the market, bringing
   the total number of life and non-life insurers to 1712. There is also a micro-insurer.13
   Competition is reportedly increasing, but not yet to the degree that insurers begin to focus on
   retail clients as a new growth area. There is virtually no insurance with a duration of more than
   one year. Although such contracts are renewable, this short period reduces consumers’ risk that
   erroneous insurance decisions have severe impact on their financial lives.




12
  http://www.issm.gov.mz/index.php/en/2014-09-23-09-17-53/2014-09-23-09-18-45
13
  NBC - Mocambique Companhia de Micro-Seguros, S.A – see http://www.issm.gov.mz/index.php/en/2014-09-23-09-
17-53/microseguradoras

                                                                                      FINANCE & MARKETS | 13
Pensions Sector
6. The private pension fund industry in Mozambique is small but developing. Pension
   coverage in Mozambique is limited to formal sector workers, and extends to around 7% of the
   population, which is towards the lower end of regional comparisons. Total pension assets amount
   to approximately USD 850 million, or 5% of GDP, which is broadly in line with regional peers.14
   The pension system in Mozambique consists of: (i) the mandatory social security scheme for the
   private sector managed by the Instituto Nacional de Segurança Social (INSS), which has around
   1.2 million registered workers (however the 7% contributions are only received for around
   400,000); (ii) mandatory schemes covering approximately 380,000 public sector workers, or less
   than 2% of the population; and (iii) voluntary private pensions currently offered by around a
   dozen large employers (banks, manufacturing firms, transport companies), covering an
   estimated 20,000 workers. Market opportunities for the latter funds were created in 2007 when
   the previously generous INSS benefits were reduced.15
Table 4: Pension System in Mozambique*
                                                 Nature of Scheme         Coverage          Assets USD mln.
     Civil Servants and State Agents Social      Public    sector     -   380,000           N/A   –    currently
     Protection System,(CSSASPS)                 mandatory                                  unfunded
                                                 Public    sector     -   1,500             300
     Bank Mozambique Pension Scheme
                                                 mandatory
                                                 Private   sector     –   1.24 mln**        400
     INSS
                                                 mandatory
     Occupational Pension Schemes (open and      Private   sector     –   20,000            150
     closed)                                     voluntary
                                                                          1.64 million      850
     Total
                                                                          (7% population)   (5% GDP)

*World Bank estimates as of November 2014
**INSS total registered participants (active and retirees). In practice, contributions are only being received for
400,000 members and pensions paid to around 50,000.

7. Pension funds are not sold on a retail basis directly to individuals. As funds are
   established by employers and therefore there is no individual choice of provider or investment
   portfolio, members of pension funds are not ‘consumers’, strictly speaking. However, protection
   for members of private pension funds is still required, and the 2014 CPFL Review was conducted
   in this context.




14
     Source: World Bank Pensions Database, ILO
15
     The review and recommendations in the report cover voluntary, private pension funds

                                                                                            FINANCE & MARKETS | 14
Securities Sector
8. The Mozambique Stock Exchange (BVM) opened in 1999 but is still in a very early
   stage of development. The market capitalization was only around 8% of GDP in 2013.16 In
   contrast, in 2012, the market capitalization of Zimbabwe was 94.7% of GDP, in Uganda it was
   30.7% of GDP and in South Africa it was 154.1% of GDP.17 However, due to recent gas fields
   that have been discovered and “mega” development projects, there are expectations that it will
   increase fairly rapidly over the next several years.
Table 5: Stock market capitalization as % of GNP (end of year)
       Year                 2009               2010             2011             2012               2013
 Capitalization
     (in USD)         321,339,319       352,651,011      624,475,972     1,016,062,296     1,197,010,000
     % of GDP                 3.32               3.8             4.97             7.13               7.81
       GDP          9,674,037,707     9,274,448,732    12,547,888,400   14,376,457,305   15,318,970,100
Source: BVM, Boletim Cotacoes and World Bank
9. Most listings on the BVM are debt instruments, with only 4 equity issues currently
   traded. The retail market for securities is virtually non-existent. Market participants
   have indicated that there is a general lack of financial literacy, not only among the potential
   investing public, but also among the businesses and companies that would be likely candidates
   for using the stock market as a means of raising capital. Along with the general concern of
   disclosing internal business finances and activities, this lack of literacy has resulted in a limited
   use of the exchange. The BVM has been concentrating a lot of its efforts in the area of financial
   literacy in providing information to companies to encourage them to list on the exchange.




16
   http://www.macauhub.com.mo/en/2014/07/11/market-cap-of-mozambique%E2%80%99s-stock-exchange-total-us1-
117-billion-in-2013/
17
   Source: http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/CM.MKT.LCAP.GD.ZS

                                                                                     FINANCE & MARKETS | 15
                             DEMAND FOR FINANCIAL SERVICES
10.The existence of a sound financial consumer protection framework is fundamental to
   increasing responsible access to financial services; this is particularly relevant in
   Mozambique, where usage of formal financial services is relatively low. As shown by
   the WB’s 2013 Enhancing Financial Capability and Financial Inclusion in Mozambique-A Demand
   Size Assessment (WB Financial Capability and Inclusion Survey),18 36% of adults have never
   used a financial product or service.19 Further, usage of insurance products is low. Only 18% of
   adults have used them, and this figure is 11% of adults in rural areas and 24% in urban areas.20
   More sophisticated products such as private pensions and investments in stocks are hardly used
   at all.21
11.People are more likely to use bank services in areas with shorter distances to bank
   branches and better infrastructure; additionally those who are reached by financial
   services often use multiple ones at the same time.22 Around a third of the population is
   not being reached by any financial service providers.23

Figure 1: Usage of Different Financial Institutions in Mozambique
                        Used two financial                       Used three or more
                           institutions                          financial institutions
                               21%                                       19%




                                       Used one
                                       financial         Never used a
                                      institution          financial
                                          24%             institution
                                                              36%


Source: WBG Financial Capability Survey, Mozambique 2013




18 http://responsiblefinance.worldbank.org/~/media/GIAWB/FL/Documents/Publications/Enhancing-Financial-Capability-
and-Inclusion-in-Mozambique-FINAL.pdf
19 WB Financial Capability and Inclusion Survey, Figure 11
20WB Financial Capability and Inclusion Survey, Figures 10 and 12

21WB Financial Capability and Inclusion Survey, at page 25
22   Id.
23   Id.

                                                                                             FINANCE & MARKETS | 16
12.Usage of insurance products is low. Only 18% of adults have used them; however, this
   figure grows among adults that have used banking services (29%).24

Figure 2: Percentage of Mozambicans that have ever used financial institutions

                          All Adults      Adults that have used banks       Adults that have used never used banks
                                       54%


                      37%
                                                                                                29%

                                                    19%                          18%

                                                                                                               7%


                                 Have used MFIs                                   Have used insurance companies
       Source: WBG Financial Capability Survey, Mozambique 2013

13. Sophisticated savings products are not very common among the population. Private
    pensions are only used by 1% of rural and 4% of urban adults; similarly Mozambique’s Stock
    Market is still in its early development with only 3% of Mozambicans reporting to have invested
    in it.25

Figure 3: Usage of Sophisticated Saving Products in Rural and Urban Areas

                                               Rural areas    Urban areas


                                         4%

                                                                                             3%



                     1%

                                                                            0%

                    Private pension products                      Investments (stocks, bonds, funds, etc.)

Source: WBG Financial Capability Survey, Mozambique 2013




24   Enhancing Financial Capability and Financial Inclusion in Mozambique-A Demand Size Assessment, supra note 8, at 24.
25   Enhancing Financial Capability and Financial Inclusion in Mozambique-A Demand Size Assessment, supra note 8, at 25.

                                                                                                  FINANCE & MARKETS | 17
    FINANCIAL CONSUMER PROTECTION IN MOZAMBIQUE

                           INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS
14.The institutional arrangements for regulation and supervision of each part of the
   financial sector merits careful review. Of particular importance are the following issues:
   who is       responsible     for consumer protection in each sector?                  Are   there
   gaps/overlaps/capacity/resource issues to be considered? Is there an appropriate allocation
   between prudential supervision and consumer protection supervision? Is there co-ordination
   between multiple agencies? Is the private sector involved, e.g. through self-regulatory codes of
   conduct? Does the supervisor concerned have adequate resources, skills, and expertise? There
   is, however, no “best practice” on how to structure financial consumer protection institutionally.
   The appropriate model in any country depends on the country-specific characteristics, such as
   size and structure of the financial system and existing regulatory and supervisory arrangements.

General Overview
15.The principal regulators for the main subjects of the 2014 CPFL Review are ISSM for
   the pensions and securities sectors and BdM for the securities sector, with potential
   for overlap with other regulators. Entities other than ISSM and BdM with functions which
   are potentially relevant to these sectors are the Consumer Institute, which is provided for under
   Decree No. 22/2009 Consumer Protection Law (CP Law), and MIC, whichis responsible for the
   Advertising Code. Both the CP Law and the Advertising Code also contain provisions of general
   application which could apply to the sectors under consideration, as noted below under Legal
   and Regulatory Framework. However, the Consumer Institute is yet to be established (this is
   expected to occur in 2015) and it is understood that the Ministry of Trade and Industry has not
   actively supervised the application of the Advertising Code to the financial sector. Nonetheless,
   as noted in the 2012 CPFL Review, there is potential for overlap between these various
   institutions.




                                                                                 FINANCE & MARKETS | 18
Table 6: Financial Consumer Protection Regulators and Supervisors
 AUTHORITY                PRINCIPAL LEGAL PROVISIONS                       ENTITIES SUPERVISED
 ISSM     (under    the   Insurance Legal Framework - Decree - Law No.
 Ministry of Finance)     1/2010
                                                                           Insurance companies and
                          ISSM Statute Regulations - Decree No. 29/2012
                                                                           pension funds.
                          Insurance Regulations - Decree No. 30/2011
                          Pension Funds Regulations - Decree No. 25/2009
 BdM                                                                       Stock Exchange and
                          Securities Market Code - Decree-Law No. 4/2009
                                                                           Securities Market.
 Consumer     Institute                                                    All public and private
 (expected     to    be   Consumer Protection Law - Decree No. 22/2009     entities providing goods and
 established in 2015)                                                      services for a price.
 Ministry of Industry                                                      A natural person or legal
 and Commerce             Advertising Code - Decree 65/ 2004               entity in whose interest
                                                                           advertising is done.

16.Although the CP Law recognizes consumer associations, the existing consumer
   associations do not have the resources or capacity to be able to contribute
   significantly to the protection of financial sector consumers. The CP Law recognizes
   consumer associations and cooperatives and endows them with a social partner status in
   consumer policy matters, so that they can appoint representatives to the corresponding
   consultative or cooperative bodies and represent consumers during the decision-making process.
   The CP Law also gives them a right to airtime on radio and television that comes with the social
   partner status (despite the law, no airtime seems to be available for consumer protection unless
   paid for). However, the two main consumers associations (DECOM and ProConsumers) at present
   have only a very limited focus on financial consumer protection. At present, this is understandable
   given their broad role, their minimal resources, and absence of a substantial retail market in the
   sectors in question. Nevertheless, if there is to be an effective civil society voice for consumers
   in Mozambique, they need to have their resources and capacity enhanced.

Key Recommendation(s)
17. Consider funding and capacity building support for consumer associations and
   involve them in consultations about policy and legal framework development. This is
   both important from a consumer protection point of view and will help the associations to fulfill
   the statutory role envisaged for them in the CP Law. This recommendation is consistent with the
   2012 CPFL Review.




                                                                                  FINANCE & MARKETS | 19
Insurance and Pension Sectors
18.The insurance and pensions sectors are regulated by the ISSM. ISSM was created as an
   entity within the Ministry of Finance with functions, covering insurance activities, insurance
   mediation and reinsurance, the management of supplementary pension funds, mandatory social
   insurance provided by the National Insurance Institute (INSS) and the BdM Pension Fund.
   However, INSS does not have a specific consumer protection mandate.26

19. ISSM has limited staff although it is seeking to expand its resources. Currently the ISSM
    has eight out of ten10 supervisory staff focusing on the insurance sector and only two on the
    pensions sector. ISSM are currently seeking to hire another seven staff. None of the ISSM’s staff
    have an industry background, although some have useful supervisory experience and expertise
    from their previous roles within MoEF. A particular concern is that ISSM does not have an actuary,
    although the law requires the calculation of actuarial reserves by actuarial methods recognized
    and accepted by ISSM.27 More generally, the concern is that ISSM does not have sufficient
    capacity and resources given the new insurance and pension legal and regulatory framework,
    and the expectation that these sectors will develop in the future.

20.Consumer protection supervision by ISSM is at a nascent stage of development.
   Supervisory staff are responsible for both prudential and consumer protection supervision and
   do not appear to have a specific focus on the latter. These arrangements can in principle give
   rise to conflicts between prudential supervision objectives and market conduct supervision
   objectives. Consumer protection and prudential supervision also require different types of
   supervisory profiles, skills, and approaches, with the latter focusing more on quantitative skills
   and analysis of an institution’s financial soundness, and the former on qualitative skills and
   assessment of how an institution deals with consumers. Further, staff do not use, in any
   systematic way, many of the specific tools relevant to this area. These issues will become more
   serious in the future as Mozambique develops its consumer protection legal and regulatory
   framework and its insurance and private pensions markets.

21.There are various examples of particular industry practices and supervisory concerns
   that have the potential to adversely affect consumers. They include: (i) the few pension
   funds which are still operating without authorization; (ii) the delays in publishing up to date
   information about insurers and pension funds (the ISSM website was only launched shortly after
   the CPFL Review mission28); (iii) the failure to publish other information that could help customers
   make well-informed insurance purchase decisions, for example claims turnaround times or
   complaints statistics; (iv) the limited on-site visits which are being undertaken; (v) the breach of
   asset class restrictions by pension funds; and (vi) the concern with regard to the non-payment
   of employer contributions within the mandatory social security INSS system and – of most
   concern - the non-remittance of employee contributions to the fund. Although the latter point is
   not a private pension fund issue, which was the focus of the CPFL Review, it is highlighted as
   important for the protection of members of the pension system as a whole.


26
     Article 5 of Decreee No. 1/2010
27
     Article 38 of Decree No. 30/2011
28
     The site was launched in December 204 (after the CPFL Review mission): see http://www.issm.gov.mz/index.php/en/


                                                                                             FINANCE & MARKETS | 20
Key Recommendation(s)
22.Although ISSM is widely respected, there is a clear need for the development of
   proportionate consumer protection-specific supervisory arrangements, tools, and
   capacity building for ISSM, and increased specialist supervisory resources. In the
   longer term, consideration could be given to the establishment of a separate market conduct/
   consumer protection supervisory unit within ISSM as the market develops, with a separate
   budget. Examples of the consumer protection-specific supervisory tools that could be developed
   include mystery shopping, customer focus groups and surveys, review of advertising materials,
   as well as a systematic analysis of customer complaints made to the various mediation services
   on offer.
23.ISSM should start to collect, analyze, and publish standardized industry data on its
   website and in annual reports, in a clear and timely way in order to allow all
   stakeholders to gain a clear picture of the insurance and pensions industries as they
   develop. This includes, for the insurance sector, information such as average claims, turnaround
   times for claims, complaints data, names of agents and brokers, and information about the
   financial status of insurers and, for the pensions sector, data on the number of schemes,
   members, assets, average/range rates of return, and the average/range of fees charged).29
24.ISSM also has specific consumer protection functions in the insurance sector that
   need special attention. One example is the requirement that insurers have to submit the
   general and special conditions of their policies for registration at the ISSM. As well as
   expeditiously assessing legal compliance, ISSM could also develop tools and checklists to assess
   the suitability of the product and the related distribution channels for the intended target market.
25.Supervisory capacity needs to be built out to ensure full protection for pension fund
   members. The ISSM staff focusing on pensions should attend specialist training courses on
   pension supervision. Staff should be encouraged to attend the meetings of the International
   Organization of Pension Supervisors (IOPS), which they recently joined, in order to gain
   experience and knowledge from their international peers.
26.ISSM should also begin to focus on regulatory implementation of the new pension
   sector legislation. The few funds which continue to operate without authorization should be
   forced to register, join an umbrella fund, or close. At a minimum, the regulator should agree on
   a timetable with these funds for compliance. The investment regulations established under
   Ministerial Diecree 261 of 2009 also need to be enforced, at a minimum by agreeing on a
   timeframe with non-compliant funds to bring their portfolios in line with asset class restrictions.




29
     Some of this information is starting to be published on the ISSM website: http://www.issm.gov.mz/index.php/en/


                                                                                                 FINANCE & MARKETS | 21
Securities Sector
27.Due to the lack of a retail securities market and the fact that all financial
   intermediaries are banks, there are minimal resources devoted by the BdM to the
   supervision and enforcement of consumer protection laws in the securities sector as
   a subject area separate from bank supervision. The securities market appears to be
   supervised by a small number of staff located within the BdM Licensing and Regulation
   Department, while the BVM oversees trading on the Stock Exchange. Accordingly, the supervision
   and enforcement of consumer protection laws in the securities sector does not appear to be
   undertaken separately from bank supervision and regulation.
28.The Central Securities Depository is currently a part of the BVM. In a small securities
   market such as in Mozambique, this is a cost effective means of running the Depository. It is
   also implementing a system whereby accounts are held at the Depository for individual account
   holders under the financial intermediaries account. Nonetheless, as the market grows larger,
   the Depository will need to become independent in line with international best practice.

Key Recommendation(s)
29.There is a clear need for the development of proportionate consumer protection-
   specific supervisory arrangements, tools, and capacity building for the BdM for the
   purposes of its securities supervisory role, and increased specialist supervisory
   resources. This is similar to the issue with the ISSM. Examples of consumer protection-specific
   supervisory tools that could be developed include mystery shopping, customer focus groups and
   surveys, and reviews of advertising materials, as well as a systematic analysis of all customer
   complaints of which BdM is aware. In the longer term, consideration could be given to the
   establishment of a separate market conduct / consumer protection supervisory unit as the market
   develops, with a separate budget. In the very long term, consideration might be given to the
   establishment of a separate regulator to regulate the securities market.
30.In the longer term, as the securities market increases in activity, a Central Depository
   should be established as a separate entity from the BVM.

                       LEGAL AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
31.A strong legal and regulatory framework for financial consumer protection is crucial
   to protect financial consumers and proactively prevent market abuses. Market conduct
   regulation should at a minimum ensure that consumers: (i) receive information to allow them to
   make informed decisions; (ii) are not subject to unfair or deceptive practices; and (iii) have
   access to recourse mechanisms to resolve disputes. All laws and subordinate legislation relating
   to consumer protection in the financial sector should be considered in this context with a view
   to assessing their scope and sphere of application, any related gaps and overlaps, and with a
   particular focus on issues such as licensing, transparency and disclosure, business conduct,
   recourse mechanisms, data protection, and credit reporting. The legal and regulatory framework
   should also be supported by supervisory agencies which have the capacity to ensure effective
   implementation (see Institutional Arrangements above).




                                                                               FINANCE & MARKETS | 22
General Comments
32.The Consumer Protection Law 22/2009 (CP Law) contains comprehensive
   protections for consumers but does not appear to have been implemented or
   enforced (as also noted in the 2012 CPFL Review). In summary, the consumer rights
   covered include rights to education, information (and there are specific provisions in relation to
   credit contracts), a 7-day cooling-off period, substantive fairness, clear and legible print in
   contracts, rights to the protection of economic interests, and legal protection and accessible
   justice. Further, there are prohibitions against misleading advertising and abusive clauses, and
   the CP law also provides for the establishment of consumer arbitration centers. There is also
   provision for the establishment of a Consumer Institute designed to promote consumer
   protection policies. However, notwithstanding the broad scope of this law, it does not appear to
   have been implemented or enforced to date, though implementing regulations are being
   prepared and are expected to be approved early in 2015, with the establishment of the Consumer
   Institute to follow.
33. As with the 2012 CPFL Review, there is also a concern as to the interaction between
   the sector-specific laws and consumer protection laws of general application. For
   example, the abovementioned CP Law and the Advertising Code, the Insurance Act and the
   Pensions Act all contain provisions on misleading advertising with different enforcement
   authorities. However, there are considerations in support of sector-specific regulators having
   responsibility for financial consumer protection in the sectors under consideration. The
   complexities of the products and markets in these sectors require specialist skills and knowledge
   and a deep understanding of the requirements of the international standard setters for the
   insurance, pensions, and securities sectors.

Key Recommendation(s)
34. Consideration should be given to amending the CP Law and the Advertising Code to
   exclude the financial sector from their application, as was recommended in the 2012
   CPFL Review. In their place, equivalent provisions should be included in the relevant sector
   specific laws to the extent that they are not already there, with the relevant regulator thereby
   becoming the monitoring and enforcement authority in these respects with power to issue
   regulations and guidelines. The consumer protection mandate of each regulator should also be
   made explicit. It is of course important that each such regulator is given sufficient financial and
   human resources to be able to discharge their obligations satisfactorily.

Insurance and Pensions Sectors
35.Significant progress has been made in the development of the consumer protection
   legal and regulatory framework for the insurance and pension sectors. The legal
   framework for both the insurance and pensions sectors have been updated relatively recently
   (Insurance Act 30/2011 and Pension Act 25/2009) and provide a sound basis for the fair
   treatment of consumers. However, given the newness of ISSM, not all regulations required to
   implement the law have been issued yet (for example, in relation to micro insurance).




                                                                                 FINANCE & MARKETS | 23
36.There are still gaps in the insurance sector legal framework affecting consumers.
   Examples concern the provision of health insurance to residents of Mozambique by companies
   which are not supervised by the ISSM, the lack of specific regulations concerning the digital
   delivery of insurance products (for example, over mobile phones), the appropriateness of the
   professional civil liability required for insurance intermediaries (in respect of the extent of their
   liability and in respect of the mishandling of premium), the regulation of KYC information and
   confidentiality, and the possibility to unilaterally change policy conditions.
37.The Pension Act (Ministerial Decree 25/2009) and supporting regulations provide a
   strong legal and regulatory framework for the developing, supplementary pension
   sector. The principles of the Good Practices are broadly covered in the regulations, thereby
   providing adequate protection for pension fund members. Specific issues which require
   addressing are covered in the remainder of this report.

Key Recommendation(s)
38. The abovementioned gaps in the insurance sector legal framework should be
   considered by ISSM. In particular, ISSM should consider the regulation of the health insurance
   to reduce the scope for regulatory arbitrage in health insurance and the need to regulate the
   digital delivery of insurance products. Other issues are discussed further below in this report.

Securities Sector
39.There are significant gaps in the securities sectors laws concerning consumer
   protection issues. The legal and regulatory framework for consumer protection in the securities
   sector is underdeveloped in comparison to the other sectors, presumably due to the lack of a
   retail market for securities. The laws and subsidiary legislation are drafted in general terms and
   provide for general obligations of financial intermediaries and investment fund managers in
   regards to their dealings with customer/investors. However, they do not contain a series of
   prescriptive, detailed rules for the interaction of these entities with their customers. For example,
   Article 5 (1) of the Securities Code provides that “financial intermediaries shall serve their
   customers with the utmost diligence, loyalty, neutrality and discretion, and with absolute respect
   for their interests”; however, it does not specify how the “absolute respect” is to be implemented.
40.Sales people and other professionals that deal with customers are not qualified and
   licensed by the regulator. The current regulations place the responsibility for educating and
   evaluating sales people on the financial intermediary. However, since the most important
   interactions with investors take place between investors and sales representatives, the regulator
   needs to be certain that such people are qualified and appropriately trained to ensure compliance
   with standards relating to issues such as Know Your Customer, product suitability, and disclosure.




                                                                                   FINANCE & MARKETS | 24
Key Recommendation(s)
41.As market activity increases, a detailed legal structure for regulation on consumer
   protection issues will need to be implemented. Although there is an excellent beginning,
   the laws and regulations need to set out in detail how CP principles should be enforced and
   respected. For example, regulations could include provisions defining fraud and prohibiting half-
   truths (i.e. misleading information), curbing high-pressure sales tactics (such as limiting calls to
   specific hours in the day and allowing consumers to opt out of telephone marketing). Further,
   any such prohibitions should clearly apply to employees and agents who conduct such activities,
   and there should be significant penalties for breaches.
42.The regulations should require that all persons dealing with customers in the sale of
   securities are licensed by the regulatory authority and meet specified requirements
   as to their qualifications and expertise. In particular, securities intermediaries should be
   required to undertake a qualifying exam and to disclose their status at point of sale. The
   qualifying exam should also be undertaken by the supervisors of sales staff.

                           TRANSPARENCY AND DISCLOSURE
43.Specific disclosure requirements can help create an informed consumer marketplace,
   enable product comparisons, encourage competition, and promote financial
   inclusion. It is, however, important that any new requirements in this regard are proportionate
   in the sense of reflecting the risks of the relevant activity, the literacy/capability level of the
   relevant consumers, and that they do not impose costs which outweigh benefits.

General Comments
44.There are 19 local languages spoken in Mozambique, in addition to Portuguese and
   English. It is understood that Portuguese is spoken by only around half of the population. This
   makes it all the more important that product documents are in a language which is
   comprehensible to the customer(s) concerned and that oral explanations are available as needed.

Key Recommendation(s)
45.Consider need for local language requirements and oral explanations. In particular,
   disclosure documents and financial literacy materials should be available in common local
   languages and comprehensible to the customer concerned; oral explanations should be readily
   available for customers who arenot able to understand the documents, for example because they
   are illiterate or handicapped in some way (e.g. blindness).




                                                                                  FINANCE & MARKETS | 25
Insurance Sector
46. The 2010 Insurance Contract Law (ICL) sets out an extensive list of information that
   customers must receive in writing before signing an insurance contract. This includes
   information about the insurer, the covered risks, premiums, coverage limitations, termination
   and transfer procedures, and rights of recourse. 30 There are also additional disclosure obligations
   in relation to life policies.31 Other articles specify that the insurance proposal has to document
   that the mandatory information has been provided to the policyholder, and that the supervisor
   may issue norms and guidelines in respect of the information duties. Violation of this information
   duty allows the customer to rescind from the contract within 30 days of having received the
   policy; the same rescission right applies if the policy conditions do not correspond to the
   information provided before inception of the contract.32
47.There is a requirement for disclosure documents to be in the Portuguese language
   and in a specified format. The Article 91 information must be provided in “clear form and in
   the Portuguese language”. There are also general requirements to the effect that all documents
   required to be provided under the ICL must be in the Portuguese language.33 Further, the
   insurance policy (including general, special, and particular conditions) must be “dated and signed
   by the insurance company and addressed in a clear and perfectly intelligible mode, with legible
   characters and in the Portuguese language”.34 Exclusions have to be highlighted in “distinct
   character”, otherwise they will be considered to be unknown to the policyholder.35
48.Policyholders have to be reminded in writing no later than 30 days before any
   premium payment is due, informing them of the consequences of non-payment. If the
   insurer cannot prove that this information was delivered to the policyholder’s address, it cannot
   deny claims payment on the basis of non-payment of premium.36
49.Art. 88 of Decreto No. 30/2011 empowers the ISSM to issue norms relating to
   consumer protection in advertising and to check compliance with these norms,
   ordering if necessary the suspension or immediate publication of an adequate
   rectification. However, at the time of the CPFL Review there was no process for the ISSM to
   review insurance advertising before launch.




30
   Articles 91 – 93 and see also Article 11 re Portuguese language requirements
31
   Article 232
32
   Article 94
33
   Article 11
34
   Article 103
35
   Articles 250, 254
36
   Article 130

                                                                                  FINANCE & MARKETS | 26
Key Recommendation(s)
50.To complement, standardize, and make comparable the information required to be
   disclosed to customers before contracting insurance, potential policy holders should
   be required to be given standardized, comparable, and simply expressed Key Facts
   Statements summarizing the key features and costs of commonly used insurance
   products. These Key Facts Statements should be prepared by the ISSM in consultation with
   insurance and consumer groups.
51.ISSM should also consider inspecting any advertising by insurance companies before
   it is launched to the public, so that any concerns can be addressed before they reach
   consumers. However, it is appreciated that this may be difficult given ISSM’s limited resources.
   At a minimum, ISSM should actively monitor advertising by insurers on an ongoing basis.

Pensions Sector
52.The Pension Law provides comprehensive guidance on the information which should
   be provided to pension fund members when they join the scheme and on an annual
   basis. This includes the nature of contributions and benefits, vesting and transfer rules, the risks
   of the scheme, whether any guarantees provided, fees charged, notification of major changes,
   as well as annual benefit statements and information on the financial position of the fund and
   the manager. In-house and external pension fund managing entities do appear to be providing
   this information to their members. This is generally still in paper format, though the external
   managers do have plans to roll out online information services for their members.37

Securities Sector
53.The regulations only require that financial intermediaries inform “customers of the
   nature of the services provided, their conditions, and their costs”. This provision is
   subjective and subject to interpretation by each intermediary as to what would be sufficient
   information. There are no other detailed statements as to what should be in the disclosure of
   information.
54.The Decree on Investment Funds allows the management of a fund to determine
   what is to be disclosed to customers. Although the Management Regulations of a Fund are
   approved by the regulator, they can vary from fund to fund. There are no requirements for a
   standardized Key Facts Statement that succinctly summarizes the characteristics of a fund and
   allows an investor to compare funds.

55.The legal framework for the securities sector does not contain detailed legal
   requirements for periodic statements to investors. There is no provision in the regulatory
   framework regarding the requirement for a statement to be sent to a client of a financial
   intermediary on a periodic basis, although a client can request one pursuant to Article 26(2) of
   the Securities Code. This is also no requirement in the Investment Funds Decree.




37
  According to interviews with external manager and selected in-house firms – though not all schemes were visited
during the mission.


                                                                                              FINANCE & MARKETS | 27
Key Recommendation(s)
56.Specific requirements should be developed for disclosures in securities point of sale
   documents. These disclosures should cover risks, terms and conditions, fees and charges and
   commissions; for contract notes; and disclosure of professional relationships between principals
   and intermediaries.
57.The legal framework for the securities sector should contain detailed legal
   requirements for periodic statements to be provided to investors. Such statements
   could be provided by mail or (with consent) electronically for each account with a securities
   intermediary or a collective investment scheme.
58.If an investment fund industry starts in Mozambique, the regulations should be
   amended to require the funds to issue a Key Facts Statement. This should be a short
   form (one/two pages), clearly expressed KFS for investment fund products that is given to an
   investor prior to the sale of the product.

                                    BUSINESS PRACTICES
59.A key consumer protection concern is that financial service providers, and their staff
   and other intermediaries, do not engage in fair business practices. Specific issues in this
   context include proper training of retail sales officers and other intermediaries, product suitability
   advice, responsible finance standards, misleading and deceptive advertising and sales practices,
   tying and bundling of different types of financial services and products, unfair contract terms,
   cooling-off periods, and debt collection practices.

General Comments
60.There are no industry codes of conduct in place. Although such codes cannot be considered
   to be a substitute for well-framed laws, they can represent a consensus in the industry as to
   good practice and provide a mechanism for the industry to police itself and, importantly, build
   consumer confidence in the industry. This is especially important in a country such as
   Mozambique with low levels of financial inclusion. For example, a code of conduct could be useful
   for the insurance industry and for financial intermediaries in the securities industry. This finding
   is consistent with the 2012 CPFL Review.

Key Recommendation(s)
61.In the longer term, the development of industry codes of conduct is encouraged as
   the various sectors develop a retail presence. The Codes should create and reflect a
   consensus in the relevant industry as to good practice and provide a basis for an enforceable
   disciplinary regime by the relevant industry associations. At a minimum, they should contain
   commitments to fair treatment of consumers and to high standards of disclosure and
   transparency in simplified, easy to understand and comparable documents, product suitability
   assessments, appropriate product design, and consumer recourse. They should be widely
   disseminated and clients of the relevant entity should be referred to them in relevant contracts
   and in the case of complaints.




                                                                                    FINANCE & MARKETS | 28
Insurance Sector
62.Although ISSM can examine the qualifications of insurance intermediaries, the
   professional qualification requirements could be enhanced. The majority of insurance
   contracts in Mozambique are intermediated by qualified professionals equipped to reduce
   misunderstandings and mediate differences of opinion; suitable qualification is a prerequisite that
   the ISSM may examine, and interviewed insurers and brokers appear to train their intermediaries
   regularly. There are, however, limited professional qualification requirements for insurance
   intermediaries and ISSM is yet to develop a syllabus for basic insurance training requirements.
63.There are also no formal requirements to ensure the suitability of a customer’s needs
   for a particular type of insurance policy. The Insurance Regulation requires all
   intermediaries to present to the policyholder “the type or kind of contract that in their view is
   best suited to their particular case”. However, there is no guidance on how this should be done
   or documented; formal fact finding is not mentioned.
64.Although there is a 7-day cooling-off period provided for in the CP Law, it is of limited
   effect. The CP Law provides a general 7-day cooling-off period in cases of lacking, insufficient,
   illegible, or ambiguous information that may compromise the proper usage of the services. The
   same cooling-off period applies whenever services are provided outside of a commercial
   establishment, via correspondence or similar means.38 This does not address insurance
   specifically, and it is unclear what “contracting services outside of a commercial establishment”
   means for insurance purchases.
65.Bundling insurance with credit is frequent and, with motor vehicle insurance,
   constitutes the bulk of retail insurance business. However, customers must be given a
   choice of where to procure the required insurance.39 The insurers interviewed advised that they
   inform customers of that right, but acknowledge that they have group insurance arrangements
   in place and it is usually more convenient for the customer to accept coverage under such a
   policy.

Key Recommendation(s)
66.Consideration should be given to mandating product suitability requirements in
   connection with the sale of insurance products. In particular, insurers and their
   intermediaries should be required to obtain sufficient information about the prospective policy
   holder to ensure an appropriate product is offered. Further, as the retail market for voluntary
   insurance develops, and especially as microinsurance develops, ISSM should monitor the
   appropriateness of insurance offered to emerging customers. This might be done, for example,
   through assessing products submitted for registration and the corresponding distribution and
   customer service processes, and through analyzing complaints statistics.




38
     Article 10
39
     Article 119 of the ICL


                                                                                 FINANCE & MARKETS | 29
67.Formal standards of practice in relation to the bundling of credit and insurance
   products should be established. At a minimum, there should be requirements to clearly
   inform the prospective policy holder of the key terms, exclusions, and premiums for the insurance
   policy and related commission before the policy is taken up. This should be in addition to
   obligations to give the consumer a choice of insurer and to prohibit any requirement to take out
   insurance with a particular insurer. Further, in the longer term, consideration should be given to
   whether there should be prohibition on insurance forcing practices. The ‘insurance forcing’
   prohibition could apply to a requirement to acquire insurance as a condition of providing a
   banking service (such as a loan). However there could be an exception to such a prohibition in
   certain cases, for example, where the requirement is for insurance over mortgaged property or
   where insurance is required by law. It is also acknowledged that careful consideration will need
   to be given as to the extent to which such a prohibition may limit access to credit.
68.Mandate a cooling-off period for long-term / life / savings insurance products and
   clarify when an insurance contract can be terminated.
69.ISSM should develop and disseminate the standard syllabus of what basic training
   for insurance intermediaries needs to cover, as well as the related exam. Ideally, this
   should be done in cooperation with the insurance industry. As part of its supervisory role, ISSM
   should also inspect the training syllabus and formats used by insurers, and develop a procedure
   to assess the capacities of intermediaries achieved by the mandatory training.

Pension Sector
70. There is potential for challenges to develop around fees and governance
   arrangements for pension funds which have been an issue in similar situations
   internationally. As the pension market is new and small, fees are currently high (ranging from
   Assets under Management (AUM) charge of around 1.5% to 5%, the top end being well above
   international averages and even some regional peers). These should decline as the market grows
   and matures. However, competition has proven not to work as well for pensions as for other
   financial sector markets, with fees staying stubbornly high as pension fund members lack
   knowledge and are generally disengaged. Regulators in other countries have been forced to
   intervene when this is the case.
71.One key aspect of the protection for pension fund members is the governance
   structure of the pension funds. The Pensions Law (25/2009) requires all funds to establish a
   ‘supervisory committee’ to oversee the fund on behalf of the fund members. At least one-third
   of this committee must be appointed by members themselves. It is too early a stage in the
   industry’s development to tell how well these regulations are operating in practice. However,
   international experience suggests that the governance of defined contribution funds operated by
   commercial financial institutions is always challenging, and therefore will need to be supervised
   carefully by the regulator.
72. The vesting of employer contributions should also be addressed. For example, one issue
    which was raised by the pension management companies is that not all occupational funds allow
    for the vesting of employer contributions. International good practice is for employer
    contributions to also vest within a reasonable time frame (normally within 5 years). Whilst
    employees get their own contributions back when they leave the firm and move to a different
    company, they do not receive any of the contributions which the employer made on their behalf.
    International experience is normally for these contributions to vest after an appropriate period
    of time (usually up to 10 years).

                                                                                FINANCE & MARKETS | 30
Key Recommendation(s)
73.ISSM should ensure that appropriate fees are levied by pension fund management
   companies. International experience and evidence regarding acceptable fee levels and how and
   when to intervene should be studied.
74.ISSM could provide additional supervisory guidance (in the form of a circular or
   appropriate regulatory instrument) on the good governance of pension funds and
   their expectations and standards for supervisory committees. This should include
   minimum standards for trustees. Over the longer-term, ISSM should consider providing or
   supporting training for members of the supervisory committees, particularly those appointed by
   members.
75. ISSM should issue a guidance note on vesting of pension fund contributions.
   Employee contributions should vest immediately and employer contributions should vest within
   a reasonable time frame (e.g. 5 years).


Securities Sector
76.The securities legal framework contains a general admonition that financial
   intermediaries should deal honestly with clients, but beyond that, it only contains a
   few specific forbidden practices, such as churning and front running client orders. For
   example, the law is lacking specific provisions on sales fraud. Further, sales materials of
   investment funds do not have to be reviewed or approved by the regulator and there are no
   detailed regulations as to the required contents of advertising, other than that the existence of
   a prospectus should be disclosed.
77.Product suitability requirements are not as clear as they might be. Taken together, the
   relevant provisions in the Securities Code imply that a financial intermediary should not engage
   in transactions for clients that are not suitable given their experience, financial condition, and
   objectives.40 However, it is not explicit whether the financial intermediary should refrain from
   unsuitable transactions or merely advise the client as to whether the transaction is unsuitable
   and give the client more extensive advice and a choice as to further action.
78.The record-keeping requirements in the Securities Code and regulations are also
   simple and not detailed. There are no specifics as to the records that must be maintained,
   the contents of a contract notice evidencing a trade or the contents of periodic notices to
   customers regarding their accounts.




40
     Article 5


                                                                                 FINANCE & MARKETS | 31
Key Recommendation(s)
79. There should be more specific requirements concerning product suitability
   obligations in the legal framework. The obligation of a financial intermediary, funds, and
   investment fund manager to determine the suitability of a financial instrument for a client should
   be set out in the legal framework for the securities sector more directly, in addition to actions
   that should be taken if the client wishes to invest in a product or service which is not considered
   suitable for him or her (for example, by way of warnings).
80.The securities legal framework should be amended to include a more robust
   prohibition against the fraudulent sales of securities to purchasers. Additionally, when
   the investment fund industry becomes more active, regulations should be enacted to set out in
   detail the basic requirements for all investment fund advertising.
81.The record-keeping requirements of financial intermediaries, funds, and investment
   fund managers should be clearly set out in detail.

              COMPLAINTS HANDLING AND DISPUTE RESOLUTION

82.One of the key pillars of a robust system of financial consumer protection is to provide
   easily accessible, well–known, and free recourse mechanisms for consumers who
   have a complaint about a financial product or service. Similarly, there is a need for an
   independent, transparent, accessible and (ideally), free external dispute resolution body.

General Comments
83.There are limited rules relating to internal complaints resolution processes, reflecting
   the small size of the relevant markets. Of the existing rules, those for the securities sector
   are best developed. However, there are still gaps – for example, in relation to the obligation to
   report comprehensive complaints statistics to the relevant regulator and to inform consumers
   about the available means of making complaints and lodging disputes.
84.There is no formal external dispute resolution scheme in Mozambique for consumers.
   The CP Law provides for the establishment of Consumer Arbitration Centers but no action has
   been taken in this regard to date. The Center for Arbitration, Conciliation, and Mediation, which
   organizes arbitrations, is used mainly for larger disputes due to costs. It has indicated an interest
   in dealing with consumer disputes, but does not have the resourses to do so. Recourse through
   the courts is not a viable option given the costs and time delays involved, and concerns about
   the lack of expertise of members of the judiciary.
85.Overall, there appear to be a low number of complaints in the insurance, pensions,
   and securities sectors. This may indicate that consumers are satisfied with the relevant
   products and services or, alternatively, that detailed statistics are not being collected by
   regulators. It could also signal that not all customers are aware of their avenues for recourse,
   or, if they are, are not optimistic about the outcome or simply do not wish to pursue them. This
   is an important issue as customer empowerment and trust, and ultimately financial inclusion, are
   likely to rise with the growing awareness that complaints are taken seriously and handled
   appropriately by either the financial services provider or through some form of external dispute
   resolution system.



                                                                                   FINANCE & MARKETS | 32
Key Recommendation(s)
86.All relevant entities should be required to develop standardized procedures for
   dealing with complaints, ensure their customers are aware of them, and report
   complaints statistics to the relevant regulator. It is especially important that consumers
   are made aware of where and how they can lodge complaints, and the timelines for
   consideration. These rules should be uniform across the three sectors under consideration.
87.In the longer term, it is suggested that Mozambique considers options for the
   development of an independent, accessible, and free third party external dispute
   resolution scheme. Such a scheme should apply to the insurance, pensions, and securities
   sector, as well as other parts of the financial sector. Consideration could, for example, be given
   to the establishment of a financial ombudsman service. The recommendations in the 2012
   Volume II CPFL Report (see Good Practice E.2 Banking Section) discuss the legal foundations,
   possible ways to establish and fund such a service, governance, and corresponding international
   standards. Another option which might be considered is the establishment of the Consumer
   Arbitration Centers provided for in the CP Law.
88.Pending the establishment of a third party dispute resolution scheme, ISSM should
   dedicate resources to consider consumer complaints, analyze and publish complaints
   statistics, and consider them for supervisory action.

Insurance and Pension Sectors
89.Although insurers are required by the Insurance Contracts Law to establish and
   advise consumers about their internal complaints resolution process, there is no
   requirement for standardization of procedures or to report statistics to ISSM. The
   insurers interviewed advised they do maintain internal procedures for complaints handling, which
   are not documented in writing in most cases.
90.In relation to private pension funds, according to the Pension Law, the Fund’s
   Supervisory Committee is responsible for representing member’s interests in relation
   to disputes. For externally managed occupational funds, disputes between the managing entity
   and the employer sponsoring the plan would be handled via the fund manager’s internal
   processes. However, none of these procedures have been really tested yet, given the newness
   of this industry. Nevertheless, it is important that the pension fund members should be given
   information regarding complaints and dispute processes and procedures.
91.Consumer complaints in relation to insurance policies and pension funds are handled
   by ISSM. Insurance complaints are very limited in number (around 10 per year) and ISSM does
   not maintain, or publish, any statistics in relation to such complaints. ISSM has not yet had to
   deal with pensions complaints.




                                                                                FINANCE & MARKETS | 33
Key Recommendation(s)
92.ISSM should review the complaints handling policy and procedures (to be
   documented in writing) of all insurers, assess their appropriateness in respect of
   customer protection and fair treatment, make suggestions for remedies where
   necessary, and communicate its views on best practices that the industry is
   recommended to follow. Such policies should not only address complaints made, but also
   ways to reduce causes that have already been identified as frequent sources of complaints (e.g.
   underinsurance41) and mechanisms to systematically monitor causes of complaints in the future
   and address them proactively.
93.ISSM should investigate the reasons for the low number of complaints, by compiling
   appropriate statistics, discussing them with insurers and brokers, and also by
   contacting customers who had disputes. The findings should be put into a report suited to
   inform both the industry and the public, and should be disseminated accordingly. If the findings
   suggest that there are few reasons for disputes because, for example, the insurance contract
   law is so clear that disputes do not arise or because insurers in Mozambique have high standards
   of customer orientation, disseminating that finding will contribute to the public’s trust in the
   industry. If, on the other hand, weaknesses are found, they should be addressed – this proactive
   approach will also strengthen the public’s confidence in ISSM and the industry generally.
94.Pension scheme members should be given information regarding complaints
   /dispute mechanisms on joining the scheme, and should be informed who their
   representatives are on the supervisory committees.

Securities Sector
95.Financial entities regulated by BdM (including securities intermediaries) are required
   to have internal complaint resolution processes.42 In particular, Notice 4/GBM/2009 of the
   BdM requires regulated institutions to set up internal complaints procedures and to establish a
   complaint, data request, and suggestions service counter for the public. As banks are the only
   entities acting as financial intermediaries, complaints would be handled through the relevant
   bank’s complaints processes. It is understood that bank headquarters may have the required
   service counter where complaints can be made face-to-face, but it is less clear if bank branches
   do.

Key Recommendation(s)
96.Financial intermediaries should establish appropriate mechanisms to ensure that all
   customers are aware of the complaint procedure and have access to it.




41
  An insurer may exercise a right to average (and hence reduce the amount paid on a claim) in the case of alleged
underinsurance
42
     Decree No. 4/GBM/2009 and RAI Article 5


                                                                                                FINANCE & MARKETS | 34
                                FINANCIAL LITERACY/CAPABILITY
97.As a complement to a strong financial consumer protection framework, it is
   important to have high levels of financial literacy/capability, so consumers have the
   necessary knowledge and understanding to make informed decisions and to help
   meet financial inclusion targets by building trust in the financial sector. For instance,
   any regulations which require financial institutions to disclose, clearly and fairly, the key
   information on terms and conditions associated with their products and service will not affect a
   consumer’s behavior if the consumer does not understand why it is important to read disclosure
   documents or if they fail to understand the information contained in these documents. Likewise,
   any requirement for financial institutions to have standardized procedures for dealing with
   consumer complaints will be ineffective if consumers are not aware of their rights and the
   available complaints mechanisms, or if they prefer not to take action to deal with a complaint.
   Financial literacy is especially important in an environment where there are high levels of
   innovation in the design and delivery of financial products.
98.There are low levels of financial literacy in Mozambique. The World Bank’s Financial
   Capability Survey referred to above showed that while 74% of respondents are familiar with bank
   products, whereas only 38% are familiar with insurance and a low 7% are familiar with brokerage
   houses.43 There is very limited knowledge of private pension schemes, no doubt due to the
   newness of this industry and the ability of formal sector workers to rely on the INSS mandatory
   social protection scheme, as well as the BdM scheme.
99.There are a number of strategic initiatives currently addressing financial literacy in
   Mozambique. The Government’s Financial Sector Development Strategy 2013–2022 includes
   activities to promote financial literacy, such as financial education campaigns to be disseminated
   through media and financial education material to be used in schools. The Strategy documents
   the government’s commitment to financial inclusion as signaled by the signing of the Maya
   Declaration in 2012. It is understood that financial literacy will also be covered by Mozambique’s
   Financial Inclusion Strategy, which is in the process of development with the support of the
   Mozambique FISF Program. The FISF program includes the promotion of financial literacy among
   its objectives.
100. ISSM also has a new Financial Literacy Strategy 2014-2018 for insurers and is in
   the process of developing programs to implement the strategy. In addition to providing
   for print material and seminars, the Strategy includes capacity building for journalists and
   collaboration with schools in the development of insurance teaching materials. The Strategy
   recognizes the need to coordinate with a considerable number of stakeholders, as well as the
   need for corresponding resources. It also acknowledges the potential to include suitable
   insurance-related teachings in school curricula, so that young adults become familiar not only
   with insurance as a financial service that can be of value to them, but also as a potential
   employer. This will be important as (micro) insurance grows into new socioeconomic segments
   of population that will need to be serviced by more insurance staff, ideally with a similar
   background.




43   Enhancing Financial Capability and Financial Inclusion in Mozambique-A Demand Size Assessment

                                                                                               FINANCE & MARKETS | 35
101. Although these activities are welcome, there is a need for coordination (including
   with BdM strategies and programs). At present, it is not entirely clear how the various
   initiatives are coordinated, nor is it clear who is responsible to lead and coordinate their
   implementation. This will be especially important as BdM develops its Financial Inclusion
   Strategy.

   Key Recommendation(s)
102. Ensure there is consultation and coordination between relevant stakeholders in
   developing and implementing financial literacy strategies and programs. It is
   particularly important to ensure there is consultation and coordination between relevant
   stakeholders in developing and implementing Mozambique’s Financial Inclusion Strategy,
   including aspects related to financial literacy, and also in relation to the implementation of the
   ISSM Financial Literacy Strategy.
103. It is also important that specific programs are developed for the insurance,
   pensions, and securities sectors. Such programs could include: (i) training for the media and
   consumer associations on insurance, pensions and securities issues; (ii) training for HR
   representatives of all employers sponsoring pension schemes; (iii) ensuring a wide range of
   media channels are used for financial literacy programs (e.g. radio, TV, social media); (iv)
   including financial literacy information on websites of BdM and BVM concerning the
   charactersistics of available investments in the securities sector.




                                                                                FINANCE & MARKETS | 36
                        ANNEX: List of Overall Recommendations
          (This is a high level summary list of all recommendations resulting from the 2014
             Mozambique CPFL Review (i.e. not just the High Priority recommendations
            contained in Volume I). See Volume II for details of these recommendations.
Table 7: List of Overall Recommendations44
                      RECOMMENDATION                           RESPONSIBILITY                                                  TERM*
                                  INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS
 Cross Cutting: Consider funding and capacity building
 support for consumer associations and involve them in             BdM, ISSM                                                     LT45
 consultations about policy and legal framework development.
 Insurance and Pensions: Develop proportionate consumer
 protection-specific supervisory arrangements, tools, and             ISSM                                                        ST
 training for ISSM, increase specialist supervisory resources.
 Insurance and Pensions: Consider creating a separate
 market conduct / consumer protection supervisory unit and
                                                                      ISSM                                                        ST
 equip it with the required consumer protection tools and
 capacity and budget.
 Securities: Create an independent unit in BdM to regulate the
 securities markets and equip it with the required consumer            BdM                                                       MT
 protection tools and capacity and budget.
 Securities: Establish the Central Securities Depository as an
                                                                       BdM                                                        LT
 entity separate from the BdM.
 Securities: Consider a separate securities regulator as the
                                                                       BdM                                                        LT
 market develops.
                               LEGAL AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
 Cross Cutting: Clarify interaction between Consumer
                                                                   MoEF, MIC                                                     MT
 Protection Law and sector specific legislation.
 Cross Cutting: Consider development of a Personal Data               MoEF                                                        LT
 Protection Law covering e.g. use, disclosure and security
 issues.
 Cross Cutting: Encourage development of detailed industry
                                                               Industry. BdM, ISSM                                                LT
 Codes of Conduct.
 Insurance: Require all insurers and intermediaries to
 prominently publish the fact that they are regulated and by          ISSM                                                        ST
 whom (e.g. in sales materials and on the Internet).
 Insurance: Assess current training practices and mandate
                                                                      ISSM                                                       MT
 training for intermediaries as required.
 Insurance: Consider the establishment of a guarantee fund
 to cover third party injuries and damage caused by uninsured      MoEF, ISSM                                                     LT
 motorists.



44
     A reference to “laws” includes a reference to Acts, regulations and other forms of subordinate legislation

45
     ST (short term) = 1 year, MT (medium term) = 2 years, LT (long term) = 3 years



                                                                                                                  FINANCE & MARKETS | 37
                      RECOMMENDATION                              RESPONSIBILITY                          TERM*
 Insurance: Assess role of mobile banking and banking
                                                                        ISSM                                 LT
 correspondents in distribution of micro insurance products.
 Insurance: Clarify regulatory status of providers of health
                                                                        ISSM                                 LT
 insurance.
 Insurance: Publish names of registered intermediaries on
                                                                        ISSM                                 ST
 website.46
 Pensions: Enforce licensing requirements for pension funds.            ISSM                                 ST
 Pensions: Enforce investment limits under Ministerial Decree
                                                                        ISSM                                 ST
 261 of 2009.
 Pensions: Provide guidance on good governance of pension
                                                                        ISSM                                MT
 funds and standards for supervisory committees.
 Pensions: Mandate that employer contributions vest after an
                                                                        ISSM                                MT
 appropriate period (e.g. up to 10 years).
 Securities: Require the staff of all securities intermediaries
 to be licensed and trained, to disclose their status at point of
                                                                        BdM                                 MT
 sale, and to undertake a qualifying exam (supervisors should
 also take a qualifying exam).
 Pensions: Develop Know Your Customer requirements for
                                                                        ISSM                                 LT
 pensions market.
 Securities: Require disclosure of conflicts of interest and
                                                                        BdM                                  LT
 how the conflict is proposed to be handled.
 Securities: Develop detailed investor protection regulations
                                                                         BdM                                 LT
 under the Securities Code.
 Securities: Develop rules for payouts for investors to be
 segregated in the event of insolvency of a securities                  BdM                                  LT
 intermediary, investment adviser or CIU.
                          TRANSPARENCY AND CONSUMER DISCLOSURE
 Cross Cutting: Develop short form, clearly expressed Key                                                    ST
 Facts Statements in consultation with industry and consumer                                            (insurance)
 associations for commonly used insurance and pensions                                                      MT
                                                                   MoEF,ISSM, BdM
 products and for investment fund products.                                                              (pensions
                                                                                                            and
                                                                                                       investments)
 Cross Cutting: Consider need for disclosure documents and
 financial literacy materials and explanations to be in local                      ISSM, BdM                 LT
 languages.
 Insurance and Pensions: Collect, analyze, and publish
 standardized industry data on website and in annual reports                          ISSM                   ST
 and in a clear and timely way.
 Insurance and Pensions: Issue norms and guidance
 concerning projections included in advertising and sales
                                                                                      ISSM                  MT
 materials and consider further guidance as markets develop
 including review of advertising material before publication.

46
 It is understood that these names have now been published and is updated as and when required: see
www.issm.gov.mz


                                                                                             FINANCE & MARKETS | 38
                      RECOMMENDATION                           RESPONSIBILITY            TERM*
Insurance: Provide further detail on duties of disclosure and
                                                                      ISSM                 MT
effect of non-disclosure.
Insurance: Mandate a cooling-off period for long-term / life /
savings insurance products and clarify when an insurance              ISSM                  LT
contract can be terminated.
Pensions: Review sales materials, forms of contract and
periodic statements provided to individual pension fund
                                                                      ISSM                  LT
members to ensure adequate disclosures are made as market
develops.
Pensions: Require pension fund and individual member
information to be made available to members online and on             ISSM                 MT
request.
Pensions: Supervise qualifications and information provided
by sales staff at pension consultants and consider training           ISSM                  LT
requirements for HR staff responsible for pension issues.
Securities: Develop specific requirements on disclosures for
point of sale documents, regarding risks, terms and conditions
and fees, charges and commissions; for contract notes; and            BdM                  MT
regarding disclosure of professional relationships between
principals and intermediaries.
Securities: Introduce detailed rules for the provision of
                                                                   MoEF, BdM               MT
periodic statements.
Securities: Clarify legal liability for sales materials and
                                                                      BdM                  MT
related selling activities.
Securities: Prohibit false and misleading oral (as well as
                                                                   MoEF, BdM               MT
written) statements and high pressure sales tactics.
                                         BUSINESS PRACTICES
Cross Cutting: Issue detailed regulations on product
suitability (Fact Finds) requirements for insurance, pensions
                                                                   ISSM, BdM               MT
and financial intermediaries, funds and investment fund
managers.
Cross Cutting: Encourage development of industry codes of
                                                               ISSM, BdM, Industry
conduct for insurers and financial intermediaries in the                                    MT
                                                                  Associations
securities industry, building on existing law.
Insurance: Specify criteria and procedures for assessment of          ISSM
                                                                                           MT
policies.
Insurance: Assess use of different titles by insurance
intermediaries and enforce requirement that only licensed
brokers use the term “broker”.
Pensions: Support INSS in contribution collection efforts.        ISSM, INSS               ST
Pensions: Monitor fees levied by pension fund managers.              ISSM                  MT
Pensions: Issue additional guidance on pension fund                  ISSM
                                                                                            MT
governance.
Pensions: Provide guidance for supervisory committees of
                                                                     ISSM                   LT
pension funds.



                                                                            FINANCE & MARKETS | 39
                       RECOMMENDATION                          RESPONSIBILITY           TERM*
Securities: Develop detailed record-keeping requirements for
financial intermediaries, funds, and investment fund                   BdM                MT
managers.
Securities: Strengthen law relating to fraudulent sales of
securities so that it is more specific and has stronger             MoEF, BdM             MT
sanctions.
Securities: Extend RAI requirements for financial
                                                                    MoEF, BdM             MT
intermediaries to investment fund managers.
                                        DISPUTE RESOLUTION
Cross Cutting: Require that all relevant entities have
comprehensive, standardized procedures for dealing with
complaints, ensure their customers are aware of them and            ISSM, BdM              ST
report comprehensive complaints statistics to the relevant
regulator.
Cross Cutting: Consider options for the development of an
independent third party external dispute resolution scheme,
                                                                    ISSM, BdM              LT
including the Consumer Arbitration Centers provided for in the
CP Law.
Insurance and Pensions: Ensure ISSM has dedicated and
trained staff responsible for considering consumer complaints          ISSM               MT
and that ISSM analyzes and publishes complaints statistics.
Pensions: Pension scheme members should be given
information regarding complaints / dispute mechanisms on
                                                                       ISSM               MT
joining the scheme, and should be informed who their
representatives are on the supervisory committees.
                                FINANCIAL LITERACY / CAPABILITY
Cross cutting: Ensure there is consultation and coordination
between relevant stakeholders in developing and                ISSM, BVM and BdM
implementing Mozambique’s Financial Inclusion Strategy,          (and public and
                                                                                           ST
including aspects related to financial literacy, and also in      private sector
relation to the implementation of the ISSM Financial Literacy     stakeholders)
Strategy.
Cross cutting: Develop training for the media and consumer
                                                                    ISSM, BdM              LT
associations on insurance, pensions, and securities issues.
Cross cutting: Ensure a wide range of media channels is
used for financial literacy programs (e.g. radio, TV, social   ISSM, BVM and BdM           LT
media).
Insurance and Pensions: Develop financial education and
                                                                       ISSM               MT
awareness programs in relation to pensions and insurance.
Pensions: Develop training programs for HR representatives     ISSM and public and
of all employers sponsoring pension schemes.                      private sector          MT
                                                                   stakeholders
Securities: Include information on websites re
                                                                    BdM, BVM              MT
charactersistics of available investments.




                                                                           FINANCE & MARKETS | 40
