                      Kalimantan Forest Carbon Trust Fund (KFCTF)


Indonesia emits globally significant amounts of greenhouse gases from forest loss and conversion,
drainage and degradation of peat swamps. As part of the effort toward reducing emissions from
deforestation and degradation (REDD+), the Governments of Indonesia and Australia have formed a
development cooperation known as the Indonesia-Australia Forest Carbon Partnership (IAFCP). Through
this partnership, AusAID finances the Kalimantan Forests and Climate Partnership (KFCP), an official
REDD+ Demonstration Activity of the Government of Indonesia (GOI). KFCP, financed with an AUD 47
million grant from AusAID, operates within a peat swamp area in Central Kalimantan, Indonesia’s REDD+
pilot province.

This area has been extensively modified since 1996 under a failed agricultural intervention of a previous
government that involved clearing forest and draining peat, which made it susceptible to fire.
Traditionally, local Indigenous-Dayak communities have used the area to support subsistence
agriculture, fishing and small scale extractive activities. The deforestation and degradation since 1996
has reduced livelihood opportunities and affected social cohesion and customary land uses. KFCP aims
to reduce deforestation and degradation, primarily by re-wetting and rehabilitating degraded peatland,
protecting remaining intact peat swamp forest, and mitigating the frequency and severity of fire, with
community consultation and participation.

The Kalimantan Forests and Climate Trust Fund (KFCTF) is being established with AusAID financing to
operate an independent payment mechanism in support of KFCP. The KFCTF will seek to establish a
functioning REDD+ payments mechanism to channel incentives for communities to engage in REDD+
compatible activities and livelihoods in the KFCP REDD+ Demonstration Area. KFCTF will also finance
technical assistance and analyses to contribute to the design and testing of effective, efficient and
eqitable benefit sharing arrangements that could channel REDD+ financing from international donors or
carbon markets to the local level on the basis of actual emission reductions. KFCTF is being established
as a Bank trust fund to test performance-based payment approaches with strong community
participation, to model an independent, internationally credible payment and financial oversight system,
and to draw on the Bank’s expertise in carbon and climate finance. KFCTF will have both Bank executed
activities and recipient executed activities through a grant agreement with CARE, an international civil
society organization.

The higher level objective of the KFCTF is to contribute to the development of a system of incentive
payments aimed at reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation (REDD+). By applying
community-based approaches and focusing on high emission peatlands in Central Kalimantan in
collaboration with the KFCP REDD+ Demonstration Activity, the KFCTF will yield lessons on avenues for
effective participation by local communities in REDD+. These lessons will be valuable for tailoring REDD+
mechanisms for use in other areas, and for adoption by potential national and sub-national efforts. In
general, supporting Indonesia’s REDD+ initiative has global significance because of the country’s large
emissions from land use change and forestry.
Addressing climate change in the forestry sector also means tackling many of Indonesia’s fundamental
environmental, natural resource management, governance, and tenure and poverty issues, while
producing direct benefits of reduced deforestation and pollution and, indirectly, better health
outcomes. Environmental sustainability, including climate change and REDD, is a core element of the
Country Partnership Strategy for FY 2009-2012.

The Project Development Objective is to engage with forest communities in the KFCP Demonstration
Area, trialing incentive payments to demonstrate the effectiveness of REDD+.

The objective will be achieved by providing financing, facilitation, capacity development and technical
assistance to: (a) reduce emissions by expanding alternative livelihood options for communities in the
area in line with sustainable forest and peatland management in village development plans, (b) directly
reduce emissions by restoring and conserving peatlands, and (c) contribute to the design and testing of
benefit sharing arrangements that could channel REDD+ financing from international donors or carbon
markets to the local level.

PDO Level Results Indicators

The key PDO indicators are:

       a) Household livelihoods security in participating communities is increased.

       b) Village and district institutional capacity to access and equitably share benefits from
          implementation of REDD+ activities is strengthened.

Experience and lessons from the incentive payment trials are consolidated and disseminated to inform
development of REDD+ benefit sharing mechanisms
