                                     103531
Agriculture and Rural Development
Authors: Kees van der Meer
Official Use Only



EXCLUSION OF SMALL-SCALE FARMERS FROM
COORDINATED SUPPLY CHAINS:

MARKET FAILURE, POLICY FAILURE OR JUST
ECONOMIES OF SCALE?
                                             2



Summary
Coordinated supply chains are rapidly increasing in importance in global food markets.
They are commercial tools for competitive strategies, assuring quality, food safety, and
better logistics. They serve high-end markets, especially in industrial countries, but
increasingly also in developing countries in urban areas with relatively high income.
However, the share of production in developing countries marketed through coordinated
supply chains is still small. There is widespread fear that small-scale farmers will be
excluded from coordinated supply chains. Empirical evidence is mixed; there are
abundant examples of successful inclusion as well as of painful exclusion. In some cases,
economies of scale are such that only large-scale enterprises can compete successfully in
global markets. But, in many other cases there is no level playing field. Analysis of
factors that contribute to inclusion and exclusion indicates that there are market failures
and policy failures that contribute to relatively weak competitiveness of small-scale
farmers. Hence, public intervention can be warranted.


Trends in food markets
Rapid changes have taken place in global food markets in recent years. Changes in
consumer demand, food safety concerns and the rise of modern retail systems are the
main drivers for these changes. With higher income and changing lifestyles, demand has
increased for more variety, higher quality, year-round supply of fresh produce, “healthy”
food, convenience and value added. There is a rapid increase of demand for “ready-to-
eat” food. And, last but not least, consumers require safe food, and they have increasing
concerns about the social and environmental conditions under which food is produced.

Food industries, supermarkets and food services compete for the market shares and
market power by trying to meet consumers’ preferences. They have become important
buyers in global markets and ask for specifications that meet consumer demand. These
private-sector specifications are often much more demanding than public-sector
requirements of food safety and quality. Food industries serve consumers with attractive
processed products. Supermarkets try to offer an attractive assortment of products at a
one-place-to-shop. Food services –restaurants, canteens, fast food outlets -- offer direct
service to consumers, which by-passes supermarkets. The market share of food services
is growing faster than that of supermarkets in many countries.

Information technology, logistics and advances in food processing and post-harvest
handling have greatly enhanced the development of global sourcing and retailing. Trade
liberalization has contributed to a rapid growth of international trade in food, especially
for fruit, vegetables and fisheries products (FAO 2003, Diop and Jaffee forthcoming).

Economies of scale are important in retailing, transport, logistics and processing, and
there is a clear concentration among retailers, food services and food processors. Yet,
there is heavy competition from which companies try to escape through strategies of
product differentiation, branding of products, and product and market innovation.




                                             2
                                              3

Food safety concerns have been an important accelerator of changes in food market
development. Many countries have seen food scandals and food scares. Most important
examples are BSE, high residues of pesticides and antibiotics, dioxin and toxic chemicals
in the food chain, listeria, salmonella and other microbiological hazards, hepatitis, and
recently, Avian Flu. These scandals and scares received major attention in the media and
contributed to consumers’ concerns. It is fair to say that consumers have become more
suspicious about the trustworthiness of food regulators, scientists and the food industry,
and in many countries this translated into political pressure to strengthen public control.
Fears of bio-terrorism have added to this. As a result, food laws and regulations have
been revised in Japan, the EU, the USA and elsewhere, responsibilities have been
sharpened, and border controls intensified.

The private sector has been much affected by food safety crises over a decade or so. It
sometimes experienced heavy losses because of stocks that had to be discarded,
interrupted supply, loss of business, and damage to company and brand name. A number
of cases resulted in bankruptcies. Nowadays, most food companies treat food safety as an
important commercial risk, but also as a subject with opportunities to distinguish
themselves from competitors. They deal with food safety risks through increased control
of the supply chains from farm to table. They abandon open markets with anonymous
suppliers and instead turn to integrated or coordinated supply chains. This usually
involves reliance on preferred suppliers who assure safety through tracking and tracing,
and independent certification of good agricultural and good manufacturing practices.

These trends in consumer demand, retailing and food safety management are most visible
in the high-income industrial countries, but in developing countries the same trends can
be observed in urban areas with relatively high incomes, although the impact levels are
still lower.

Coordinated supply chains
Coordinated supply chains are durable arrangements between producers, traders,
processors and buyers about what and how much to produce, time of delivery, quality and
safety conditions, and price. They often involve exchange of information, and sometimes
also help with technology and finance. They are usually initiated by investment of private
traders and food companies, who act as chain leaders. They have characteristics of
partnerships and joint interest. By contrast, relations in open supply chains are usually
limited to transactions only. There are hardly contractual relations and little clear loyalty
between buyers and sellers. In fully integrated supply chains, on the other end of the
spectrum, one company performs all activities from production to processing and
wholesaling on its own account without partnering with other entities. Here the intra-firm
handling has replaced market transactions. Coordinated supply chains as an institution
have to compete with atomistic markets on the one hand and with the firm which
completely controls the supply chain on the other.

Coordinated supply-chains well fit the logistics requirements of modern food markets,
especially those for fresh and processed perishable food. They can be used for process
control of safety and quality. This is more effective and efficient than only control at the



                                              3
                                              4

end of the supply chain. Companies cannot control each single package that is sold; they
need total quality and safety management as well. Companies use coordinated supply
chains also as tools in competitive strategies, such as for sales promotion, labeling and
branding.

With the emergence of coordinated supply chains, competition is increasingly between
supply chains rather than between individual firms.

In the past ten years, coordinated supply chains spread rapidly in food markets of the
industrial countries. The spread mainly depended on increase of sophistication in
consumers’ demand, stringency of quality and safety requirements, and the possibilities
of efficiency gains through improved logistics. This means that penetration is highest in
the market segments that cater for the top-end retailers in industrial countries. It is higher
for perishable products than for staples, because of the higher food safety risks. Certain
product and market segments in the food-processing industries have higher risk and
vulnerability than others, such as baby food and dairy products. They use stringent supply
chain control for managing risk. Restaurants and other fast food chains are also very
vulnerable to food scandals, hence, coordinated supply chains play prominent roles. In
bulk product segments with lower quality and safety risk, coordinated supply chains play
modest roles at best.

In developing countries the pattern is similar to that in industrial countries, but the level
of penetration of coordinated supply chains is much lower. Coordinated supply chains are
relatively widespread in the small production segments that cater for demanding export
markets, especially those for perishable products and sensitive processed products
destined for industrial countries. They are emerging slowly in the perishable products for
the domestic supermarket segments, international hotels, modern restaurants, and food
processing. They are virtually absent in the large traditional food and commodity
markets.

Although coordinated supply chains are spreading rapidly, in both more and less
developed countries, the share of small-scale farmers in developing countries affected by
them is still small. An example is the spread of coordinated supply chains in China. The
export share of vegetables is about 1 percent of the volume of production, and of fruits
about 2 percent (China Statistical Yearbook; China Customs Data). The share of fresh
fruit and vegetables that goes through supermarkets in Shanghai, the country’s most
developed city, is less than ten percent and a significant part of that product is still
sourced from open wholesale markets. (the author’s interviews) This means that for the
country as a whole the share of fruits and vegetables that goes through coordinated
supply chains is a few percent at most.

Contract farming arrangements are coordinated supply chains or parts thereof and while
much of the literature on contract farming is relevant to coordinated supply chains, for
brevity it is not addressed explicitly here. (Baumann 2000; Eaton and Shepherd 2001)




                                              4
                                            5


What are the incentives for investing in coordinated supply chains?
Why would enterprises – and farmers – invest in the formation of coordinated supply
chains? Why would a trader or processor try to become a chain leader? Advantages can
be that better prices can be obtained. Supply chain control may help in achieving higher
quality and safety standards, which command better prices. It may result in getting or
maintaining access to higher-end markets, which pay better. It may be a pre-condition for
successfully adding value to primary products, such as cleaning, packing for
supermarkets, or processing. Advantages can also be reduction of cost through higher
efficiency and reduction of losses. In particular, in fresh produce losses can be high
because of uncoordinated supply and limited shelf life. Transaction costs may be lower if
the supply chain is shortened by bypassing traditional markets. Demand for regular daily
supply of fresh product or supply for retailers or processors can only be met through
coordination in the supply chain, and the supplier who can organize that successfully will
have a stronger market position. This is closely related to achieving more economies of
scale and scope. And, last but not least, managing risk successfully can also require
coordination between producers, traders, exporters and buyers. Often advantages include
a mix of these benefits. But, benefits come with costs and the decision to invest in a
coordinated supply chain is a commercial one. It is based on assessments of costs,
benefits and risks.

Can small-scale farmers participate in coordinated supply chains?
There is a widespread concern among development specialists that small-scale farmers
are excluded from coordinated supply chains. This fear has been strengthened by a series
of studies on the rapid growth of supermarkets in developing countries led by Tom
Reardon, which point at drastic impacts for and exclusion of small farmers from
supermarket supply-chains (see Reardon and Berdegue 2002 as one of the leading studies
in this field).

Small-scale farmers have particular strengths and weaknesses for participating in high-
end markets, compared to commercial farms. The important question is whether supply
chains with small-scale farmers can compete successfully with supply chains with
commercial farms and with integrated supply chains.

The main strength of small-scale farmers, which comes up frequently in interviews and
literature (interviews by the author and, for example, Baumann 2000:31) is that their
production cost in labor-intensive products is often 20-40% lower than that of large-scale
commercial farms. The latter have high overhead and supervision costs and paid labor is
generally less motivated than are self-employed farmers. In some cases where lack of
access to land forms an obstacle to the emergence of commercial farms, access to land is
a competitive strength of small-scale farmers.

Important weaknesses of small-scale farmers are lack of knowledge about modern
markets, modern technology and proper use of modern inputs. Access to capital can be an
obstacle for upgrading from production for direct consumption and local markets, rather
than to more demanding markets. Working with small-scale farmers is difficult for
trading and processing companies. Quantities of product are small and heterogeneous in



                                            5
                                                       6

quality, supply can be haphazard and bulking-up of volume into a steady stream of
product of constant quality difficult to realize. These are serious problems for serving
high-end modern supply chains. The organization of small-scale farmers is not easy in
many cases. The culture of existing cooperatives and organizations may be an obstacle
rather than an asset. Enterprises interested to step in and help with the organization of
production and marketing face high transaction costs, and contract enforcement that is
costly or even impossible. Risks of working with small-scale farmers can be high because
of their ignorance and higher incidence of inappropriate application and use of illegal
agrochemicals.

Without support from traders and processors small-scale farmers will rarely be able to
overcome their weaknesses and participate in supply chains for high-end markets.
Traders and processors will include small-scale farmers in coordinated supply chains
only if they expect the benefits to outweigh costs (Box 1 has an example) 1 . Important
factors are the perceived benefits, costs and risks.

    Box 1. A rewarding pro-active strategy
    A Thai packing house that collected horticultural products from small-scale producers and delivered
    packaged products for export to an exporter, received strong signals in the late 1990s from buyers in
    the UK that it had to upgrade to the new retail standards, BRC and EUREPGAP. The company
    decided to pursue a pro-active and offensive strategy. The company acquired land on which to
    establish good agricultural practices. It upgraded all its facilities, introduced HACCP and ISO 9001
    with external certification and was BRC accredited in 2003. Its farm is EUREPGAP accredited. It has
    heavily invested in the training of its staff. The company shortened the supply chain by exporting
    directly and leaving out the exporter. The company has long-term daily delivery schedules with
    buyers, which enabled the company to negotiate low airfreight rates.

    In 2003, the company produced about 35 per cent of the value of its shipping on its own farms, but
    that share is declining. The rest it buys from small-scale farmers through a system of contract
    arrangements through brokers with farmers’ groups and its individual members. The brokers provide
    technology and ensure compliance with delivery requirements. For vegetables, Good Agricultural
    Practices (GAPs) are prescribed, and growers receive training, seeds, pesticides and other inputs. The
    inputs are repaid in kind. Use of inputs and production is registered daily. The farmer groups have
    first responsibility to control compliance with GAP requirements themselves. Farmers receive prices
    20 percent higher than in local markets. The number of contract farmers was about 900 at the end of
    2003 and increasing. The company’s sales increased from US$3.3 million in 1999 to US$8.5 million
    in 2003 and an estimated US$11.5 million in 2004.
    Source: Interviews by Sompop Manarungsan and Kees van der Meer in May and November
    2004.

The risks will depend on many factors. With extensive markets for cheap illegal
pesticides and illegal antibiotics, the risks for uses of illegal pesticides and antibiotics by
small-scale farmers are higher than in cases of effective public control. Government
support for educating farmers in proper use of agrochemicals will also help in reducing
risks. Risk of working with small-scale farmers on complex technologies will be
relatively high. Given the potential risk with contract enforcement and loyalty,
government culture matters. A culture of disrupting government interference in markets,

1
 Swinnen in a World Bank study (World Bank, forthcoming) and other publications documents many
examples of successful coordinated supply chains between small-scale farmers and agribusinesses in
former communist countries of Central and Eastern Europe.


                                                       6
                                             7

debt forgiveness and weak contract enforcement will result in higher risks of working
with small-scale farmers. Increased mutual trust between farmers and enterprises will
reduce the perceived costs and, last but not least, good organization of farmers and
effective leadership is a crucial factor in overcoming many of the weaknesses.

Benefits of working with small-scale producers in coordinated supply chains will be
highest for labor-intensive products. An enterprise may achieve benefits of a coordinated
supply chain through increased economies of scale in the market, since more volume of
consistent quality may allow for better contracts with buyers. Experience in working with
small-scale farmers is an important factor for success in enterprises that seek to link to
such farmers. There is a need to develop suitable contractual relations and benefit
sharing, with the aim the achieve loyalty and reduced costs in the supply chain. Farmers
participating in coordinated supply chains receive better prices than they could obtain in
open markets. Loyalty is a crucial variable for sustainability and will depend on higher
prices that can be paid or on high shifting cost for farmers who want to divert to other
buyers. Experience among farmers in working with enterprises can result in reduced
transaction cost. This will always require well-organized groups with good leadership.
Various activities at the local level can be much better performed through self-control by
farmer groups, and through farmer leaders rather than by enterprise staff.

Cost for investors in setting up and operating coordinated supply chains will be reduced if
the investment climate is good – infrastructure, contract enforcement, public and
commercial services – and if there is public support for high set-up costs for training and
for the development of applied technology.

Possible policy interventions
Coordinated supply chains are commercial tools in competitive strategies. They are
institutional arrangements that help the private sector, including farmers, to achieve net
benefits that otherwise would not be available. Their creation depends on investment
decisions, mainly by the chain leader, but also by farmers and others involved in the
partnership. Once parties have invested, they have a joined interest. Breaking up a
coordinated supply chain results in loss of capital. Hence, there is often loyalty and
durability in partnerships that form coordinated supply chains. Needless to say,
arrangements in a coordinated supply chain require a different culture from that prevalent
in the transaction supply chains. Competition in the high-end markets is increasingly
competition between (integrated and coordinated) supply chains rather than between
individual enterprises. It is also competition between coordinated supply-chains and
small-scale farmers and commercial farmers.

Although coordinated supply chains are commercial arrangements in which the private
sector must be in the driver’s seat, there are a number of things the public sector can do to
enhance their emergence and functioning. These things are related to the investment
climate and involve public-goods aspects. Four fields for public intervention deserve to
be mentioned. First, the government must provide adequate laws, regulation and
enforcement necessary for doing business, in particular in food supply chains in which
small-scale producers are involved. Important areas of attention are regulation of markets



                                             7
                                              8

for pesticides and veterinary drugs. But, also property rights and contract enforcement
deserve attention. Second, there is a role for independent facilitators -- honest brokers --
to help in overcoming lack of experience and lack of trust among enterprises and farmers.
This can be done by contributing well-documented information about arrangements and
experiences that have worked elsewhere, and tailoring arrangements to specific needs.

A third area is the promotion of producers’ organizations. In many countries legislation
and regulation discourage the formation and development of independent producer
organizations. Memories of failed policies that initiated or supported public-sector-
dominated cooperatives contribute to negative attitudes among farmers and others about
farmers’ organizations. Subsidization and debt forgiveness schemes of the past have
contributed to a wrong business culture among farmers. Governments must clearly break
with policies of the past in order to give farmers a good chance as partners in coordinated
supply chains. Support for independent producers’ organizations, training of leadership
and education about modern markets can be helpful. Fourth, support can be given for the
development of good agricultural practice (GAP), good manufacturing practice,
improved technology and training. Often it may be a good strategy to let the chain leader
take the lead, since the results are directly related to market success, and provide some
sharing in the cost.

Final remarks
The market served by coordinated and integrated supply chains is more visible than
traditional markets, but in most countries it constitutes still a relatively small share of
production, often a few percent only. It is the more profitable part of the agricultural
sector and it caters for the export market of perishables and vulnerable processed
products. It is also an emerging but small part of the modern domestic retail market. It
gets a relatively large amount of attention given its modest share in production and the
limited involvement of poor farmers and laborers.

Coordinated supply chains are spreading rapidly in high-end food markets. There is much
concern whether small-scale farmers can participate in these relatively profitable parts of
the food markets. There is evidence of successes from many parts of the world. Many of
these successes occurred without or with little public support. But, there are also
examples of exclusion; cases where small-scale farmers lost in competition from large-
scale competitors. Rapidly increasing requirements for food safety and quantities of
consistent quality contribute much to rapid restructuring of supply chains. It is important
to analyze and understand reasons for success and failure, and to design public
intervention in cases where it is warranted.

Global food markets are characterized by economies of scale and scope, especially in
logistics, marketing and technology. Small-scale farmers, even if they are well organized
and not discriminated against, cannot be competitive in all products and markets. There is
nothing wrong with that. In such cases large-scale enterprises can be competitive and in
so operating generate on-farm and off-farm employment in serving high-end markets.
However, in cases where the growth of large-scale companies is based on neglect or
discrimination of small-scale farmers rather than on economies of scale there is a need to



                                              8
                                               9

create a level playing ground. Small-scale producers may be in a weak position because
of market failure or policy failure.

There are market failures that bear relatively heavily upon small-scale producers and
that can put them in a disadvantageous position for participating in coordinated supply
chains. Small-scale farmers are often poorly organized and risks and transaction costs of
involving them in coordinated supply chains are relatively high. Small-scale farmers are
more affected by negative externalities of markets for agrochemicals and by problems of
moral hazard than are larger scale farmers. Markets that provide small-scale farmers with
information and technology are often incomplete and inefficient.

There may also be policy failure, which can put small-scale farmers in a weak position.
An important policy failure is failing to mitigate problems of well-understood market
failure. Failure to properly control markets for agrochemicals, for instance, negatively
affects the competitiveness of small-scale farmers. Producer organizations have to play
important roles in reducing transaction costs and risks of working with small-scale
producers. However, inappropriate policies inhibit or discourage their development.
Support provided for development of independent producer organizations and applied
technology is often insufficient. A culture of political interference in markets and poor
contract enforcement increases the risk for enterprises of working with small-scale
farmers.

This note provides a framework for understanding the rapid spread of coordinated supply
chains and why small-scale farmers are included or excluded. It also provides arguments
for policy intervention in cases where there is no level playing field for small-scale and
forthcoming large-scale producers because of market and policy failure. The World
Bank’ Agriculture Investment Sourcebook provides some guidance for work in this field
(World Bank 2004). There is much need for more empirical research for better
understanding of economies of scale, and market and policy failures in this domain which
includes a wide range of products, local situations and markets. Such analysis will help to
better inform policy development and intervention in the diverse circumstances being
faced by the World Bank’s clients.


References

Baumann, Pari, 2000. “Equity and Efficiency in Contract Farming Schemes: The
Experience of Agricultural Tree Crops.” Overseas Development Institute, Working Paper
139, London.

China, Statistical Yearbook, various issues.

China, Customs Data.

Diop, N. and Jaffee S. forthcoming. “Fruits and Vegetables: Global Trade and
Competition in Fresh and Processed Product Markets”, in Global Agricultural Trade and



                                               9
                                         10

Developing Countries, M.A. Aksoy and J. Beghin (eds.) forthcoming Global Agricultural
Trade and Developing Countries. Trade and Development Series. World Bank,
Washington, D.C.

Eaton, Charles and Shepherd, Andrew W. 2001. Contract Farming. Partnerships for
Growth. FAO Agricultural Services Bulletin 145, FAO, Rome.

FAO 2003, “The Market for Non-Traditional Agricultural Exports (NTAEs)”,
unpublished study, FAO, Commodities and Trade Division, Rome

Reardon, T. and Berdegué, J.A.. 2002. “The Rapid Rise of Supermarkets in Latin
America: Challenges and Opportunities for Development,” Development Policy Review ,
20 (4), September: 317-34.

World Bank, forthcoming, The Dynamics of Vertical Coordination in ECA Agrifood
Chains: Implications for Policy and Bank Operations, World Bank, Washington, D.C.

World Bank, forthcoming. Rising Food Safety and Agricultural Health Requirements:
Challenges and Opportunities for Developing Country Exports, World Bank,
Washington, D.C.

World Bank 2004. Agriculture Investment Sourcebook, World Bank, Washington, D.C.
Also available on the web http://www-esd.worldbank.org/ais/




                                         10
