                               103603




  Understanding children’s work and
youth employment outcomes in Uganda




           Executive summary
              June 2014
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY



1. Overcoming the twin challenges of child labour and youth employment will be
critical to Uganda’s progress towards the Millennium Development Goals.
Estimates presented in this report indicate that over 2.4 million children aged 6-13
years are in employment. At the same time, most young people in the 18 to 30
years age range remain trapped in informal sector jobs offering little prospect for
advancement or for escaping poverty and exploitation. The effects of child labour
and poor youth employment outcomes are well-documented: both can lead to
social vulnerability, societal marginalisation and deprivation, and both can
permanently impair lifetime patterns of employment and pay.
2. The report examines the related issues of child labour and youth employment in
the context of Uganda. Guided by observed outcomes in terms of schooling, work
activities and status in the labour market, the report considers the economic as well
as the social determinants of child labour and youth employment. The 2011/2012
Uganda Labour Force and Child Activities (NLF&CAS) survey is the primary data
source for the report. Data from this survey permit a comprehensive and nationally-
representative picture of the child labour and youth employment situation. The
report builds on previous research cooperation in Uganda involving the Uganda
Bureau of Statistics, ILO-IPEC and UCW in 2008,1 and on the range of smaller-scale
non-representative surveys addressing the situation of Ugandan children and youth.


Children’s involvement in work and schooling
3. Children’s involvement in employment2 remains very common in Uganda.3 Thirty-
one percent of children aged 6-13 years, about 2.4 million children in absolute
terms, are in employment according to NLF&CAS 2011/2012. Most of these
children are also in child labour in accordance Ugandan legislation and as many as
three-quarters are exposed to hazardous conditions in the workplace. Only limited
progress against children’s employment has occurred in recent years. Children’s


1See, UBOS. IPO-IPEC and UCW (2008). Understanding Children’s Work in Uganda: Report on Child Labour. Country Report,
Kampala (http://www.ucw-project.org/attachment/child_labour_Uganda20110628_105759.pdf).
2 Children in employment is a broad concept covering all market production and certain types of non-market production
(principally the production of goods for own use) (see also Panel 2). It includes forms of work in both the formal and informal
sectors, as well as forms of work both inside and outside family settings. For reasons of comparability across countries, the
employment definition used in this Report does not include the collection of firewood and water fetching.
3The Report focuses primarily on children aged from six years, rather than from five years, as six years is the age at which
compulsory schooling begins in Uganda. The lower bound of six years therefore permits assessing the interplay between
employment and schooling. Statistics on children’s involvement in employment from the age of five years are provided in in the
Statistical Appendix.




                                                    UGANDA INTER-AGENCY COUNTRY REPORT | Executive summary                        i
            employment decreased by 1.4 percentage points in the period 2006-2012,
            accompanied by an almost equivalent increase in the school attendance rate.


Table 1. Child activity status, 6-13 years age group, by sex
                                                      Residence                                                Sex
                                                                                                                                                     Total
Activity status                             Urban                      Rural                     Male                    Female
                                      No.            %           No.            %          No.           %            No.         %            No.            %
Only employment                      9,861          1.0       133,332          2.0       82,963         2.1          60,230       1.5       143,193          1.8
Only schooling                      852,836         85.4     4,020,687         59.0    2,384,246        61.6     2,489,277       63.2      4,873,523         62.4
Employment and schooling            95,822          9.6      2,185,291         32.1    1,127,094        29.1     1,154,018       29.3      2,281,113         29.2
Neither activity                    40,083          4.0       473,124          6.9      278,302         7.2       234,905         6.0       513,207          6.6
Total in   employment(a)            106,027         10.5     2,334,643         33.9    1,215,279        31.0     1,225,391       30.8      2,440,670         30.9
Total in school(b)                  956,211         95.0     6,234,311         91.1    3,534,508        90.7     3,656,014       92.5      7,190,522         91.6
Total out-of-school
                                    50,665          5.0       608,793          8.9      362,059         9.3       297,400         7.5       659,459          8.4
children(c)
Notes : (a) Refers to all children in employment, regardless of school status; (b) refers to all children attending school, regardless of employment status; and (c)
refers to all children out of school, regardless of employment status.
Source: UCW calculations based on Uganda Labour Force and Child Activities Survey (NLF&CAS) 2011/2012.




            4. There are several important characteristics of children’s employment in Uganda of
            relevance for policy. First, children’s employment is mainly, although not
            exclusively, a rural phenomenon. Children in rural areas are three times more likely
            to be in employment than their peers in cities and towns (34 percent against 11
            percent). Second, there are substantial regional differences. In Kampala, the largest
            city and capital of Uganda, only three percent of children are in employment against
            30 percent in Eastern region, 31 percent in Western region and 45 percent of
            children in the Central region. Third, the percentage of children in employment rises
            steeply with age, reaching more than 49 percent at the age of 13 years. Numbers
            of very young children in work are nonetheless far from negligible. Already at the
            age of six years, almost one in ten children is involved in employment.
            5. Working children are concentrated primarily in family agricultural work. Nearly 96
            percent of employed children aged 6-13 years work in agriculture. The small
            remaining fraction of children in employment (four percent) are distributed across
            commerce, manufacturing and services. The predominance of agriculture is a
            particular concern in light of the fact that this sector is one of the three most
            hazardous in which to work at any age, along with construction and mining.4 The
            overwhelming majority of children in employment (88 percent) work for their
            families as unpaid labourers. Around ten percent of children in employment are
            self-employed and only two percent work for a wage.
            6. Hazardous conditions are alarmingly common in the workplaces where children are
            found in Uganda, posing a direct threat to their health and safety. In all, 75 percent
            of 6-13 year-olds in employment, 981,000 children in absolute terms, are exposed


            4   ILO, Child labour in agriculture (http://www.ilo.org/ipec/areas/Agriculture/lang--en/index.htm).




                                                                         UGANDA INTER-AGENCY COUNTRY REPORT | Executive summary                                        ii
to dangerous conditions such as dust and smoke, insect or snake bites, and used
dangerous tools. Exposure to dangerous conditions is highest among those in
construction, mining and quarrying and for those in agriculture. A significant share
of children – 13 percent of all 6-13 year-olds in employment – also report
experiencing some form of verbal or physical violence in the workplace. Younger (6-
13 year-old) children do not appear more protected in the workplace than their
older counterparts - they face a level of exposure to hazardous work conditions
similar to that of adolescents.
7. As a consequence, Ugandan working children face a very high risk of ill-health and
injury related to work.5 Working children face about a 47 percent chance of
suffering ill-health related to work over the course of a 12-month period. Younger
children are at much greater risk (70 percent) of work-related illness and injury than
their older counterparts (39 percent). The risk of ill-health among child workers
appears to depend on the type of work they are involved in: incidence is highest for
the agriculture sector (57 percent) and, perhaps surprisingly, for unpaid work within
the family unit (61 percent).
8. Children’s employment is associated with compromised education, especially in
terms of the transition to secondary (i.e., to non-compulsory) education. An
attendance gap opens up from age 13 years favouring children attending school
exclusively. The gap increases from five percentage points at age 13 years to almost
30 percentage points at age 17 years. Ugandan working children also have lower
school life expectancy (SLE).6 At each age up to the age of 16 years, the difference in
school life expectancy is of about one year. Data on average grade-for-age show
that children in employment also lag slightly behind their non-working counterparts
in terms of grade progression.
9. There are large numbers of out of school children in Uganda, in part due to the
demands of work. Some 193,000 (almost five percent of) children in the 10-13 years
age group are out of school.7 Around 78 percent work in some form of productive
activity, i.e., in employment, household chores or both, again underscoring the
close link between getting children out of work and getting them into school.
Learning needs for out-of-school children are very significant: 40 percent of out-of-
school children8 suffer what UNESCO terms “education poverty”, i.e., possess less
than four years of education, the minimum amount of school time considered by
UNESCO as necessary for acquiring basic literacy skills. It is likely that the education
poverty indicator actually underestimates the second chance learning needs of out-


5The general ill health variable reflects illnesses (such us skin problems, eye problems, breathing problems, stomach
problems, diarrhoea, fever, extreme fatigue, or other illnesses) or injuries (such as superficial injuries or open wounds, fractures,
dislocations, sprains or stains, burns, corrosions, scalds or frostbite back/muscle pain or other injuries) in the last 12 months.
The work-related ill-health variable reflects illnesses/injuries in the last 12 months and, that, in the opinion of the respondent,
occurred because of work.
6School life expectancy (SLE) provides a measure of the total number of years of education that a child can be expected to
complete. Relatively higher school life expectancy indicates greater probability of achieving a higher level of education.
7   We consider the narrower group of 10-13 year-olds to eliminate most potential late entrants.
8   We consider the 10-17 years age group to provide a more complete picture of second chance learning needs of children.




                                                      UGANDA INTER-AGENCY COUNTRY REPORT | Executive summary                            iii
of-school children, as basic literacy skills alone are less and less an adequate skills
floor for successful entry into the labour market.
10. Econometric evidence9 points to some of the factors influencing household
decisions to involve their children in work or school:
     Household wealth. Children from poorest households are more than eight
      percentage points less likely to go to school exclusively and almost three
      percentage points more likely to participate in employment exclusively
      compared to children from richest households. The results underscore that
      children’s earnings or productivity can play an important role in household
      survival strategies among low-income families in Uganda.
     Household ownership of livestock. Children belonging to household owning
      animals are more likely to be in employment and less likely to be exclusively
      attending school. One reason for this is that when a household owns livestock
      there is an increase in the demand for labour within the family unit,
      outweighing the income effect associated with livestock ownership.
     Household head education. Higher household education levels make it more
      likely that a child attends school and less likely that he or she is in employment.
     Internal migrants.10 Migration has a negative impact on children’s time use.
      Migrant children aged 6-13 years are about four percentage points less likely to
      attend school than non-migrant children and at the same time are about two
      percentage points more likely than non-migrant children to work in
      employment.
     Illness of mother and/or father. The parents’ temporary or permanent
      unavailability for work due to illness appears to push children out of school and
      into work to support the family income or alternatively to keep children from
      going to school to take care of the sick.
     Household composition. The presence of elderly household members
      significantly increases children’s risk of employment and denied schooling. This
      result suggests that in multi-generational households, the social vulnerabilities
      associated with aging (e.g., loss of the ability to earn income, declining physical
      health) can increase the social vulnerability of the household as a whole, and
      can force families to rely on child labour as a coping strategy.
     Access to basic services. Access to basic services has a dramatic impact on the
      likelihood of children working and attending school. Electricity access is
      particularly important in this regard. Access to electricity reduces the likelihood
      of involvement in employment among 6-13 year-olds by almost 22 percentage


9  For detailed information on the model, see Cigno, A.; Rosati, F.C. 2005, The economics of child labour (New York, NY,
Oxford University Press). The analysis carried out in this section is, obviously, conditioned by the information available.
Notwithstanding the extensiveness of the survey utilised, potentially important variables are missing. In particular, information on
the relative price of child work is difficult to capture: indicators for returns to education, work and household chores are not easily
available (for a discussion of the role played by unobservables refer to Deb and Rosati, Determinants of Child Labour and
School Attendance: The Role of Household Observables, December 2002).
10 Due to data limitations, migration refers to internal migration.




                                                      UGANDA INTER-AGENCY COUNTRY REPORT | Executive summary                              iv
         points while making it two percentage points more likely that a child attends
         school. Access to tap water is also very relevant. Children aged 6-13 years from
         households with tap water are five percentage points less likely to work and
         more than four percentage points more likely to attend school.
      Household employment benefits. Children in the 6-13 years age range belonging
       to household where the head is an employee with social security and/or
       medical benefits are almost six percentage points less likely to work in
       employment compared to children from other households.
   11. Parents’ decisions concerning whether to involve their children in school or
   work do not appear influenced by gender considerations in Uganda. Similarly,
   orphan status does not appear to affect the risk of employment or denial of
   education when other child-, household- and community-related background
   characteristics are controlled for.


Child labour

   12. . Child labour is a narrower concept than children’s employment or work, and
   refers to work that is injurious, negative or undesirable to children as set out in
   national legislation and international labour standards.11 Lower-bound estimates of
   child labour based on national child labour legislation12 suggest that child labour is
   very common in Uganda. Some of 1.5 million children below the age of 12 years are
   in employment, 500,000 children aged 12-13 years work in excess of 14 hours
   and/or are in hazardous work and one million children aged 14-17 years are in
   hazardous work. Summing these three groups yields a total of almost three million
   children aged 5-17 years in child labour, accounting for more than 24 percent of all
   children in this age range.




   11Three main international conventions – the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), ILO Convention No. 182 (Worst
   Forms) and ILO Convention No. 138 (Minimum Age) – define child labour and provide a framework for efforts against it.
    And following the global guidelines for child labour measurement (Global guidelines for child labour statistics are set out in
   12

   Resolution II (2008) of the Eighteenth International Conference of Child Labour Statisticians (ICLS)).




                                                       UGANDA INTER-AGENCY COUNTRY REPORT | Executive summary                        v
Table 2. Lower-bound estimate of child labour involvement, based on national legislation
                                                                               (b)
                                          (a)                                                                   (c)                              (a)&(b)&(c)
                                                                 children aged 12-13 years
                              Children aged 5-11 years in                                           Children aged 14-17 years                Total in child labour,
Background                                                       not in “light work” and/or in
                                   economic activity(i)                                                in hazardous work(iii)                    5-17 years
characteristics                                                       hazardous work (ii)
                              % of total age                     % of total age                     % of total age                    % of total age
                                                     No.                                No.                               No.                                  No.
                                 group                              group                              group                             group
                Male               22.0           734,115             24.2           247,833             30.9           534,411            24.9            1,516,358
Sex
                Female             21.5           715,722             22.6           244,409             28.4           474,889            23.6            1,435,020
                Urban               7.1            60,658             11.2            30,066             19.6           97,484             11.6              188,207
Residence
                Rural              23.9          1,389,179            25.2           462,176             31.4           911,816            26.2            2,763,171
Region          Kampala             1.8            4,085               4.7            2,871              18.8            24,202             7.5              31,159
                Central            34.3           458,613             22.8            99,171             29.8           228,487            31.0              786,271
                Eastern            21.1           431,839             19.1           120,306             22.8           227,303            21.2              779,447
                Northern           13.9           184,923             21.1            88,746             27.5           164,861            18.6              438,530
                Western            21.5           370,377             32.4           181,148             40.2           364,447            28.7              915,971
Total                              21.7          1,449,837            23.4           492,242             29.7          1,009,300           24.2            2,951,378
Notes: (i) National child labour legislation prohibits the employment of children under the age of 12 years; (ii) Includes 12-13 year-olds working over 14 hours per week
(not in “light work”) and children in this age range exposed to hazardous conditions irrespective of working hours; and (iii) Includes 14-17 year-olds working over 43 hours
per week and children in this age group exposed to hazardous conditions irrespective of working hours. The hazardous conditions include: carrying heavy loads; work
with dangerous or heavy machinery; work in dust or smoke environment; work with fire and gas; exposition at work to loud noise or vibration, work with dangerous tools;
exposition at work to snake and poisonous insect bites; work with chemicals; work in extreme temperatures or humidity; underground work; work in the
water/lake/pond/river; workplace too dark or confined; work with explosives; work with lack of ventilation; work at heights and work during night.
Source: UCW calculations based on Uganda Labour Force and Child Activities Survey (NLF&CAS) 2011/2012




                   Youth employment outcomes (age 18-30)
                   13. Ugandan young people face a number of challenges entering the labour market.
                   Levels of human capital remain low for many Ugandan young people, compromising
                   their future prospects. A high proportion of urban youth are not in education,
                   employment or training (NEET) and therefore at risk of social marginalisation.
                   Unemployment is high in urban areas and in the capital Kampala, particularly when
                   discouraged workers are taken into account. Unemployment spells are very long for
                   many youth without jobs, leading to the risk of skill depreciation and making it more
                   difficult to ultimately find work. Youth employment is dominated by poor quality
                   unremunerated work concentrated in the agriculture sector. Almost all youth jobs
                   are in the informal sector and therefore have limited access to social or job security.
                   Educated young people face greater difficulty securing jobs, but the quality of the
                   jobs they eventually do secure is typically better.
                   14. Labour force participation is very high among Ugandan youth and education
                   participation is relatively low. More than four of every five 18-30 year-olds are
                   economically active. Among this group, most (68 percent of all youth) are in
                   employment exclusively while percent are attending school; only a relatively small
                   proportion continues their education while working (11 percent) and an even
                   smaller share (three percent) is unemployed.




                                                                               UGANDA INTER-AGENCY COUNTRY REPORT | Executive summary                                          vi
            15. While labour force participation is similar male and female youth, female youth
            are more likely to leave school earlier and to be engaged in household chores. Those
            female youth who are economically active face a higher unemployment rate than
            their male peers. Gender differences increase when taking into consideration
            discouraged workers.


Table 3. Aggregate labour market indicators, persons aged 18-30 years, by residence, sex, age range and migration status
                                                                                                                                                             Relaxed
                                           Labour mkt.         Education       Inactive and out                       Employment       Unemployment       unemployment
Population category                                                                                   NEET(a)
                                           participation      participation      of education                             rate              rate              rate(b)
                                                                                                     (% pop.)
                                             (% pop.)           (% pop.)           (% pop.)                            (% active)        (% active)        (% expanded
                                                                                                                                                              active)
Residence              Urban                   71.4               24.2              12.0               18.5               88.4              11.6               19.4
                       Rural                   84.3               22.2               5.8                7.0               98.4               1.6                3.2
Sex                    Male                    83.5               29.0               3.3                5.2               97.3               2.7                4.5
                       Female                  79.8               17.2              10.4               13.2               95.7               4.3                8.2
Age range              18-24                   74.4               35.5               7.5                9.8               95.9               4.1                7.8
                       25-30                   91.2               5.0                6.5                9.0               97.1               2.9                5.0
Migration status       Migrated                83.4               12.3               9.6               14.7               93.1               6.9               11.7
                       Not migrated            81.1               25.1               6.5                8.2               97.3               2.7                5.1
Region                 Kampala                 73.2               20.7              12.3               21.7               84.3              15.7               23.9
                       Central                 81.1               19.7               8.8               11.8               95.5               4.5                9.4
                       Eastern                 81.1               28.0               7.1                8.9               97.4               2.6                5.6
                       Northern                81.3               20.1               6.8                8.4               97.6               2.4                4.3
                       Western                 84.8               22.1               4.5                5.4               98.7               1.3                1.6
Total                                          81.5               22.6               7.1                9.5               96.5               3.5                6.5
Notes: (a) NEET refers to youth who are not in education or employment. It is a measure that therefore reflects both youth who are inactive and out of education as well
as youth who are unemployed; (b) Relaxed unemployment considers both unemployed workers and all individuals who are not working and are available for work. The
relaxed unemployment rate is the sum of unemployed workers and not working individuals available for work expressed as a perc entage of the expanded active
population. The expanded active population, in turn, comprises not working individuals available to work and the active population.
Source: UCW calculations based on Uganda Labour Force and Child Activities Survey (NLF&CAS) 2011/2012


            16. Trends over the course of the last six years indicate that young people are staying
            in school longer. Between 2006 and 2012, school attendance increased by eight
            percentage points and labour force participation decreased by four percentage
            points.
            17. A number of factors appear to influence finding a job upon leaving education. A
            regression model was estimated to assess the link between the probability of youth
            employment and a set of individual and household characteristics. Key results are
            summarised below.
                         Youth age, sex and marital status. The probability of employment rises with
                          age. Female youth have a lower probability of employment, owing to the
                          fact that many more female youth transition from education to domestic
                          work in their own homes while more male youth transition from education
                          to the labour force. Married youth are more likely overall to be employed,
                          but the opposite pattern prevails for married female youth. Again, the result
                          reflects the culturally-driven tendency for females to remain at home to
                          undertake domestic responsibilities.
                         Place of residence. Youth living in urban areas are less likely than their rural
                          counterparts to be employed, again reflecting underlying differences in the
                          rural and urban labour markets for youth. However, it is worth recalling


                                                                         UGANDA INTER-AGENCY COUNTRY REPORT | Executive summary                                            vii
            that in rural areas one major issue is underemployment, which is not
            captured by the regression model.
        Household composition. Young persons with more 6-13 year-old siblings are
         more likely to work. These results suggest that young persons play an
         important role in helping maintain dependent children within their
         households.
        Migration status. Migrant status does not have a significant impact on the
         likelihood of employment when other individual and household factors are
         controlled for.
        Education level. Higher education levels do not increase the probability of
         employment. However, although more educated youths may face more
         problems securing jobs, the quality of their jobs is likely to be better.
        Vocational training. Youths who have learned a trade or technical skill at a
         vocational school/course (or from a friend or family member or from an
         NGO or community organization) are more likely to be employed.
        Local labour demand. Local labour demand has a strong positive impact on
         the chances of youth securing employment, underscoring that youth
         employment is driven in important part by the state of the broader labour
         market. Labour supply, on the other hand does not appear to have a
         significant impact on the likelihood of youth employment.
18. About four percent of young people in the labour force are without jobs. But this
low overall unemployment rate disguises important differences by sex and
residence. Unemployment rates are much higher in urban areas than in rural areas
– almost 12 percent versus two percent. In the capital city Kampala the
unemployment rate is as high as 16 percent, while in other regions it varies from
five percent in the Central region to one percent in the Western region. Within
urban areas, the female youth unemployment rate is ten percentage points higher
than that of males in the same age range. Levels of “relaxed” unemployment, which
also include discouraged workers are much higher.13 The relaxed unemployment
rate stands at almost seven percent for the 18-30 years population as a whole,
rising to 24 percent in the capital city of Kampala and to 27 percent for females in
urban areas.
19. A variety of measures suggest that the quality of jobs held by Ugandan young
people is generally low. Youth underemployment, sometimes referred to as “hidden
unemployment”, affects 12 percent of employed youth in Uganda.14 Only about one

13The “relaxed” youth unemployment rate is a more complete measure of the youth unemployment problem because it also
captures discouraged workers, i.e. those available to work but who have given up actively seeking work. Relaxed
unemployment considers both unemployed workers and all individuals who are not working, but would accept a job if offered.
The relaxed unemployment rate is the sum of unemployed workers and not working individuals available to work expressed as a
percentage of the expanded active population. The expanded active population, in turn, comprises inactive individuals available
to work and the active population.

14 A person is considered in a situation of under-employment, in turn, if he or she works less than 40 hours a week and would
like to work more hours than he or she actually does




                                                   UGANDA INTER-AGENCY COUNTRY REPORT | Executive summary                         viii
in five rural youth work off the farm. A wide body of evidence indicates that the
productivity and profitability in non-farm enterprises is generally better than in the
farm sector, as are average wages and working conditions. Finally, 98 percent of all
youth jobs are informal in nature.15 The formality of employment is perhaps the
best proxy for job quality, associated with more job stability, higher income and
access to job benefits.
20. The timing and length of youth transitions to working life vary considerably. Two-
thirds of youth that have transited to a first job found that first job immediately,
with no intervening period of unemployment, inactivity or involvement in
household chores. This share is third-highest of the seven SSA countries where data
are available. This high share of “direct transiters” should not, however, be
interpreted as positive per se, as it is likely driven in important part by poverty and
by the consequent inability of many young persons to “afford” a period of
unemployment or inactivity. The average transition time is 31 months for those who
do not find a job immediately upon leaving school, 3rd longest of the seven
countries included. The variation around this mean, however, is large. The duration
for the 25th percentile of the distribution is eight months but rises to 37 months for
the 75th percentile.
21. Levels of human capital remain low for many Ugandan young people,
compromising their future prospects. Almost 13 percent of young people not
currently in education have no schooling and 56 percent have primary education or
less. Female youth are particularly disadvantaged in this regard – the share of
female youth with no education is eight percent higher than the share of male
youth. Low human capital is more pronounced in rural areas, where 15 percent of
youth not currently in education have no schooling and 62 percent have primary
education or less. A number of regions also lag behind national averages in this
regard. In the Northern region, for example, one quarter of all youth have no
education.
22. More educated young people appear to face greater initial difficulty securing
jobs but ultimately have a better chance of securing quality employment.
Unemployment is highest among youth with the most education, a reflection in part
of mismatches between the skills produced by the education system and those
needed in the labour market, and of the need for better mechanisms for bringing
together young skilled job seekers and employers. Level of education is nonetheless
clearly linked with job quality. The likelihood of paid work and of work in the tertiary
sector both rises consistently with more education. Successive levels of educational
attainment are also associated with higher earnings. The moves from primary to
secondary and from completed secondary to tertiary education are associated with
especially large jumps in earnings. More educated youth are more likely to enjoy



15Informality is defined as including unpaid family workers, employees with no social security, paid leave or paid sick leave in
case of illness or injury. This category also includes self-employed whose business is not registered for income tax and is not
organized in the form of an incorporated enterprise.




                                                    UGANDA INTER-AGENCY COUNTRY REPORT | Executive summary                         ix
           formal sector employment, although even youth with more than secondary
           education are heavily concentrated in the informal sector.




           Policy priorities for addressing child labour and youth employment
           concerns

           23. Child labour and youth employment are closely linked, underscoring the
           importance of addressing the two issues hand in hand, following a lifecycle
           approach. The figure below illustrates key components of an integrated response to
           child labour and youth employment concerns. A set of child-centred policies is
           needed to promote schooling as an alternative to child labour, and, following from
           this, to ensure that children enter adolescence with the basic and life skills needed
           for further learning and practical living. This foundation is in turn crucial to the
           success of active labour market policies for promoting improved youth employment
           outcomes, and to ensuring that youth successfully transition from education into
           decent work in the labour market. This causal chain also works in the opposite
           direction: successful youth labour market outcomes can increase household
           incentives to invest in children’s education earlier in the lifecycle. The specific set of
           policy priorities for responding to child labour and to youth labour market concerns
           is discussed below.


Figure 1. An integrated response to child labour and youth employment problems

                                                           Successful youth labour market outcomes increase household
                                                          incentives to invest in children’s education earlier in the lifecycle


  Policies for promoting schooling                                       Policies for promoting improved
    as alternative to child labour                                        youth labour market outcomes


  Improving school access and                                           Skills development and technical
   quality                                                                and vocational education activities
  Extending social protection                                            to address job-relevant skills
                                            CHILDREN ENTER                constraints
  Awareness raising and social            ADOLESCENCE WITH
                                                                                                                          YOUTH SUCCESSFULLY
   mobilisation to build societal                                        Entrepreneurial support to address                TRANSITION FROM
                                           THE BASIC AND LIFE             constraints to business start-up and
   consensus against CL                                                                                                      EDUCATION INTO
                                           SKILLS NEEDED FOR              self-employment
  Strengthening policy and legislative                                                                                    DECENT WORK IN THE
                                           FURTHER LEARNING
   frameworks as a foundation for                                        Job search support                                 LABOUR MARKET
                                          AND PRACTICAL LIVING
   action                                                                Public works programmes to help
  Strengthening child labour                                             youth gain an initial foothold in the
   monitoring and inspections                                             labour market




                                                         UGANDA INTER-AGENCY COUNTRY REPORT | Executive summary                                 x
Policy priorities for addressing child labour
24. Five policy areas are especially relevant as part of an integrated response to
child labour – education and second chance learning, social protection, public
awareness, social mobilisation and inspections and monitoring – building on the
foundation provided by adequate political commitment and institutional capacity.
These policy areas are discussed in more detail below.


Education and second chance learning
            Promote early childhood development (ECD). Evidence from a range of
             developing countries suggests that early childhood education programmes
             can promote learning readiness, increase school enrolment and school
             survival, and help children away from work in their early years. In Uganda,
             expanding the coverage of ECD programmes remains an important
             challenge, particularly among children from poor households. While the
             government’s release of a National Integrated Early Childhood
             Development Policy (IECD) is a positive step, there is need for an
             accompanying action plan for resource mobilisation and for promoting
             implementation.
            Promote equal access to education. Continued efforts are needed to
             remove access barriers to schooling for all children, within the framework
             provided by the National Development Plan16 and the Education Sector
             Strategic Plan.17     Increasing school coverage remains a challenge,
             particularly in outlying areas and at the secondary level. Many rural
             secondary schools also lack basic school facilities such as desks,
             blackboards, chairs, drinking water, and toilet facilities. Among the other
             factors which hinder children’s access to and participation in education are
             the direct costs that parents must bear in the form of non-tuition dues and
             levies,18 school books, uniforms and other school items.
            Address the quality of education. There are concerns regarding the declining
             quality of education owing, inter alia, to large class sizes, teacher
             absenteeism and lack of appropriate skills by teachers particularly in rural
             areas. Improving quality education in Uganda will entail introducing reforms
             that gradually reduce large class sizes and improve teacher-pupil ratios,
             teacher training to strengthen their knowledge and skills and introducing
             methods of learning that encourage questioning and children’s
             participation. Again, these reforms are outlined in the government plans
             and the priority in moving forward is to effectively implement them across
             the education system.


16   NDP, 2010/2011-2014/15.
17   ESSP, 2004/05-2014/2015.
18   UNESCO 2005 , UBOS 2006a




                                      UGANDA INTER-AGENCY COUNTRY REPORT | Executive summary   xi
       Support second chance learning opportunities through transitional
        education. “Second chance” policies are needed to reach former working
        children and other out-of-school children with educational opportunities as
        part of broader efforts towards their social reintegration. Existing second
        chance programmes, including the Alternative Basic Education for Karamoja
        (ABEK) programme, the Basic Education for Urban Poor Areas (BEUPA)
        programme and the Child Centred Alternative Non-formal Community-
        based Education (CHANCE), are limited in coverage, lack coordination and
        are not uniformly successful in terms of learning outcomes. There is a clear
        need for an expanded national second chance education strategy for
        children focused on transitional education.


Social protection
25. The importance of social protection in reducing child labour is well-established.
Social protection instruments serve to prevent vulnerable households from having
to resort to child labour as a buffer against poverty and negative shocks. The
government has prioritized social protection expansion and in this context initiated
a social protection programme known as the Social Assistance Grants for
Empowerment (SAGE) in 2011. SAGE, comprised of a Senior Citizens Grant and
Vulnerable Families Grant, is being piloted in 14 districts. A recent evaluation of
SAGE indicates that it is linked to improved household livelihoods and increased
school enrolment. The programme offers an important basis for extending the
social protection floor available to vulnerable households in the country.


Public awareness
26. Awareness raising is needed as part of efforts to build a broad consensus for
change. At present, public awareness about what constitutes child labour and its
cost to children and society remains limited in Uganda. Communication efforts are
needed at both national and local levels. A mix of conventional (e.g., radio,
television and print media) as well as of non-conventional communication channels
(e.g., religious leaders, school teachers, community theatre, health care workers
outreach) is important in order to achieving maximum outreach. Baseline
information on local knowledge and cultural attitudes towards child labour is
needed to tailor communication messages, and to evaluation changes in awareness
and attitudes following communication activities.


Social mobilisation
27. Social mobilisation is critical to engaging a broad range of social actors in efforts
against child labour. Social actors, including, for example, NGOs, faith-based
organisations, teachers’ organizations, the mass media, trade unions, employers’
organizations, also have important roles to play in a broader societal effort against
child labour. Care providers in direct contact with children, including teachers and
health workers, are in an especially good position to identify and refer child



                                   UGANDA INTER-AGENCY COUNTRY REPORT | Executive summary   xii
labourers, and therefore constitute particularly important allies in protecting
children from child labour


Labour inspections and monitoring
28. While the Employment Act No.6 (2006) requires districts to appoint labour
officers to provide technical advice to employers, the government’s actual capacity
to monitor formal workplaces is limited, and the informal sector of the economy is
largely outside formal inspection regimes. The current capacity for labour
inspection and child labour follow-up therefore needs to be significantly
strengthened, through both additional training and additional manpower, so that
district labour officers and other specialised personnel can effectively enforce
labour legislation and workplace safety standards, and follow-up on child labour
infractions. Community monitoring systems also have an important role to play.
These systems involve labour officers joining hands with local groups (e.g.,
community volunteers, religious leaders, women and youth groups, teachers,
workers, employers, local leaders and district staff) to form broad-based child
labour monitoring systems at the local level.


Political commitment
29. A political commitment at all levels is also needed to ensure that child labour
reduction elimination occupies a prominent place in the national development
agenda and is accorded adequate budgetary resources. In this context, the
government released a National Child Labour Policy in 2006 and a National Action
Plan for the Elimination of Child Labour 2012/13-2016/17. These documents, the
product of consultations with NGOs, government institutions and other
stakeholders, reflect the government commitment to eliminating child labour and
provide a framework for national efforts towards this goal. The total budget for the
NAP is 510.1 billion Ugandan Shillings for five years. However, limited funding from
the government and lack of a clear resource mobilization strategy undermines its
effective implementation.


Institutional capacity
30. While the National Child Labour Policy, the National Action Plan and other
development plans provide solid bases for action, these frameworks are unlikely to
be implemented effectively in the face of capacity constraints. Institutions require
strengthening in a number of areas, including using data for strategic planning,
policy and programme design, programme monitoring and evaluation, programme
coordination, and the mainstreaming of child labour in broader development plans
and programmes. Local governments are charged with initiating and implementing
programmes for preventing child labour, and effectively building their capacity to
play this role is therefore especially important to broader efforts against child




                                 UGANDA INTER-AGENCY COUNTRY REPORT | Executive summary   xiii
labour. Child labour committees exist in some districts, although with limited
functionality.19 Most districts, however, have not integrated child labour concerns in
their development plans and lack the financial and human resource capacity to
effectively do so.


Policy priorities for addressing youth employment concerns
31. The many challenges facing Ugandan young people entering the labour market
point to the need for active labour market policies aimed at improving youth labour
market outcomes, building on the knowledge foundation acquired during childhood
through improved basic education and preventing child labour. Four policy pillars
are particularly relevant in this context, two addressing supply-side constraints to
employment arising from inadequate or mismatched job skills or inadequate labour
market information, and two addressing demand-side constraints to employment
arising from low labour demand and limited entrepreneurial opportunities. Active
labour market policies are designed to improve labour market outcomes for young
people within existing institutional and macro-economic constraints; the broader
structural economic reforms needed to reduce youth unemployment in the long
run are beyond the scope of this Report.
32. It is worth highlighting that the Government is developing a National Action Plan
(NAP) for Youth Employment within the overall framework of the National
Employment Policy. However, the draft NAP has not been finalized and launched by
the government, thus hindering effective planning, implementation and
coordination of youth employment initiatives. Limited government commitment to
funding youth employment activities is another key barrier to realizing the goal of
youth employment in Uganda.



Skills development
33. Continued investment is needed in strengthening the capacity of the business
technical vocational education and training (BTVET) system to effectively meet the
skills requirements of Ugandan young people. The BTVET system is hampered by
inadequate resources to provide the training most in demand by the labour market.
Training consequently often focuses on low-cost skills mismatched to current and
emerging labour market needs.20 Indeed, less than 40 percent of large and medium
firms regard courses offered by BTVET institutions as relevant. 21 The BTVET system
also has insufficient programmes for agri-business development and informal sector
employment, the two most important sub-sectors of the Ugandan labour market for

19Rakai, Wakiso, Mbale were supported by ILO-IPEC in 2012 and integrated child labour concerns in the district development
plan and budgets. Lira district was supported by International Rescue Committee to integrate child labour concerns in the district
development plan and budget (ILO-IPEC 2012).
20   IYF, 2011.
21   MoES, 2011.




                                                    UGANDA INTER-AGENCY COUNTRY REPORT | Executive summary                           xiv
the foreseeable future. Insufficient engagement of employers, a rigid supply
structure in the formal BTVET provider system and the lack of a systematic labour
market information system are among the major challenges to increasing the
demand-responsiveness of the BTVET system. The BTVET Strategic Plan (2011-2020)
has prioritized improving youth employability by increasing the quality of skills
provision. Ensuring the effective implementation of the Plan will therefore be
critical to progress moving forward.


Job search support
34. One of the key challenges hindering effective transition of youth to the labour
market is lack of labour market information. Labour market information is currently
not systematically and regularly collected in Uganda. Available information is scarce
and sketchy, especially on skill requirements. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and
Social Development (MGLSD) runs a manual labour market information system, but
this system is not widely used or easily accessed by youth. The National
Employment Policy contains plans to strengthen the capacity of MGLSD as the
national and regional depository for labour and employment management
information, but does not make clear how in practice labour market information will
be shared with the job seekers. This points to the need for a full-fledged
employment agency operated by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social
Development responsible for providing timely and accurate information to job
seekers about the available employment opportunities and the skills required. The
agency would help increase the quantity and quality of job matches, reduce the
spells and duration of unemployment and generally increase the efficiency of the
labour market. Such an employment agency should be part of a broader package of
employment services, guidance and career advice to help students, first job seekers
and unemployed young people to make informed choices about their education and
working lives.


Public works programmes
35. The large number of youth not in education, employment or training (NEET)
points to the need for demand-side measures to improve employment
opportunities. Labour-intensive public works programmes targeting young persons
represent one important policy option in this context. Such programmes can
provide both qualified and unqualified young people with an entry point into the
labour market within broader efforts to reduce poverty and develop rural services
infrastructure. Experience from public works programmes targeting youth outside
Uganda indicate that adding mandatory technical, behavioural skills, financial
literacy, or job search training to the public works initiatives can further increase
their impact. There is lack of collaboration between Ministry of Gender, Labour and
Social Development and Ministry of Transport and other ministries that implement
public works programmes, meaning the potential of public works as a targeted
employment measure for youth is under-exploited in Uganda. This is a policy area
that merits further exploration within the context of the National Employment
Policy and the draft National Action Plan (NAP) for Youth Employment.


                                  UGANDA INTER-AGENCY COUNTRY REPORT | Executive summary   xv
Youth entrepreneurship and self-employment
36. Youth entrepreneurship represents an important strategy for expanding youth
employment opportunities. A lack of adequate entrepreneurship skills and
experience combined with poor access to financial services hinder youth
entrepreneurship and self-employment. As a result, the role of youth entrepreneurs
in the development of small and medium enterprises (SMEs) has thus far been
limited in Uganda. Rather, self-employed youth are concentrated in low-
productivity and survival-type activities in the informal economy. Many policy
measures for expanding entrepreneurial opportunities for young people in Uganda
are spelled out in the National Employment Policy (NEP) and the draft National
Action Plan (NAP) for Youth Employment. The NEP calls for support to young
people, particularly female youth, to make transition from informal to formal
employment through improved access to training, business development services,
and access to low interest microfinance. The government has also made available a
venture capital fund of Uganda Shillings 25 Billion to support growth of viable and
sustainable small and medium enterprises by the youth in the private sector. In
addition, the Youth Entrepreneurship Facility (YEF),22 supports small-scale youth
entrepreneurship development projects implemented by youth-led organizations.
These efforts provide an important basis for scaled-up efforts aimed at providing
entrepreneurship opportunities for youth.




22The Youth Entrepreneurship Facility is a three-year initiative undertaken with the support of the Africa Commission and the
Youth Employment Network (YEN).




                                                   UGANDA INTER-AGENCY COUNTRY REPORT | Executive summary                       xvi
