                                                                                        103796

    WORK VALUES IN WESTERN AND EASTERN EUROPE



                                              By



                                       Benno Torgler ∗




Abstract:       The paper reports on work values in Europe. At the country level we find that
                job satisfaction is related to lower working hours, higher well-being, and a
                higher GDP per capita. Moving to the micro level, we turn our attention from
                job satisfaction to analyse empirically work centrality and work value
                dimensions (without exploring empirically job satisfaction) related to
                intrinsic and extrinsic values, power and social elements. The results indicate
                substantial differences between Eastern and Western Europe. Socio-
                demographic      factors,   education,   income,    religiosity   and   religious
                denomination are significant influences. We find additional differences
                between Eastern and Western Europe regarding work-leisure and work-
                family centrality that could be driven by institutional conditions.
                Furthermore, hierarchical cluster analyses report further levels of
                dissimilarity among European countries.



JEL Classification:      P20, D10, J28, J17, J22

Keywords:                Work values, job satisfaction, work-leisure relationship, work-
                         family centrality, Eastern Europe, Western Europe



∗
  Benno Torgler, The School of Economics and Finance, Queensland University of Technology, GPO
Box 2434, Brisbane, QLD 4001, Australia, e-mail: benno.torgler@qut.edu.au. He is also a research
fellows of CREMA – Center for Research in Economics, Management and the Arts, Switzerland and
associated with CESifo in Germany. This is a background paper for a forthcoming World Bank report
entitled “Golden Growth: Restoring the Lustre of the European Economic Model”.


                                                   1
                                    I.       INTRODUCTION



Humans spend a large proportion of their life-time at ‘work’, and the construct of

‘work’ plays a central role in today’s society (see, e.g., Hochschild 1997). In fact,

people spend (on average) around a quarter of their lives at work, which makes

understanding well-being in the workplace imperative (Blanchflower and Oswald

1999). It has been a while since Marx argued that the circumstances of work are the

key sources of well- and ill-being (Lane 1998), yet only a decade ago Blanchflower

and Oswald (1999) noted that “the study by labor economists of job satisfaction is still

in its infancy. This may be, in part, because economists are suspicious of the

usefulness of data on reported well-being. However, it is known that satisfaction

levels are strongly correlated with observable phenomena (such as quit behaviour)”

(p. 1). Similarly, Hamermesh (2001) argue that although “other social scientists have

paid attention to job satisfaction since the early twentieth century, economists have

traditionally been loath to deal with subjective outcomes describing work” (p. 2).

Performance of workers is often difficult to measure and therefore indirect measures

such as job satisfaction can provide valuable tools for decision makers in industry and

society (Sousa-Poza and Sousa-Poza 2000). Economists have suggested work

satisfaction to be sub-utility function (s) in an overall utility function u(s, l), where l is

utility from other areas of life (see, e.g., Clark 1997, Clark and Oswald 1996). Clark

(1997) cites work by Argyle (1989) which establishes job satisfaction as one of the

three most important predictors of overall well-being besides marriage and family

satisfaction (p. 343). The correlation between job satisfaction 1 and happiness 2 is


1
 Overall, how satisfied or dissatisfied are you with your job? (1=dissatisfied, 10=satisfied).
2
 Taking all things together, would you say you are: very happy, quite happy, not very happy, not at all
happy. Our focus here is on the share of people stating that they are very happy.

                                                       2
presented in Figure 1, using data from the World Values Survey 3 focusing on 26

countries (EU-15, EU New Member States, EU Accession countries (Albania, the

Former Yugoslavia, and Turkey), and Ukraine as an Eastern Partnership Countries).

The results indicate a relatively strong positive correlation between happiness and job

satisfaction (Pearson r=0.48). If we drop Turkey (outlier), the correlation increases

considerably to 0.71. Moreover, job satisfaction levels seem remarkably high for

Western European countries compared with Eastern European countries.

           Hamermesh (2001) stresses that only “one measure, the satisfaction that

workers derive from their jobs, might be viewed as reflecting how they react to the

entire panoply         of job characteristics” (p. 2). It has also been argued that job

satisfaction has decreased over time, highlighting the need for a better understanding

of work values (Blanchflower and Oswald 1999, Rose 2005). Previous research in the

US has discovered that the downward trend in job satisfaction is not due to the falling

proportion of union representation or because of perceived decreases in job security

(Blanchflower and Oswald 1999). Green and Tsitsianis (2005, p. 402) also point out

that any “decline within a modern European nation might be regarded as surprising

for an affluent economy with rising real wages. The resolution to this paradox might

reside in changing aspects of jobs, whose effect on job satisfaction could have

outweighed any beneficial effects of rising wages”. The authors refer to two major

structural changes in the industrialized economies: intensification of global

competition and the diffusion of computer-based technologies among all sectors.

Similarly, other researchers have argued that the world of work is rapidly changing

due to global competition, high pace innovations, and the tendency towards assigning

people to projects rather than to jobs. This makes work more demanding and is


3
    Country values based on averages using the first four waves.

                                                         3
compounded by the advent of internet and computer-based work, blurring the

boundary between work and private life (van Beek et al. 2011).



                        Figure 1: Happiness and Job Satisfaction


                                                                              Ireland
                                                                    Netherlands
          .4




                                                                       Belgium            Denmark
                                                                                        Sweden
               Turkey                                               Luxembourg
          .3




                                           France
                                                                    Finland
          .2




                                                                       Spain
                                           Greece

                                                          Italy Poland
                                                                Portugal
                                                  Hungary
                                                  Slovenia
                                               Serbia and Montenegro
                                     Croatia
          .1




                                 Bulgaria           Czech Republic
                                    Estonia            Slovakia               Albania
                                 Latvia                          Ukraine
                                             Lithuania

                                 Romania
          0




                6          6.5              7              7.5                     8             8.5
                                           Job satisfaction

                          Rate being very happy                     Fitted values




Clark (1997) emphasizes that an understanding of job satisfaction provides “an

additional route towards the understanding of certain important labour market

behaviours” (p. 344). He declares that job satisfaction is “as close as we are likely to

come to a proxy measure of utility at work, upon which a great deal of

microeconomics is based” (p. 344). Classical factors more frequently used by

economists (such as wages) provide only one dimension in the process of work

judgement and work selection, and in understanding how a workforce increases

productivity and reduces shirking and absenteeism (Jürges 2003).

       In the last few decades, the exploration of job satisfaction and work values has

become a very important research agenda across several fields; attracting the attention

of psychology, economics, industrial relations, and management. This increased

                                                       4
interest is due to the high degree of correlation with job performance, meaning that

job satisfaction and work values are crucial factors in the success of a firm (Judge et

al. 2001). Previous research has, for example, shown a strong link between low levels

of job satisfaction and quitting behaviour, absenteeism and lower work performance

(Clark et al. 1998, Drago and Wooden 1992, Freeman 1978, Gordon and Denisi 1995,

Judge et al. 2001). Hamermesh (2001, p. 3) stresses that one “might even reasonably

imagine that the fluctuations in the “animal spirits” that are a major Keynesian

motivation for business cycles arise in part from variations in workers’ perceptions of

their well-being. Presumably, more satisfied workers who are secure in their jobs have

a reduced motive to undertake precautionary saving”. The management literature has

provided a long time ago evidence that individual job satisfaction and job

performance are positively correlated (for a meta-study see Petty et al. 1984). The

Figures 2 and 3 show a positive relationship between job satisfaction and GDP per

capita using data from two different World Values Survey waves (second and fourth

wave). In both cases we observe a strong positive correlation between GDP per capita

and job satisfaction (Figure 2: 0.54; Figure 3: 0.67).




                                               5
                       Figure 2: Job Satisfaction and GDP per Capita in 1990


     40000


                                                                         JAPAN       SWITZERLAND
     30000




                                                                           NORWAY
                                                                              UNITED STATES
                                                                               ICELAND
                                                                                         DENMARK
                                                                                 SWEDEN
     20000




                                                           FINLAND CANADA
                                FRANCE      UNITED KINGDOM                 AUSTRIA
                                           GERMANY     NETHERLANDS  BELGIUM
                                                        ITALY
                                                                              IRELAND
     10000




                                                   SPAIN
                                                     PORTUGAL
                                                    SLOVENIA
                                KOREA, REPUBLIC OF        ARGENTINA                                MALTA
                                              CZECH REPUBLIC     MEXICO
                              LATVIA       LITHUANIA   HUNGARY
                                                   SLOVAKIA
                                     ESTONIA
                         RUSSIA ROMANIA                         CHILE
                       BULGARIA              SOUTH AFRICA    BRAZIL POLAND
                                       CHINA INDIA         NIGERIA
     0




                 6             6.5              7              7.5                    8               8.5
                                              Job satisfaction (mean)

                        GDP per capita (constant 2000 US$)                           Fitted values




                       Figure 3: Job Satisfaction and GDP per capita in 2000
60000




                                                                 LUXEMBOURG
40000




                                                                             ICELAND
                                                                                      DENMARK
                                                               SWEDEN
                                                         UNITED KINGDOM    IRELAND
                                                                       FINLAND AUSTRIA
20000




                                                      FRANCE                  GERMANY
                                                          NETHERLANDS
                                                                         BELGIUM
                                                              ITALY
                                                     GREECE     SPAIN
                                                                    PORTUGAL               MALTA
                                                            SLOVENIA
                                                                    CZECH REPUBLIC
                                    TURKEY POLANDESTONIAHUNGARY
                     BELARUS                SLOVAKIA      LITHUANIA
                               UKRAINE         LATVIA CROATIA    BULGARIA
0




                                      RUSSIA    ROMANIA
-20000




             5                       6                  7                         8                         9
                                             Job satisfaction (mean)

                       GDP per capita (constant 2000 US$)                             Fitted values




                                                             6
Wright (2006) provides an interesting overview on the emergence of job satisfaction

in organizational behaviour, citing work going back more than 80 years. He stresses:

“In any event, job satisfaction is, by far, the most frequently studied variable in

organizational research, with more than 10,000 studies published to date” (pp. 262-

263). However, while the literature on job satisfaction is extensive, the empirical

investigation on (other) work values has remained scarce in relative terms. These

other work values (such as intrinsic and extrinsic job factors or job centrality) have

primarily been explored as factors that influence job satisfaction rather than treating

them as endogenous or dependent factors. Taris and Feij (2001) provide a definition

of intrinsic and extrinsic work values: “Intrinsic work values refer to the degree to

which employees value immaterial aspects of their jobs that allow for self-expression

as important, for example, job variety and autonomy. Extrinsic work values refer to

the degree to which employees value material or instrumental work aspects, such as

salary and opportunity for promotion, as important” (p. 55). We will explore an

additional important element by including an analysis of social work values, which

can be defined as “the degree to which employees find it important having a good

relationship with their coworkers and supervisors” (p. 55).

   Moreover, because most studies are country specific, the literature would benefit

from more analyses using international data sets to improve the comparison between

countries. The available knowledge about Eastern European countries is particularly

limited, hence we apply a comparative approach to data on large set of European

countries in order to reduce these shortcomings.




                                              7
                      II.     IMPORTANCE OF WORK VALUES

Values play a central role in human behaviour, shaping norms, practices, heroes, and

symbols at the core of culture; influencing not only attitudes and perceptions, but also

choices. Values are internalized over a lifetime as individuals are socialized from a

young age within the context of a (national) culture, learning and adopting dominant

values (Hattrup et al. 2007). Roe and Ester (1999, p. 5) stress that “in modern

societies work values are typically considered as salient, basic, and influential…The

importance of the work role in many cultures makes work values into core values that

take a cardinal position in the overall pattern of values” (p. 5). The authors provide an

overview of research that has focused on the study of work values. Work centrality

describes the degree of the importance that work plays in a person’s life and work

ethics are often conceptually constructed on the belief that work is desirable and

rewarding in its own right (for a discussion see Hirschfeld and Feild 2000). The

history of work values or the history of comment on work values is a quite long one 4.

Work values have substantially changed over time; for example, work was not

portrayed as a joy in the Old Testament, but as an activity necessary to prevent

poverty and destitution (Hill 1996). Ancient Greeks or Romans viewed work as

dishonourable (Hill 1996). The ancient ideal was to attain self-sufficiency and

satisfaction with life, although there were some extreme philosophical views in

existence (for example, the Stoics valued work as a means to serve society). The same

holds true for medieval times, when work was basically seen as a punishment by God

for man’s original sin. Early Christian thought frowned upon an attachment to

physical things of the world, naming avarice or avaritia (striving for accumulation of

excessive wealth) as one of the “deadly sins” (Tambling 2004, Hill 1996). However,

4
 For a nice overview available online see Roger B. Hill (1996), History of Work Ethic at
www.coe.uga.edu/~rhill/workethic/hist.htm.

                                                      8
this attitude changed with the formation of monasteries and more importantly and

substantially with the Protestant reformers such as Luther, Calvin and Zwingli (for an

overview see Schaltegger and Torgler 2010). Lipset (1992) states: “The idea that

human beings should work hard because it is virtuous, or contributes to the common

good, or allows them to accumulate personal possessions and wealth is a relatively

recent phenomenon. Work is difficult, and the question is not why people are lazy or

why they goof off but why, in absence of compulsion, they work hard” (p. 45).

       In the European context, economists have focused their analyses on work hour

differences between the US and Europe. Alesina et al. (2005) note that some theorists

relate the increased working hours in the US to the long-standing cultural differences

possibly rooted in America’s puritan Calvinist heritage: “It is certainly true that New

England’s Puritan settlers avidly struck long-standing religious holidays off the

calendar (including Christmas) and thereby increased their total work days

significantly” (p. 46). However, they point out that Europeans worked longer hours

than Americans up until the late 1960s. They also report results indicating no real

correlation between the proportion of Protestants in a population and the average

hours of work across countries. Economists have made other attempts to solve the

puzzle of why work hour development differs over time between the US and Europe.

Blanchard (2004) asks the important questions: “Should we interpret the large

decrease in hours worked per capita in Europe as the result of preferences leading to

the choice of leisure over income as productivity increased? Or should we interpret it

instead as the result of increasing distortions, such as high taxes on work, an increase

in the minimum wage, forced early retirement programs and so on?” (p. 6). Various

factors have proved to be relevant such as taxation (Prescott 2004), unionization and

regulation (Alesina et al. 2005) or individual preferences (Blanchard 2004).


                                               9
           Revisions of the European Directives on working time and maternity leave

underscores the need to understand the importance of work in European societies and

support the balance between working time and time devoted to other aspects such as

family and leisure (Davoine and Méda 2009). Work hours can reflect various

elements such as labour supply decisions of the individual, employer preferences (also

influenced by technology), industrial relations and business cycles. Additionally,

work hours have been the focus of concern regarding work-life balance in recent

years (Green and Tsitsianis 2005).

    Empirical results obtained by Alesina et al. (2005) indicate that the impact of

taxes on labour supply disappears when controlling for unionization or labour market

regulation. In an analysis of 16 OECD countries, they find a relatively strong negative

correlation between hours worked and percentage of the labour force that is covered

by collective bargaining agreements. Additional influences on working hours in

Europe may come from the strong political power of unions over welfare state and

pension system matters. Moreover, government issued regulations in European

countries (e.g., France, Italy) have either forced or created incentives to reduce

working hours (mandatory vacations, making it more difficult to use overtime, etc.).

However, Alesina et al. (2005) stress that there “is      little doubt that increasing

marginal tax rates have reduced hours worked, especially through an effect on female

participation in the labor force” (p. 12). However, they also argue that reasonable

elasticity estimates suggest the differences in tax rates can explain no more than one-

half of the discrepancy between the United States and Europe regarding hours worked

(p. 24).

    Blanchard (2004) points out that attribution of the decrease in hours to these

increases in tax rates depends on the assumption one makes about utility and the


                                             10
strength of income and substitution effects. He refers to data from Ireland where the

average hours worked per worker decreased from 2140 in 1970 to 1670 in 2000 (25

percent decrease). This change cannot be blamed on a depressed labour market and an

increase in tax rates as Ireland was booming during that period, experiencing major

in-migration, an increase in labour participation rates and a low level of

unemployment together with a small increase in the average tax rate (3 percent

compared to 8 percent increase in the US). He summarizes by stating that “a large part

of the decrease in hours per capita over the last 30 years in Europe reflects a decrease

in hours worked per full-time worker, a choice that is likely to be made voluntarily by

workers. The remaining issue is how much of this change comes from preferences and

increasing income and how much comes from increasing tax distortions. I read the

evidence as suggesting an effect of taxes, but with the larger role left for preferences”

(p. 9). Bonatti (2008), on the other hand, contends that preferences between the EU

and US were initially similar but became different due to different institutions and

policies. He develops a theoretical framework incorporating a sort of “dynamic

multiplier”, modelling the hypothesis that households’ work preferences tend to

change due to variations in social habits 5 related to time allocation evolved on past

experiences (endogenous/evolving preferences). More precisely, he modelled the

hypothesis that the evolution of preferences generate permanent differences as a result

of a period in which one region is influenced by labour regulations or tax regimes that

do not disappear once regulations are eliminated.

         If preferences are indeed so crucial, it suggests that we need a better

understanding of work values. Alesina et al. (2005) work with the German GSOEP


5
  Alesina et al. (2005) use the notion of social multiplier as a factor that could explain the discrepancy
between micro and macro estimates of labor supply (p. 45). For example, it “is hard to obtain more
vacation for yourself from your employer and even harder, if you do, to coordinate with all your friends
to get the same deal and go on vacation together” (p. 53).

                                                        11
from 1990 and 2000 to explore the determinants of life satisfaction. They found that

fewer hours worked is associated with greater life satisfaction, suggesting the simple

interpretation that working less makes Germans happier. In a next step the authors

looked at OECD data for 10 to 12 countries (cross-sectional and in panel (129

observations)). Here they also found the tendency towards a negative correlation

between hours worked across countries and life satisfaction. They conclude with the

statement that “Europeans seem to be happy to work less and less. Whether they

internalize the macroeconomic effects of working less, like relative shrinking of the

size of their economies relative to emerging countries, or a decline in the relative

prominence of Europe as an economic superpower, is of course a different matter” (p.

55).

       If it is true that working hours affects life satisfaction, what about the link

between working hours and job satisfaction? Past research has observed that longer

hours of work are associated with lower satisfaction (Clark 1997). For our analysis,

we employ data from the World Values Survey (average values between 1981 and

2000, first four waves). We also utilize a measure of the annual working hours in

2006 based on a detailed review by the European Foundation for the Improvement of

Living and Working Conditions 2010 (Comparative Analysis of Working Time in

European Union). Figure 3 presents a scatterplot showing a very strong negative

correlation between annual working hours and job satisfaction (r=-0.65). We observe

that Eastern European countries are working more hours and are less satisfied with

their job than their Western European counterparts. This may indicate the need to

consider regional differences in our study.




                                              12
          Figure 3: Job Satisfaction and Annual Average Weekly Working Hours




         8.5
                                                   Sweden
                                          Denmark
         8
                                                    Ireland
                                                   Belgium                 Spain
                 Netherlands                              Luxembourg
                                                            Finland      Portugal   Poland
         7.5




                                                                 Italy
                                                                                    Slovakia
                                                                               Slovenia
                                                                               Hungary    Czech Republic
         7




                                                              France
                                                                  Lithuania              Greece
                                                                           Estonia
                                                                             Romania Bulgaria
         6.5




                                                                                       Latvia
         6




                      32       34          36          38           40                   42
                                 Annual average weekly working hours

                                Job satisfaction               Fitted values




               III.        CONDITIONS OF COUNTRIES AND REGIONS

The transition of economies in Central and Eastern Europe (CEE) has attracted

interested from social scientists as it can be seen unique societal or natural quasi-

experiment. This allows testing of theories and identification of possible (hidden)

features that are hard to notice when doing research in mature market economies

(Meyer and Peng 2005).          The reform process in the transition countries caused

problems due to an institutional vacuum and uncertainty (for overview see Torgler

2003). At this point, it is worthwhile noting that the job satisfaction literature has not

been developed extensively for Eastern European countries (for exceptions, see, e.g.,

Borooah 2007, Sousa-Poza and Sousa-Poza 2000). In describing the Russian

experience, Linz (2003) found that workers “fared rather poorly during Russia’s

transition from a planned economy to a market economy” (p. 626). Thus, it is

valuable to make a comparison between a relatively stable environment (Western


                                                        13
Europe) with an environment that has faced societal changes resulting in a radical

altering of the traditional face and place of work (Eastern Europe). Many occupations,

sectors and regions were characterized by falling real wages and unpaid wages

account for nearly one-third of the wage bill due to a liquidity-constrained economic

environment. Moreover, the (relatively few) existing studies have focused only on

single countries rather than regions (for exceptions, see Borooah 2007 or Sousa-Poza

and Sousa-Poza 2000). A comparative analysis that provides a better understanding of

various countries and regions affords a valuable insight into work values in different

cultures, which is useful for (among others) multinational companies (Sousa-Poza and

Sousa-Poza 2000). The idea that the causes are largely cultural or institutional is

supported by the degree of stability these inter-country differences exhibit over time

(Davoine and Méda (2009).

       In an interesting paper, Schwartz and Bardi (1997) explore value priorities in

Eastern Europe. They refer to the results of an earlier study (see p. 386) indicating

that East Europeans did not differ (as a group) from their Western counterparts in

most values (politics, religion, primary relations) at the beginning of 1990s. The only

difference lay in the domain of work values, reporting less appreciation for initiative,

achievement, and responsibility in work. The authors suggest citing another study that

a “greater degree of constraint on independence in the occupational experience of

Eastern as compared to West Europeans may account for such differences”. They

continue: “For a limited set of values, a compensation mechanism sometimes

operates. This is the case specifically for values concerned with material well-being

and security, when their attainment is largely beyond personal control” (p. 387).

       The above discussion raises questions regarding whether the conditions of a

country (e.g., culture, political system etc.) influence the importance ascribed to

                                              14
concepts such as work values. Research on job satisfaction has been criticized as

atheoretical in nature (Judge and Locke 1993). Therefore, we try to address this

shortcoming with the following discussion about an interesting theory of values 6.

Schwartz (1999) has explored the relationship between cultural values and work

based on a theory that classifies nations according to different cultural values. He

defines values as “conceptions of the desirable that guide the way social actors (e.g.

organisational leaders, policy-makers, individual persons) select actions, evaluate

people and events, and explain their actions and evaluations” (pp. 24-25). Cultural

values are “implicitly or explicitly shared abstract ideas about what is good, right, and

desirable in a society” (p. 25), providing the “bases for the specific norms that tell

people what is appropriate in various situations” (p. 25). He derives seven types of

values (see Figure 4). First he differentiates between Conservatism (maintenance of

status quo, propriety, and restraint of actions or inclinations that might disrupt the

solidarity group or the traditional order) and autonomy, classified as Intellectual

Autonomy (independently pursuing own ideals and intellectual directions) and

Affective Autonomy (pursuing affectively positive experiences (pleasure, exciting life,

varied life)). Next, he derives further poles that deal with how people are socialized

and sanctioned to comply with the obligations and rules. The value type of it is

Hierarchy emphasizing legitimacy of an unequal distribution of power, roles and

resources (social power, authority, humility, wealth). On the other hand,

Egalitarianism refers to a culture/society where voluntary cooperation with others and

the feeling concern for everyone’s welfare is more predominant. Egalitarianism

implies the transcendence of selfish interests in favour of voluntary commitment to

promoting the welfare of others (equality, social justice, freedom, responsibility,


6
    For cultural shifts (e.g., rise of postmaterialist values) see also Inglehart (1990).

                                                             15
honesty). Finally, he differentiates between cultures that emphasize Mastery (getting

ahead through active self-assertion (ambition, success, daring, competence) and

Harmony (dealing with fitting harmoniously into the environment). A coplot

technique has been applied by Schwartz (1999) to represent these different poles in a

two-dimensional space setting while simultaneously dealing with dynamic relations of

contradiction and compatibility among the various cultural value types. For example,

the further towards the upper right a country is situated, the more intellectual

autonomy is valued relative to all other samples (see Figure 5a). He rated 24 single

values from 122 samples in 49 nations between 1988 and 1993. Instead of obtaining

national samples, he focused on urban school teachers who teach the full range of

subjects in grades 3-12, as they play a key role in value socialisation. In addition to

the teachers (from 44 different nations), he also used data on college students from a

wide variety of majors (40 nations). Looking and Figure 5a and 4b, a certain

robustness of cross-national structure of value profiles is evident. Schwartz (1999)

discusses the implications of these value profiles with respect to work, considering

elements such as work centrality, societal norms about work and work goals. For

societies in which Mastery and Hierarchy values are important (as opposed to

Affective Autonomy, Egalitarianism, Harmony and Conservatism), work is more

likely to be experienced as central to life. Schwartz (1999) stresses that Mastery

values emphasize the importance of getting ahead and the “major legitimate arena for

such assertive, controlling, exploitative activity is the world of work” (p. 40).

Similarly, Hierarchy also shares with Mastery “the legitimation of allocating roles

and resources differentially, and they justify actions to increase one’s power and

wealth within the system” (p. 40). The primacy of wealth, power and differential

resources encourages achievement of these goals in the work environment. On the


                                              16
other hand, leisure is very strongly legitimised via an emphasis on Affective Autonomy

values. Egalitarianism may be pursued through improving the community. Harmony

is in conflict with work centrality as work modifies the material and social

environment. Harmony emphasises according to Schwarz (1999) to accept the world

as it is.




                  Figure 4: Schwartz’s Cultural Dimensions of Values




              Source: Schwartz (1999, p. 31).




                                                17
Figure 5a: Country Classification Based on Teacher Samples (44 Nations)




Figure 5b: Country Classification Based on Student Samples (40 Nations)




Source: Schwartz (1999, pp. 36 and 29).




                                          18
       If we apply this classification to Europe, we observe differences between

Eastern and Western Europe as indicated in Figure 5a and 5b. Eastern Europe would

place a greater emphasis on the importance of work (work centrality).



   IV.     EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS WITH EUROPEAN DATA



We employ a multivariate analysis using the EVS 1999/2000 to check for regional

differences Past studies exploring the determinants of work values or job satisfaction

have generally been criticized for the problematic matter of individual heterogeneity:

“What is wanted by one group of individuals in terms of a job is often different from

what is wanted by another group” (Oshagbemi 2003, p. 1211). A multivariate analysis

is able to take personal correlates into account, although the subjective nature of inter-

personal comparisons means that a cross-sectional analysis is still open to criticism.

Furthermore, it is unwise to make strict causal interpretations in a cross-sectional

environment (Blanchflower and Oswald 1999). Recent studies therefore work more

intensively with panel data in an attempt to address some of these issues.

Nevertheless, while regressions can be used to approximate experiments in the

absence of random assignment (Angrist and Pischke 2009), in many situations it is

quite challenging to deal with causal interpretations. We recognize that interpretation

of our results is problematic, as is the habit of referring to observed correlations as

causal effects. The reality is that we see the results as more precisely estimated partial

correlations. For simplicity, we use the notion of ‘impact’ or ‘effect’ when discussing

the results or when providing a literature review. Such results can provide guidance

when deriving policy implications as long as one is aware that these are not fully

precise estimates of the causal effect of interest. Blanchflower and Oswald (1999)


                                               19
discuss further limitations of this kind of data. Questions are translated in different

languages which may lead to biases. However, they stress that psychologists are

familiar with translation objection . Moreover, “large differences are discovered even

across nations using the same language, so differences nation-by-nation cannot be

attributed solely to the language of the survey team” (p. 10). In a broader sense, such

language biases are culturally-motivated biases due to perceptions (ethnic bias): “If

the questionnaire or the topic being studied is “ethnically biased,” then errors in

perception will occur. Similar sounding terms in different languages such as

“individualism” and individualismo”, are based on different perceptions (Sousa-Poza

and Sousa-Poza 2000, p. 522, who cite also another paper). Similarly, Kristensen and

Johansson (2008) criticize the issue of subjective answers to questions on individual

well-being due to culturally and institutionally driven perceptions that can lead to

systematic differences across groups of sub-populations. They use anchoring vignettes

to deal with this potential problem. Respondents were not only asked about their job

satisfaction but also ranked on the same scale their assessment of how good or bad

were a set of hypothetical jobs or life situations. This information was then used to

rescale individuals’ real evaluation of their own situation. They found that rankings

across countries can change with and without this approach, indicating that caution

must be exercised when making single country comparisons (country dummies). On

the other hand, their results regarding influences that shape job satisfaction (age,

income, and gender) were in line with other studies.

       Sousa-Poza and Sousa-Poza (2000) are critical of the sample sizes of such

data. At around 1000 observations per country for this survey and other international

surveys such as International Social Survey Programme (ISSP), the authors declare:

“We have no reason to doubt the quality of the sampling, but it would be comforting


                                              20
to have larger number of workers. This is another reason to treat the estimates

cautiously” (p. 10).

       We restrict our sample to include only those individuals who were in the

labour force at the time of the survey, therefore excluding unemployed individuals,

retired people and people staying at home. We also excluded students. To reduce

potential ranking problems, we simply classify the sample of 31 countries into two

keyregions, namely Eastern and Western Europe (there are 16 countries from Western

Europe, 15 from Eastern Europe, see Table 1).



                       Table 1: Countries in the Empirical Micro-Analysis

          Western European Countries             Eastern European Countries
          Germany                                Belarus
          Austria                                Bulgaria
          Belgium                                Croatia
          Great Britain                          Czech Republic
          Denmark                                Estonia
          Finland                                Greece
          France                                 Hungary
          Iceland                                Latvia
          Ireland                                Lithuania
          Italy                                  Poland
          Malta                                  Romania
          Netherlands                            Russia
          North Ireland                          Slovak Republic
          Portugal                               Turkey
          Spain                                  Ukraine
          Sweden



We measure several variables that allow us to proxy work centrality, namely:



       IMPORTANCE OF WORK IN LIFE:

       Please say how important it is in your life: Work (1=Not at all important,

       2=Not very important, 3=Rather important, 1=Very important): Work.

                                                  21
       WORK SHOULD COME FIRST:

       Do you agree or disagree with the following statement? Work should always

       come first (1=Disagree strongly, 2=Disagree, 3=Neither agree nor disagree,

       4=Agree, 5=Agree strongly).



       DECREASE IMPORTANCE OF WORK

       Here is a list of various changes in our way of life that might take place in the

       near future. Please tell me for each one, if it were to happen whether you think

       it would be a good thing, a bad thing, or don’t you mind? Decrease in the

       importance of work in our lives (1=Bad, 2=Don’t mind, 3=Good).



       WORK DUTY

       Do you agree or disagree with the following statement? Work is a duty

       towards society (1=Disagree strongly, 2=Disagree, 3=Neither agree nor

       disagree, 4=Agree, 5=Agree strongly).



Working with multiple proxies for work centrality provides the opportunity to address

a criticism raised by Sousa-Poza and Sousa-Poza (2000): A single item and the

variance due to the specific wording of the item cannot be averaged out. In addition, a

single item also reduces the ability to evaluate internal consistency. Instead of using

an index we explore these single factors independently in order to check the

robustness of the results.

       In general, an ordered probit model ranking information of these scaled

dependent variables is appropriate. To measure the quantitative effect of this variable,


                                              22
we calculate the marginal effects because the equation is nonlinear. The marginal

effect indicates the change in the percentage or probability of individuals having a

specific level of work centrality when the independent variable increases by one unit.

For simplicity, the marginal effects in all estimates are presented for the highest value

of our dependent variables only. Weighted ordered probit estimates are conducted to

make the samples correspond to the national distribution. Furthermore, answers such

as “don’t know” and missing values have been eliminated in all estimations.

       We now briefly discuss how the controls could shape work centrality. Most of

the evidence available is related to the literature on job satisfaction rather than work

centrality. Some studies have used work centrality or work values as independent

factors to explain job satisfaction (see, e.g., Borooah 2007, Clark 1997). Thus, one

cannot infer that the results obtained in that literature are also valid for work

centrality and other work values.

       Age and gender are two key variables that have been used in the empirical

literature on job satisfaction. Kanfer and Ackerman (2004) point out that a large

number of participants in the US workforce are forty-five years or older (increasing

trend) with similar workforce age trends in most developed countries. Recent statistics

from the US Current Population Survey (May 2011 data) seemed to indicate that 60%

of the people active in the work force (without counting unemployed people) are older

than 44 years. Oshagbemi (2003) also argues that research on older workers has

become valuable from policy a perspective due to the problem of an ageing

population and labour trends indicating that these workers will play a more prominent

role in the work force. Oshagbemi (2003) provides a brief overview of the literature

on age and gender, reporting that the initial studies in the 1970s and early 1980s found

a positive linear relationship between age and job satisfaction. Changing needs and


                                               23
cognitive structures, a mellowing process, an increased coping capacity with age,

realistic expectations and accommodation to the work conditions, were all proposed

as explanations for this effect. Moreover, older workers generally have more

experience and occupy senior positions which afford the opportunity if they are

dissatisfied with the work conditions. Moving around in the early stages of a career

allows the worker to discover likable and unlikable jobs, helping people to sort

themselves into jobs they like and out of jobs they dislike (Blanchflower and Oswald

1999). In addition, older workers seem to care more about extrinsic rewards than

intrinsic motivations, with More recent studies find a curvilinear relationship and

decrease in the later part of life, although in some cases this became a U-shaped

relationship (see, Oshagbemi 2003). Younger workers entering the job market tend to

have fewer non-job (financial) pressures (e.g., family issues) (Birdi, Warr and Oswald

1995). Thus, Oshagbemi (2003) concludes that to date “there appears to be extensive

evidence of a relationship between employee age and job satisfaction. However, the

nature of this relationship, whether linear or curvilinear, remains unsettled” (p. 1214).

       Non-linearity is less obvious once we focus on aspects of work ethic rather

than job satisfaction. For example, the empirical literature on moral values has

observed a linear relationship with age (see, e.g., Torgler 2007 for tax morale).

       Jürges (2003) criticizes the job satisfaction findings as they are mostly derived

from cross-sectional data, and declares that the relationship between job satisfaction

and age is potentially biased by cohort effects. Working with the GSOEP (German

Socio-economic Panel) data set, he reports a concave relationship, observing

decreases in job satisfaction at higher ages. However, he is circumspect regarding

generalizations from his results, stating that “it is by no means certain that replications

of my study with other data (e.g., the BHPS) will lead to the same conclusion,


                                                24
especially since cohort analysis is responsive to identification issues” (p. 502).

Another influence on job satisfaction may be found in the job market, particularly for

newly-employed young people. In times of high (youth) unemployment (young)

people who have been successful in getting employment might feel pleased about

their position (Birdi, Warr, and Oswald 1995).

       Gender is another factor that has been explored extensively, and here we find

contradictory results (as reported by Oshagbemi 2003). Some studies find that women

are more satisfied than men, others find men to be more satisfied than women. At

first, higher job satisfaction among women seems surprising, since the key finding in

labour economics is the large and significant difference between men’s and women’s

pay, coupled with worse conditions for women in terms of hiring and firing, job

content, promotion opportunity and sexual harassment (Clark 1997). Shields and Price

(2002) also show that one of the most important determinants of job satisfaction

among nurses from an ethnic minority is whether they have experienced racial

harassment at the workplace, and whether they have perceived discrimination in

promotion and training.

       Again, we find expectation is a key explanation for potential differences:

“[T]hose who expect less from working will be more satisfied with any given job”

(Clark 1997, p. 342). Clark (1997) also points out that women are more likely to

select themselves out of the labour market if they are dissatisfied with the job.

However, the expectation argument may suggest that the difference is “a transitory

phenomenon, caused by women’s improved position in the labour force relative to

their expectations. Once women’s labour market rewards stop improving (or, more

accurately, only improve at the same rate as those of men) men’s and women’s

reported satisfaction should be identical” (p. 365). Sousa-Poza and Sousa-Poza (2003)


                                             25
analyze the British Household Panel Survey and demonstrate that the difference

between male and female average job satisfaction scores has declined (halved)

between 1991 and 2000. Their empirical model also shows that there is a clear

downward trend in job satisfaction in the female sample while men’s negative trend is

not very pronounced.

       It has also been suggested that men and women use different criteria in

assessment of the work and they hold different work related values that can be tested

in this study. For example, women place more value on the social factors of a job,

while men value career and opportunities for self-expression. Oshagbemi (2003, p.

1216) points out: “A job high on social satisfaction, but low on skill utilisation and

career prospects may result in higher job satisfaction for females than for males,

whereas in occupations allowing little scope for social relationship, the differences in

satisfaction might be in the opposite direction”.

       However, differences often disappear when a number of other variables are

controlled (Oshagbemi 2003). For example, Donohue and Heywood (2004) were not

able to find gaps in gender satisfaction when focusing on a younger US cohort and

using data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth. As a methodological

point, the authors also stress the importance of dividing samples by gender and by

occupational group. White-collar females report significantly higher levels of

satisfaction when childcare benefits are available and when they are working for a

small firm. On the other hand, white-collar males care about having a retirement plan.

       In general, such results indicate the importance of using work values that

measure factors other than job satisfaction as dependent variables. Moreover, it

seems that gender differences on values in general (rather than work values) are quite

stable over time. Women seem to care more about intrinsic, altruistic, and social


                                               26
values (for an overview see Hitlin and Piliavin 2004). This aspect is explored later in

the paper.

       Hitlin and Piliavin (2004) stress that educational attainment is an important

mediating variable between values and occupation. Clark and Oswald (1996) control

for income and find that highly educated people appear less content (monotonic and

well-defined effect). When income is not controlled, the effect of education on “pay”

satisfaction disappears but that between overall job satisfaction remains. Moreover,

the authors find that using lagged values of education and income returns a negative

correlation between past education and current job satisfaction. While this outcome is

in line with several papers they cite demonstrating the same relationship, Clark and

Oswald (1996) introduce their paper by stating that the result “is harder to interpret,

but may be consistent with the view that utility depends on the gap between outcomes

and aspirations, and that education raises aspiration targets (pp. 360-361). Clark

(1996) points out that the causal mechanism of this relationship is ambiguous: “the

process of education could itself raise workers’ expectations, or those who already

have high expectations (influenced by their parents or their early schooling, for

example) could be more likely to continue their education” (p. 1999). Clark (1996)

presents results in support of the idea that workers with higher levels of education

report themselves as relatively dissatisfied. Vila and García-Mora (2005) discuss the

link between education and job satisfaction in detail, explaining that perceived over-

qualification reduces satisfaction because expectations have not been fulfilled. The

authors discuss the literature on the area and conclude that it is rather limited. They

also stress that the effect of education level on workers’ satisfaction varies across

diverse aspects of the job (heterogeneous in size and direction) when controlling for

job/worker attributes.


                                              27
        In general, education is positively correlated with more efficient use of

information and the formation of expectations at work (Ganzach 1998). A significant

body of literature regarding the role of human capital on economic performance

concentrates on only one aspect of human capital endowment, namely educational

stock. Alternative factors such as job satisfaction are proving to be interesting avenues

of investigation, especially in light of results that indicate job satisfaction exhibits a

positive influence on growth in European regions (Rodríguez-Pose and Vilalta-Bufí

2005). Ganzach (1998) finds that intelligence is negatively correlated with job

satisfaction when job complexity is held constant. Based on the sample constructed,

the author argues that most of the jobs held by the respondents were not challenging

or interesting enough and the dissatisfaction produced by lack of interest was stronger

among more intelligent people. Long’s (2005) results using the HILDA survey in

Australia indicates the importance of differentiating between levels of education when

looking at gender differences. The determinants of job satisfaction for men and

women with lower levels of education are significantly different, a result not found

when looking at higher skilled/educated individuals. Women in this group exhibit

similar levels of satisfaction to their male counterparts. Thus, it seems that

expectations of work are not uniformly held by all women. Long concludes her

analysis with a criticism of the claim (previously discussed) that the job satisfaction

differential between men and women will decrease over time: “Although it is arguable

that this is increasingly more common, the continued existence of women who choose

a lifestyle where work is not their first priority suggests that differences in job

satisfaction by gender will persist” (pp. 318). This contention further underscores the

importance of exploring whether factors such as gender or education affect work

centrality.


                                               28
       It has also been argued that occupational groups that are more ‘job involved’

view their work as more central to their lives than lower skilled occupational groups

(see, e.g., Bamundo and Kopelman 1980). We would therefore anticipate a significant

difference between self-employed and full-time employees. Moreover, the choice to

work part-time may show a lower preference for work (compared to full-time

employed people). It is important to note that past evidence indicates that those at the

higher end of the occupational scale (income) report higher satisfaction with their

work (Clark 1996).

       Contrary to the perceived aim of unions, it seems that they reduce job

satisfaction in various countries such as the US, Australia, UK, or Canada. Several

reasons have been proposed for this anomaly (for an overview see Renaud 2002).

Unions are organized for the purpose of giving a voice to workers, and it may be that

this politicization of the enterprise’s workforce negatively affects job satisfaction. In

other words, by providing workers the opportunity to use their voice, unsatisfied

workers are encouraged to stay in jobs they dislike, while trying to change their

working conditions (Clark 1996). However, reverse causation suggests that unhappy

workers are more likely to join the union. Bryson et al. (2004) also note that despite a

potential spurious correlation, the chance to express their discontent through a

collective voice could indeed exert a causal influence. Nevertheless, some studies

dealing with possible simultaneity still report a negative relationship. According to

Bryson et al. (2004) the difference in job satisfaction between unionized and non-

unionized workers disappears once they control for individual and establishment

heterogeneity and model the endogeneity (indication of a selection effect). In light of

these contrary (and interesting) results, we control for various aspects related to

unions: trust in unions, belonging to a trade union or doing unpaid work for a trade


                                               29
union. In addition, we explore belonging or doing unpaid work in professional

associations and control for trust in unions. Bryson et al. (2004) cite previous work in

their criticism of confusion in the literature, explaining that this is due to a failure to

distinguish between job satisfaction and satisfaction with the union and management.

       Religion is another factor that could be worth considering in an analysis of

work values. This factor has not received a lot of attention in the job satisfaction

literature. Controlling for religion therefore implicitly assumes that individual

preferences are not to be taken as given (Mueller 2001). Torgler (2006) provides a

detailed discussion how religion and religiosity influence moral values and moral

commitments. Interestingly, Torgler (2006) observes a strong link between religiosity

and moral values (tax morale). While religiosity might reinforce certain social norms,

the idea that work is necessary to serve a higher purpose (as previously discussed with

respect to Calvinists) has mostly vanished. It has been gradually replaced by the

notion that work meets intrinsic values such as being autonomous, creative, or flexible

to express oneself and develop own skills: “In traditional, pre-modern order values

were primarily based in, and legitimized by tradition and institutional (Christian)

religion. In modern and post-industrial society they have become subject of individual

freedom and personal autonomy. The individual has become free and independent

upon the traditions in general, and social and religious institutions in particular. The

social significance of these traditional institutions has declined, and the prescriptions

of these institutions are no longer accepted as self evident and taken for granted”

(Halman 1996, p. 3). If this is the case, we would not observe a strong link between

religiosity and work values.

       To explore this relationship, we first focus on the frequency of church

attendance, as this measure indicates whether people spend their time in devotion to


                                                30
religion (for a discussion see Torgler 2006). In addition to church attendance, we

implement a variable measuring the degree of religiosity, which does not account for

the exact time spent on religious activities, but tries to capture the extent of

individuals’ internalized religious convictions (religious identity salience).

        Political interest is an underexplored aspect, but arguably one that should be

considered, as work and politics are similar institutions and therefore experiences in

one domain spillover into the other. For example, Cohen and Vigoda (1998) argue

that a non-work domain, interest, or activity can carry over into the work domain and

affect attitudes and behaviours there. Another argument is that political interest can be

seen as informal education, and an intense interest in politics might influence work

attitudes.   People who are more interested in politics may develop better work

(educational based) skills, positively influencing work attitudes. Cohen and Vigoda

(1998) stress that people who are cynical about the political system and do not

perceive themselves as capable of influence will transfer this orientation to the work

setting, resulting in lower levels of involvement in the job. Although we do not

control for political engagement, a similar effect may be observable for political

interest. Existing evidence suggests that political interest shapes moral values and

voluntary engagement (Dong and Torgler 2009, Torgler et al. 2011). In addition to

formal and informal education, we also control for trust in the education system and

ideology.

        In general, there is a significant advantage of exploring work centrality or

work ethic. Several studies on job satisfaction have been unable to control for

potential important variables such as working conditions, which can seriously bias

(omitted variable problem) the results obtained and coefficients on any correlated

variables (Brown and McIntosh 2003). Variables on work centrality or work ethic


                                               31
should be less affected by the actual work conditions (if they are affected at all). For

instance, the happiness literature has shown the importance of the relative income

position (Frey 2008, Clark et al. 2008) and job satisfaction may depend heavily on the

relative wages. However, this requires a good understanding of the correct reference

group. There are many other elements related to work conditions that could be

considered for our analysis (such as occupational environment, establishment size or

individuals’ health status), although the focus on work values may reduce the need to

control for those factors.

         In general, micro models on job satisfaction, happiness or values are plagued

by poor measures of fit (R2 values below 1 percent, in particular for large datasets)

which does not rule out the possibility that the models might have been mis-specified

and have ignored important determinants. The estimations presented in the following

tables are no exception.

         For each dependent variable we present seven different specifications. This

allows to check the robustness of key independent variables. First we explore a

baseline specification that controls age, gender, education, marital status, employment

status, religiosity, and political interest (see specifications (1), (8), (15) and (22)).

Next, we add two vertical trust variables, namely trust in trade unions and trust in the

education system (specifications (2), (9), (16) and (23)) 7. Following this, we

investigate whether belonging to a trade union or a professional association influences

work centrality ((3), (10), (17) and (24)). As there might be a difference between

passive and active involvement we extend the following specifications ((4), (11), (18),

and (25)) with variables that measure the unpaid voluntary work for trade unions and



7
  Questions: Please look at this card and tell me, for each item listed, how much confidence you have in
them, is it a great deal (4), quite a lot (3), not very much (2) or none at all (1)? Trade unions. The
education system.

                                                       32
professional associations. In addition, we start to control for ideology (rightist) 8 in

equations (5), (12), (18) and (26)), followed by a measure of whether individuals are

free to make decisions in their job 9. This first group of specifications also controlled

for regional differences (Eastern Europe dummy). In the last group of regressions we

use country dummy variables instead of our regional dummy variable. The results

indicate a substantial difference between Eastern and Western Europe. The dummy

Eastern Europe is almost always statistically significant at the 1% level and reports

large quantitative effects. We also consistently observe that work centrality is

substantially more dominant in Eastern Europe. For example, being from Eastern

rather than Western Europe increased the probability that work is very important by

between 5 and 7 percentage points. It also increases (by around 10 percentage points)

the probability of answering “strongly agree” to the question of whether work should

always come first. Moreover, work centrality reduces the probability of reporting that

a decrease in the importance of work in life by around 25 percentage points. Thus,

these results provide strong support for the idea that Eastern Europe has stronger

preferences towards work centrality.

         Turning to the other variables, we observe a positive relationship between age

and work centrality (except for Table 4). On the other hand, it seems that work is less

central for women than for men. The coefficient is mostly statistically significant at

the 1% level with marginal effects between 1 and 4 percentage points. Next, we

observe a negative relationship between education and work centrality. The

coefficient is statistically significant in all 28 estimations. On the other hand, political

interest only has a statistically significant effect on the results reported in Table 2

(importance of work) and Table 5 (work as a duty towards society). Interestingly,
8
  Question: In political matters, people talk of ‘the left’ and ‘the right’. How would you place your
views on this scale, generally speaking? (1=Left, 10=Right).
9
  Question: How free are you to make decisions in your job (1=None at all, 10=A great deal).

                                                        33
divorced people evaluate work as more important than do married people (Table 2)

but they consider it less of a duty towards society (Table 5). We observe a similar

effect for people who have never been married. Clearer patterns are observable for

employment status. Part-time workers (working less than 30 hours per week) are

substantially less likely to care about work compared with full-time employees. The

effects are quite large for our first dependent variable (importance of work). Being a

part-time worker reduces the probability of stating that work is very important by

around 10 percentage points. The opposite is found for self-employed people. Work is

more central in their life compared to full-time employees (except for the question of

seeing it as a duty towards society). However, the effect disappears in two cases (see

Table 2 and 4) once we control the extent to which someone is free to make decisions

in their job. This is not surprising considering the strong correlation between this

variable and being self-employed. Moreover, being free to make decisions in the job

is also positively correlated with work centrality.

       Turning to the results on church attendance and perceived religiosity, it should

be noted that we do not explore the impact of religious denomination in these first

estimations. Interestingly, we observe the clear tendency for religiosity to be

positively correlated with work centrality. Both coefficients are statistically

significant in most of the estimations, however, the effect of church attendance

decreases once we add country fixed effects.

       In contrast to the results on education, trust in the education system is

positively correlated with work centrality. Here the coefficient is also statistically

significant at the 1% level in all estimations. On the other hand, mixed results are

observed for trust in trade unions. It has no impact in Table 2 and 4, but we can see a

robust positive relationship in Table 3 and 4. There is the tendency that belonging to a


                                               34
trade union is negatively correlated with work centrality, particularly when focusing

on the first two dependent variables. However, when looking at all the specifications

((1) to (14) we can see that the coefficient is not statistically significant in all

specifications. Furthermore, it is interesting that we observe a different picture when

considering unpaid voluntary work for trade unions. The coefficient is positive,

although it is only statistically significant in three estimations (see Table 2).

Belonging to or doing voluntary work for professional organizations is not linked to

work centrality, except when looking at work as a duty towards society (see Table 5).

Finally, we find that there is a tendency for more ‘rightist’ oriented people to report

that work is more central to their lives.




                                              35
                                  Table 2: Importance of Work in Life
Dependent variable                                                Importance of work in life
Independent variables          (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)            (5)          (6)         (7)
Eastern Europe                 0.142***     0.160***      0.159***      0.156***       0.168***     0.196***
                               (7.08)       (7.63)        (7.55)        (7.38)         (7.24)       (8.06)
                               0.053        0.060         0.059         0.058          0.063        0.073
Age                            0.003***     0.003***      0.003***      0.003***       0.003***     0.004***    0.006***
                               (3.51)       (3.07)        (3.14)        (3.12)         (2.83)       (3.35)      (5.11)
                               0.001        0.001         0.001         0.001          0.001        0.001       0.002
Female                         -0.104***    -0.106***     -0.105***     -0.105***      -0.115***    -0.112***   -0.070***
                               (-5.05)      (-4.96)       (-4.94)       (-4.91)        (-4.92)      (-4.75)     (-2.92)
                               -0.039       -0.034        -0.040        -0.039         -0.043       -0.042      -0.026
Education                      -0.005**     -0.005**      -0.005**      -0.005**       -0.006***    -0.008***   -0.008***
                               (-2.43)      (-2.57)       (-2.37)       (-2.37)        (-2.76)      (-3.47)     (-3.27)
                               -0.002       -0.002        -0.002        -0.002         -0.002       -0.003      -0.003
Widowed                        0.000        0.000         0.001         0.002          -0.010       0.040       0.029
                               (0.00)       (0.00)        (0.02)        (0.03)         (-0.11)      (0.44)      (0.32)
                               0.000        0.000         0.000         0.001          -0.004       0.015       0.010
Divorced                       0.110***     0.125***      0.128***      0.128***       0.120***     0.117***    0.125***
                               (2.86)       (3.15)        (3.22)        (3.24)         (2.77)       (2.65)      (2.82)
                               0.041        0.046         0.047         0.047          0.044        0.043       0.046
Separate                       0.079        0.080         0.078         0.080          0.115        0.144       0.108
                               (1.05)       (1.03)        (1.01)        (1.03)         (1.31)       (1.60)      (1.18)
                               0.029        0.029         0.029         0.030          0.042        0.052       0.039
Never married                  -0.074***    -0.070***     -0.073***     -0.072***      -0.065**     -0.050*     -0.013
                               (-2.84)      (-2.62)       (-2.71)       (-2.67)        (-2.22)      (-1.67)     (-0.44)
                               -0.028       -0.026        -0.027        -0.027         -0.025       -0.019      -0.005
Part-time worker               -0.244***    -0.253***     -0.256***     -0.255***      -0.262***    -0.263***   -0.263***
                               (-8.34)      (-8.26)       (-8.35)       (-8.33)        (-7.64)      (-7.55)     (-7.37)
                               -0.094       -0.097        -0.099        -0.098         -0.101       -0.101      -0.101
Self-employed                  0.072**      0.091***      0.080**       0.080**        0.073*       0.041       0.005
                               (2.12)       (2.59)        (2.27)        (2.27)         (1.93)       (1.02)      (0.12)
                               0.027        0.033         0.030         0.030          0.027        0.015       0.002
Church attendance              0.017***     0.017***      0.016***      0.016***       0.020***     0.020***    -0.009
                               (3.69)       (3.50)        (3.33)        (3.25)         (3.83)       (3.69)      (-1.48)
                               0.007        0.006         0.006         0.006          0.008        0.007       -0.003
Religious                      0.093***     0.084***      0.086***      0.087***       0.072***     0.071***    0.080***
                               (5.06)       (4.48)        (4.56)        (4.60)         (3.49)       (3.43)      (3.67)
                               0.035        0.032         0.032         0.033          0.027        0.027       0.030
Follow politics                0.041***     0.038***      0.038***      0.038***       0.028***     0.025**     0.034***
in the news                    (5.01)       (4.46)        (4.51)        (4.50)         (2.90)       (2.50)      (3.31)
                               0.015        0.014         0.014         0.014          0.011        0.009       0.013
Trust in                                    -0.000        0.005         0.003          0.000        0.001       0.005
trade unions                                (-0.03)       (0.33)        (0.24)         (0.01)       (0.05)      (0.31)
                                            -0.000        0.002         0.001          0.000        0.000       0.002
Trust in                                    0.111***      0.111***      0.112***       0.120***     0.126***    0.118***
education system                            (7.63)        (7.83)        (7.85)         (7.68)       (7.89)      (6.82)
                                            0.041         0.042         0.042          0.045        0.047       0.044
Belong to                                                 -0.049**      -0.064**       -0.069**     -0.076***   0.028
trade union                                               (-2.10)       (-2.57)        (-2.56)      (-2.83)     (0.91)
                                                          -0.019        -0.239         -0.026       -0.029      0.010
Belong to                                                 0.015         -0.009         0.049        0.033       0.070*
professional                                              (0.44)        (-0.22)        (1.20)       (0.79)      (1.65)
association                                               0.006         -0.003         0.018        0.012       0.026
Unpaid voluntary                                                        0.094*         0.108**      0.102*      0.038
work for                                                                (1.84)         (2.00)       (1.86)      (0.70)
trade union                                                             0.035          0.040        0.037       0.014
Unpaid voluntary                                                        0.070          0.037        0.028       0.043
work for                                                                (1.11)         (0.56)       (0.42)      (0.64)
professional associations                                               0.026          0.014        0.010       0.016
Rightist                                                                               0.009        0.007       0.017***
                                                                                       (1.49)       (1.25)      (2.78)
                                                                                       0.003        0.003       0.006
Free making                                                                                         0.020***    0.028***
decisions in the job                                                                                (4.19)      (5.87)
                                                                                                    0.007       0.011
Country fixed effects          No           No            No            No            No            No          Yes
N                              18924        17755         17755         17755         14921         14516       14516
Prob>chi2                      0.000        0.000         0.000         0.000         0.000         0.000       0.000
Pseudo R2                      0.016        0.019         0.019         0.019         0.020         0.022       0.045
Notes: Coefficients in bold, z-statistics in parentheses, marginal effects in italics. The symbols *, **, ***
represent statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
                                                     36
                                     Table 3: Work Should Come First
Dependent variable                                     Work should always come first, even if it means less spare time.
Independent variables                (8)            (9)          (10)         (11)             (12)           (13)         (14)
Eastern Europe                       0.487***       0.514***     0.510***     0.508***         0.529***       0.541***
                                     (27.88)        (28.14)      (27.79)      (27.61)          (26.17)        (25.77)
                                     0.098          0.104        0.103        0.102            0.105          0.108
Age                                  0.015***       0.015***     0.015***     0.015***         0.016***       0.016***     0.017***
                                     (16.94)        (16.56)      (16.70)      (16.69)          (16.07)        (16.04)      (17.18)
                                     0.003          0.003        0.003        0.003            0.003          0.003        0.003
Female                               -0.113***      -0.114***    -0.114***    -0.113***        -0.104***      -0.104***    -0.108***
                                     (-6.39)        (-6.22)      (-6.22)      (-6.21)          (-5.20)        (-5.13)      (-5.23)
                                     -0.022         -0.022       -0.022       -0.022           -0.020         -0.020       -0.019
Education                            -0.028***      -0.028***    -0.027***    -0.027***        -0.027***      -0.028***    -0.022***
                                     (-15.67)       (-15.25)     (-14.47)     (-14.46)         (-13.49)       (13.59)      (-10.10)
                                     -0.006         -0.005       -0.005       -0.005           -0.005         -0.005       -0.004
Widowed                              0.031          0.028        0.027        0.026            -0.025         -0.021       -0.011
                                     (0.58)         (0.49)       (0.47)       (0.47)           (-0.39)        (-0.31)      (-0.15)
                                     0.006          0.006        0.005        0.005            -0.005         -0.004       -0.002
Divorced                             -0.038         -0.030       -0.030       -0.029           -0.049         -0.054       -0.017
                                     (-1.11)        (-0.85)      (-0.85)      (-0.84)          (-1.28)        (1.38)       (-0.43)
                                     -0.007         -0.006       -0.006       -0.006           -0.009         -0.010       -0.003
Separate                             -0.004         0.011        0.010        0.010            0.030          0.037        0.067
                                     (-0.06)        (0.16)       (0.14)       (0.15)           (0.40)         (0.48)       (0.86)
                                     -0.001         0.002        0.002        0.002            0.006          0.007        0.013
Never married                        -0.018         -0.013       -0.014       -0.014           0.002          0.016        0.041
                                     (-0.80)        (-0.53)      (-0.61)      (-0.59)          (0.10)         (0.62)       (1.53)
                                     -0.004         -0.002       -0.003       -0.003           0.000          0.003        0.008
Part-time worker                     -0.154***      -0.173***    -0.177***    -0.176***        -0.194***      -0.189***    -0.140***
                                     (-6.06)        (-6.53)      (-6.67)      (-6.63)          (-6.55)        (-6.24)      (-4.51)
                                     -0.029         -0.030       -0.032       -0.032           -0.034         -0.033       -0.024
Self-employed                        0.128***       0.141***     0.140***     0.141***         0.099***       0.084**      0.065*
                                     (4.46)         (4.79)       (4.71)       (4.73)           (3.06)         (2.52)       (1.87)
                                     0.027          0.030        0.029        0.030            0.020          0.017        0.012
Church attendance                    0.025***       0.023***     0.023***     0.023***         0.026***       0.026***     0.011**
                                     (6.03)         (5.54)       (5.54)       (5.39)           (5.61)         (5.64)       (2.11)
                                     0.005          0.005        0.005        0.004            0.005          0.005        0.002
Religious                            0.096***       0.090***     0.091***     0.091***         0.068***       0.069***     0.060***
                                     (5.82)         (5.28)       (5.33)       (5.36)           (3.66)         (3.67)       (3.04)
                                     0.019          0.018        0.018        0.018            0.013          0.013        0.011
Follow politics                      0.011          0.009        0.010        0.010            0.010          0.011        -0.006
in the news                          (1.47)         (1.15)       (1.37)       (1.35)           (1.10)         (1.21)       (-0.68)
                                     0.002          0.002        0.002        0.002            0.002          0.002        -0.001
Trust in                                            0.028**      0.031**      0.030**          0.034**        0.036***     0.036***
trade unions                                        (2.35)       (2.57)       (2.50)           (2.57)         (2.65)       (2.66)
                                                    0.005        0.006        0.006            0.007          0.007        0.007
Trust in                                            0.100***     0.100***     0.100***         0.107***       0.101***     0.120***
education system                                    (7.85)       (7.87)       (7.89)           (7.70)         (7.13)       (8.02)
                                                    0.020        0.020        0.020            0.021          0.019        0.022
Belong to                                                        -0.034*      -0.046**         -0.035         -0.031       0.022
trade union                                                      (-1.69)      (-2.13)          (-1.49)        (-1.34)      (0.85)
                                                                 -0.007       -0.009           -0.007         -0.006       0.004
Belong to                                                        -0.068**     -0.064*          -0.067*        -0.089**     -0.054
professional                                                     (-2.19)      (-1.80)          (-1.80)        (-2.33)      (-1.39)
association                                                      -0.013       -0.012           -0.013         -0.016       -0.009
Unpaid voluntary                                                              0.069            0.056          0.058        0.026
work for                                                                      (1.57)           (1.23)         (1.26)       (0.55)
trade union                                                                   0.014            0.011          0.011        0.005
Unpaid voluntary                                                              -0.017           -0.023         -0.034       -0.043
work for                                                                      (-0.30)          (-0.40)        (-0.58)      (-0.74)
professional associations                                                     -0.003           -0.004         -0.006       -0.008
Rightist                                                                                       0.027***       0.026***     0.029***
                                                                                               (5.37)         (5.20)       (5.47)
                                                                                               0.005          0.005        0.005
Free making                                                                                                   0.013***     0.016***
decisions in the job                                                                                          (3.25)       (3.91)
                                                                                                              0.003        0.003
Country fixed effects                No             No           No           No               No             No           Yes
N                                    17998          16906        16906        16906            14230          13837        13837
Prob>chi2                            0.000          0.000        0.000        0.000            0.000          0.000        0.000
Pseudo R2                            0.037          0.040        0.040        0.040            0.043          0.043        0.063
Notes: Coefficients in bold, z-statistics in parentheses, marginal effects in italics. The symbols *, **, *** represent statistical
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. We report the marginal effects of the highest score.
                                                        37
                                   Table 4: Decrease of Work Importance
Dependent variable                                                Decrease in the importance of work
Independent variables           (15)           (16)           (17)           (18)           (19)           (20)            (21)
Eastern Europe                  -0.708***      -0.707***      -0.709***      -0.710***      -0.723***      -0.751***
                                (-34.10)       (-32.66)       (-32.52)       (-32.44)       (-30.10)       (-30.08)
                                -0.238         -0.238         -0.239         -0.239         -0.244         -0.253
Age                             -0.006***      -0.006***      -0.006***      -0.006***      -0.006***      -0.006***       -0.008***
                                (-6.30)        (-5.84)        (-5.72)        (-5.72)        (-5.40)        (-5.14)         (-6.48)
                                -0.002         -0.002         -0.002         -0.002         -0.002         -0.002          -0.003
Female                          0.008          0.021          0.021          0.021          0.017          0.012           0.004
                                (0.40)         (0.96)         (0.97)         (0.97)         (0.73)         (0.49)          (0.17)
                                0.003          0.007          0.007          0.007          0.006          0.004           0.001
Education                       0.014***       0.013***       0.014***       0.014***       0.014***       0.015***        0.008***
                                (6.92)         (6.52)         (6.62)         (6.62)         (6.45)         (6.75)          (3.38)
                                0.005          0.005          0.005          0.005          0.005          0.005           0.003
Widowed                         -0.121*        -0.152**       -0.152**       -0.152**       -0.125         -0.113          -0.108
                                (-1.72)        (-2.05)        (-2.05)        (-2.05)        (-1.50)        (-1.34)         (-1.26)
                                -0.041         -0.051         -0.051         -0.051         -0.043         -0.039          -0.037
Divorced                        0.000          -0.014         -0.014         -0.014         -0.037         -0.032          -0.059
                                (0.01)         (-0.36)        (-0.35)        (-0.34)        (-0.84)        (-0.71)         (-1.31)
                                0.000          -0.005         -0.005         -0.005         -0.013         -0.011          -0.020
Separate                        0.043          0.048          0.047          0.047          0.048          0.036           -0.016
                                (0.63)         (0.68)         (0.67)         (0.67)         (0.61)         (0.46)          (-0.19)
                                0.015          0.017          0.017          0.017          0.017          0.013           -0.006
Never married                   0.033          0.022          0.021          0.021          0.015          0.017           -0.001
                                (1.25)         (0.82)         (0.77)         (0.77)         (0.51)         (0.56)          (-0.02)
                                0.011          0.008          0.007          0.009          0.005          0.006           -0.000
Part-time worker                0.095***       0.091***       0.089***       0.089***       0.086***       0.087**         0.044
                                (3.26)         (3.03)         (2.94)         (2.95)         (2.59)         (2.56)          (1.24)
                                0.033          0.032          0.031          0.032          0.031          0.031           0.015
Self-employed                   -0.083**       -0.093***      -0.097***      -0.097***      -0.084**       -0.052          -0.030
                                (-2.43)        (-2.63)        (-2.70)        (-2.69)        (-2.17)        (-1.29)         (-0.74)
                                -0.028         -0.032         -0.033         -0.033         -0.029         -0.018          -0.010
Church attendance               -0.020***      -0.019***      -0.019***      -0.019***      -0.015***      -0.014**        -0.009
                                (-4.05)        (-3.82)        (-3.89)        (-3.90)        (-2.82)        (-2.51)         (-1.43)
                                -0.007         -0.007         -0.007         -0.007         -0.005         -0.005          -0.003
Religious                       -0.136***      -0.134***      -0.133***      -0.133***      -0.124***      -0.129***       -0.090***
                                (-7.39)        (-7.10)        (-7.05)        (-7.04)        (-6.05)        (-6.26)         (-4.15)
                                -0.047         -0.047         -0.046         -0.046         -0.044         -0.046          -0.031
Follow politics                 -0.003         -0.005         -0.004         -0.004         -0.006         -0.001          0.010
in the news                     (-0.36)        (-0.60)        (-0.50)        (-0.50)        (-0.59)        (-0.08)         (1.00)
                                -0.001         -0.002         -0.001         -0.001         -0.002         -0.000          -0.004
Trust in                                       -0.016         -0.013         -0.013         -0.020         -0.020          -0.007
trade unions                                   (-1.20)        (-0.96)        (-0.98)        (-1.33)        (-1.30)         (-0.44)
                                               -0.006         -0.005         -0.005         -0.007         -0.007          -0.002
Trust in                                       -0.093***      -0.093***      -0.093***      -0.096***      -0.095***       -0.086***
education system                               (-6.58)        (-6.57)        (-6.56)        (-6.23)        (-6.04)         (-5.19)
                                               -0.032         -0.032         -0.032         -0.034         -0.034          -0.030
Belong to                                                     -0.030         -0.032         -0.035         -0.033          -0.013
trade union                                                   (-1.23)        (-1.27)        (-1.26)        (-1.22)         (-0.43)
                                                              -0.010         -0.011         -0.012         -0.012          -0.005
Belong to                                                     -0.022         -0.0254        -0.023         -0.010          -0.012
professional                                                  (-0.61)        (-0.64)        (-0.56)        (-0.24)         (-0.28)
association                                                   -0.007         -0.009         -0.008         -0.004          -0.004
Unpaid voluntary                                                             0.018          0.010          0.014           -0.002
work for                                                                     (0.36)         (0.18)         (0.26)          (-0.04)
trade union                                                                  0.006          -0.003         0.005           -0.001
Unpaid voluntary                                                             0.011          0.000          0.010           -0.018
work for                                                                     (0.17)         (0.01)         (0.16)          (-0.27)
professional associations                                                    0.004          0.000          0.004           -0.006
Rightist                                                                                    -0.032***      -0.031***       -0.028***
                                                                                            (-5.65)        (-5.28)         (-4.58)
                                                                                            -0.011         -0.011          -0.010
Free making                                                                                                -0.020***       -0.019***
decisions in the job                                                                                       (-4.36)         (-3.97)
                                                                                                           -0.007          -0.007
Country fixed effects           No             No             No             No             No             No              Yes
N                               18204          17191          17191          17191          14537          14140           14140
Prob>chi2                       0.000          0.000          0.000          0.000          0.000          0.000           0.000
Pseudo R2                       0.052          0.052          0.052          0.052          0.054          0.055           0.088
Notes: Coefficients in bold, z-statistics in parentheses, marginal effects in italics. The symbols *, **, *** represent statistical
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. We report the marginal effects of the highest score.
                                                        38
                                  Table 5: Work as a Duty Towards Society
Dependent variable                                                    Work is a duty towards society
Independent variables                (22)          (23)          (24)         (25)            (26)            (27)          (28)
Eastern Europe                       0.026         0.058***      0.057***     0.057***        0.055***        0.062***
                                     (1.49)        (3.19)        (3.12)       (3.09)          (2.72)          (2.98)
                                     0.007         0.015         0.015        0.015           0.015           0.017
Age                                  0.011***      0.011***      0.011***     0.011***        0.010***        0.010***      0.012***
                                     (12.60)       (11.70)       (11.65)      (11.64)         (10.19)         (9.98)        (11.97)
                                     0.003         0.003         0.003        0.003           0.003           0.003         0.003
Female                               -0.058***     -0.064***     -0.064***    -0.063***       -0.056***       -0.057***     -0.036*
                                     (-3.23)       (-3.45)       (-3.47)      (-3.44)         (-2.76)         (-2.81)       (-1.76)
                                     -0.015        -0.017        -0.017       -0.017          -0.015          -0.015        -0.009
Education                            -0.018***     -0.018***     -0.018***    -0.018***       -0.018***       -0.018***     -0.011***
                                     (-10.66)      (-10.28)      (-10.08)     (-10.09)        (-9.58)         (-9.64)       (-5.77)
                                     -0.005        -0.005        -0.005       -0.005          -0.005          -0.005        -0.003
Widowed                              0.054         0.033         0.031        0.032           0.034           0.006         0.032
                                     (0.95)        (0.54)        (0.52)       (0.54)          (0.48)          (0.08)        (0.43)
                                     0.015         0.009         0.008        0.009           0.009           0.002         0.008
Divorced                             -0.155***     -0.134***     -0.136***    -0.136****      -0.141***       -0.146***     -0.106***
                                     (-4.66)       (-3.90)       (-3.93)      (-3.93)         (-3.74)         (-3.83)       (-2.75)
                                     -0.039        -0.034        -0.034       -0.034          -0.036          -0.037        -0.027
Separate                             -0.116*       -0.100        -0.100       -0.097          -0.048          -0.047        -0.012
                                     (-1.70)       (-1.44)       (-1.43)      (-1.39)         (-0.61)         (-0.59)       (-0.16)
                                     -0.029        -0.026        -0.025       -0.025          -0.012          -0.012        -0.003
Never married                        -0.081***     -0.084***     -0.083***    -0.083***       -0.082***       -0.082***     -0.044
                                     (-3.50)       (-3.53)       (-3.47)      (-3.45)         (-3.14)         (-3.09)       (-1.60)
                                     -0.021        -0.022        -0.022       -0.022          -0.021          -0.021        -0.011
Part-time worker                     -0.192***     -0.199***     -0.199***    -0.199***       -0.199***       -0.189***     -0.159***
                                     (-7.18)       (-7.31)       (-7.26)      (-7.27)         (-6.52)         (-6.12)       (-5.05)
                                     -0.048        -0.049        -0.049       -0.049          -0.049          -0.047        -0.039
Self-employed                        -0.013        -0.001        0.005        0.004           -0.002          -0.010        -0.051
                                     (-0.45)       (-0.03)       (0.18)       (0.14)          (-0.05)         (-0.29)       (-1.50)
                                     -0.003        -0.000        0.001        0.001           -0.000          -0.003        -0.013
Church attendance                    0.044***      0.044***      0.044***     0.044***        0.044***        -0.044***     0.024***
                                     (10.52)       (10.19)       (10.23)      (10.18)         (9.39)          (9.20)        (4.49)
                                     0.012         0.012         0.012        0.012           0.012           0.012         0.006
Religious                            0.086***      0.078***      0.077***     0.077***        0.073***        0.077***      0.096***
                                     (5.09)        (4.49)        (4.45)       (4.44)          (3.90)          (4.06)        (4.84)
                                     0.023         0.021         0.021        0.021           0.020           0.021         0.025
Follow politics                      0.028***      0.025***      0.025***     0.025***        0.025***        0.022**       0.023**
in the news                          (3.72)        (3.21)        (3.22)       (3.24)          (2.78)          (2.46)        (2.54)
                                     0.007         0.007         0.007        0.007           0.007           0.006         0.006
Trust in                                           0.056***      0.053***     0.053***        0.048***        0.049***      0.042***
trade unions                                       (4.73)        (4.45)       (4.45)          (3.61)          (3.64)        (3.09)
                                                   0.015         0.014        0.014           0.013           0.013         0.011
Trust in                                           0.122***      0.122***     0.121***        0.120***        0.116***      0.141***
education system                                   (9.47)        (9.45)       (9.43)          (8.54)          (8.14)        (9.34)
                                                   0.032         0.032        0.032           0.032           0.031         0.037
Belong to                                                        0.022        0.025           0.025           0.024         0.081***
trade union                                                      (1.09)       (1.17)          (1.07)          (1.02)        (3.03)
                                                                 0.006        0.007           0.007           0.006         0.021
Belong to                                                        -0.028       -0.067*         -0.057          -0.069*       -0.059
professional                                                     (-0.92)      (-1.94)         (-1.56)         (-1.86)       (-1.55)
association                                                      -0.007       -0.018          -0.015          -0.018        -0.015
Unpaid voluntary                                                              -0.017          -0.019          -0.023        -0.055
work for                                                                      (-0.37)         (-0.39)         (-0.46)       (-1.09)
trade union                                                                   -0.004          -0.005          -0.006        -0.014
Unpaid voluntary                                                              0.130**         0.128**         0.127**       0.130**
work for                                                                      (2.33)          (2.21)          (2.18)        (2.22)
professional associations                                                     0.036           0.036           0.036         0.036
Rightist                                                                                      0.009*          0.008         0.008
                                                                                              (1.71)          (1.51)        (1.49)
                                                                                              0.002           0.002         0.002
Free making                                                                                                   0.010**       0.013***
decisions in the job                                                                                          (2.35)        (3.14)
                                                                                                              0.003         0.003
Country fixed effects                No            No            No             No             No             No            Yes
N                                    17917         16833         16833          16833          14171          13783         13783
Prob>chi2                            0.000         0.000         0.000          0.000          0.000          0.000         0.000
Pseudo R2                            0.020         0.023         0.023          0.023          0.023          0.023         0.037
Notes: Coefficients in bold, z-statistics in parentheses, marginal effects in italics. The symbols *, **, *** represent statistical
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
                                                         39
Next, we explore the relationship between Protestantism and work ethic. The variable

that expresses the strongest work centrality would be “work should always come first,

even if it means less spare time.” We therefore use this variable as the dependent

variable and extend the first six specifications reported in the previous tables with a

dummy variable for being Protestant. We also control for income in these

specifications. We added the income variable sequentially due to some issues with the

construction. The household income variable covers a ten-point scale based on

income decile counting all wages, salaries, pensions and other incomes that come in

(after taxes and other deductions). However, the ten-point income scale is based on

national currencies, which precludes conducting a cross-country comparison. A proxy

for economic situation could be regarded as the respondent’s self-classification into

various economic classes. However, this variable has not been collected in all

countries. It therefore makes sense (because of missing variables) to include the

variable sequentially. Interestingly, we observe a positive correlation between being

Protestant and work ethic. The coefficient is always statistically significant at the 1%

level. Thus, this result is compatible with Weber’s thesis, since the specific work ethic

only provides incentives if the individual seeks salvation by hard work and an ascetic

lifestyle.

        Another interesting result is that we observe a negative correlation between

income and work ethic. It may be that a higher income reduces the need to prioritize

work centrality, however, causal direction is not clear as work centrality may lead to

higher income levels. Thus, the quantitative effects should be treated with caution.

This is another reason why we have included the variable sequentially into the

specifications. As our aim is to show “better correlations” under a ceteris paribus

assumption, we avoid a detailed discussion on identifying the pattern of causality in


                                               40
this relationship (e.g. instrumental variable approach). Longitudinal investigations

could provide a better analysis. It is highly likely that a mutual influence exists,

although it is unclear which direction has a greater impact.



                         Table 6: Protestantism, Work Ethic and Income

Dependent variable                                Work Should Always Come First
Independent variables         (29)           (30)       (31)     (32)      (33)           (34)
Protestant                    0.086***       0.088*** 0.101*** 0.103*** 0.097***          0.099***
                              (3.33)         (3.32)     (3.70)   (3.79)    (3.30)         (3.35)
                              0.018          0.018      0.021    0.022     0.020          0.020
Income                        -0.017***      -0.017*** -0.015*** -0.015*** -0.021***      -0.023***
                              (-4.33)        (-4.08)    (-3.75)  (-3.79)   (-4.67)        (-5.07)
                              -0.003         -0.003     -0.003   -0.003    -0.004         -0.004
Same independent              Yes            Yes        Yes      Yes       Yes            Yes
variables as used in
Tables 2-5
N                               15247         14369       14369       14369       12219   11895
Prob>chi2                       0.000         0.000       0.000       0.000       0.000   0.000
Pseudo R2                       0.040         0.043       0.043       0.043       0.046   0.046
Notes: The symbols *** represent statistical significance at the 1% levels. We report
the marginal effects of the highest score (dependent variable).




In Table 7 we extend this analysis, including the income variable in three out of the

former reported specifications. Compared to, e.g., Table 2 we report a summary of

specification 1, 6 and 7 adding the income variable to these former specifications (in

Table 7). In other words, we are focusing on three specifications used previously in all

tables, namely the first one and the last two. The results in Table 7 indicate that

income is also negatively correlated with the other work centrality factors explored in

previous tables although the coefficient for income is not statistically significant in

decreasing the work importance. It should be noted that we use a static concept of

income, whereas Hamermesh (2001) found that changes in earnings affect job

satisfaction and that effects of earnings shocks on job satisfaction dissipate over time.

Moreover, focusing only on absolute income does not allow to check whether income


                                                      41
is evaluated relative to some comparison level. In this case absolute income may act

as a poor measure of relative income (Clark 1996). However, the concept of relative

income may be more for an investigation of job satisfaction than it is for the work

values explored in this study.



                                Table 7: Income and Work Centrality

Dependent variable                                   Importance of work in life
Independent variables                      (35)                 (36)                    (37)
Income                                 -0.013***            -0.018***               -0.017***
                                         (-2.91)              (-3.49)                 (-2.92)
                                         -0.005               -0.007                  -0.006
First and last two specifications
                                         Yes                    Yes                   Yes
as used in Tables 2-5
Country fixed effects                     No                   No                     Yes
N                                        16062                12507                  12507
Prob>chi2                                0.000                0.000                  0.000
Pseudo R2                                0.016                0.023                  0.049


Dependent variable                                 Work is a duty towards society
Independent variables                      (38)                 (39)                    (40)
Income                                 -0.015***            -0.021***               -0.022***
                                         (-3.82)              (-4.70)                 (-4.51)
                                         -0.004               -0.006                  -0.006
First and last two specifications
                                         Yes                    Yes                   Yes
as used in Tables 2-5
Country fixed effects                     No                   No                     Yes
N                                        15256                11902                  11902
Prob>chi2                                0.000                0.000                   0.00
Pseudo R2                                0.020                0.023                  0.036


Dependent variable                                 Decrease of Work Importance
Independent variables                     (41)                 (42)                   (43)
Income                                  -0.002                0.001                 0.014**
                                        (-0.46)               (0.24)                 (2.39)
                                        -0.001                0.000                  0.005
First and last two specifications
                                         Yes                    Yes                   Yes
as used in Tables 2-5
Country fixed effects                     No                   No                     Yes
N                                        15471                12194                  12194
Prob>chi2                                0.000                0.000                   0.00
Pseudo R2                                0.057                0.059                  0.091




                                                   42
It is still unclear whether work values crowd-out family and leisure values in Eastern

Europe. If the lower work centrality in Western Europe is derived by choice we would

observe a higher preference for leisure. In other words, countries with lower work

centrality should have higher preferences for leisure. On the other hand, if countries

experience real economic constraints we may observe no relationship or even a

(strong) positive relationship if work efforts allow one to conduct activities such as

leisure. Thus, economic need and scarcity of resources may play a major role. It might

be possible to explain this with the notion of Maslovian needs-reduction: increasing

living standards, economic security and no-major institutional shifts allows for the

trade-off experience between work and leisure. We explore this aspect in a primitive

manner by using scatterplots that demonstrate the relationship; first for countries in

the European Union (see Figure 6) and then Eastern European countries (see Figure

7). In line with previous figures we use average values of the first four World Values

Survey waves.

                            Figure 6: Work and Leisure Centrality in EU-15 Countries


                                  France
         .65




                                                Austria

                    Italy             Spain                                                            Sweden
         .6




                                                          Belgium
                                                                    Greece
                                      Ireland
         .55




                                              Luxembourg
                                                    Finland
         .5




                                                                                               Netherlands


                                                                               Great Britain
         .45




                                                                             Denmark

               .3               .35              .4              .45                   .5                .55
                                           Leisure is very important in life

                               Work is very important in life                  Fitted values



      Note: Portugal has been omitted as an extreme outlier.

                                                                    43
Interestingly, Figure 6 reports a negative correlation between work and leisure values

(r=-0.47). Sweden appears as an outlier. Excluding Sweden would lead to a

substantially stronger negative correlation (r=-75). On the other hand, Figure 7 shows

a positive correlation (r=0.44). Similarly, if we exclude the outlier Albania, the

positive correlation increases significantly (r=0.77). Such a result may indicate that

countries in Eastern Europe who experience (financial) restrictions may have limited

ability to promote leisure centrality.



                      Figure 7: Work and Leisure Centrality in Eastern Europe


                     Albania                                                 Macedonia, Republic of
           .8




                                                                                      Bosnia and Herzegovina



                                                                                       Turkey
           .7




                                                         Poland
                                               Armenia
                                                  Romania
                                                                  Slovenia
           .6




                                           Serbia and Montenegro
                                                            Slovakia       Georgia
                                                      Bulgaria
                                                                   Hungary
                                                  Kyrgyzstan
                                    Latvia
                                     Czech Republic           Azerbaijan
                                               Ukraine       Croatia
           .5




                                                Republic of Moldova
                               Lithuania
                                           Estonia
                .1                 .2                     .3                         .4                   .5
                                           Leisure is very important in life

                           Work is very important in life                         Fitted values




We now consider family values. There is a growing literature that explores the work-

family conflict (for early overviews see Greenhaus and Beutell 1985, Hansen 1991).

Poelmans and Sahibzada (2004) introduce their study with the statement: “The

integration of women in the labour force in Europe, as in most developing and

developed countries, has led to the intensification of conflict between work and family

                                                            44
in the lives of many individuals. From a historical point of view, this shift from

traditional to dual-earner families is a revolution because it has radically changed the

way we conceive work and working schedules, gender roles and relationships, and the

distribution of domestic and educational tasks in families” (pp. 409-410). As an

example, the proportion of dual-earner couples in the US has doubled between the

1960s and the late 1980s. Because multiple roles compete for a person’s time, this

leads to time-based conflicts. In other words, there is too much to do and too little

time to handle it (Hansen 1991, p. 348). Moreover, strains created by one environment

make it difficult to meet the demands of another environment (Greenhaus and Beutell

1985). This has led to considerable debates about the social significance of behavioral

shifts in employment and household arrangements (Bielby 1992). In the last few

decades, there has been increased interest in addressing work-family conflicts by

exploring family-friendly policies (Poelmans and Sahibzada 2004). If one (or society

in general) experiences financial limitations, then work centrality can substantially

improve the family conditions and the relative income position. On the other hand, in

societies where financial problems are less severe, it is less clear whether work values

promote family values. Figure 8 reports the situation for Eastern Europe and Figure 9

for EU-15 countries. We observe a very strong and positive correlation between work

and family centrality (r=0.76) for Eastern Europe. However, Figure 8 shows a

positive but a substantially smaller correlation (r=0.37) for Western Europe.




                                              45
                   Figure 8: Work and Family Centrality in Eastern Europe


                                                                                    Albania
.8                                                                           Macedonia, Republic of
                                                                            Bosnia and Herzegovina
                                                                                                  Turkey
.7



                                                                                  Poland
                                                               Armenia
                                                              Romania
                                                Slovenia
.6




                                                              Serbia and Montenegro
                                           Bulgaria                  Slovakia
                                                      Czech Republic  Hungary  Georgia
                                                               Kyrgyzstan
              Latvia                                      Azerbaijan
                                                          Ukraine
                                                  Croatia
.5




                                                  Republic of Moldova
      Lithuania Estonia
.4




        .7                           .8                          .9                                         1
                                  Family is very important in life

                       Work is very important in life                        Fitted values




                  Figure 9: Work and Family Centrality in EU-15 Countries


                                                              France
.65




                                                                        Austria
                                                    Spain                        Sweden
                                                                              Italy
.6




                                                              Belgium
                                                Greece
                                                                                              Ireland
.55




                                                                           Luxembourg
                                        Finland
.5




                                  Netherlands


                                                                                  Great Britain
      Portugal
.45




                                                                          Denmark

        .75                      .8                .85                               .9                    .95
                                   Family is very important in life

                       Work is very important in life                        Fitted values




                                                         46
Now, if one assumes that work is more of a necessity rather than pleasure in Eastern

Europe, this raises the question of whether hard work is perceived as an important

quality that children are encouraged to learn at home. We speculate that we may not

observe a positive relationship, particularly if parents (or the society in general) hope

to improve the economic situation in the future for their children (less need to

improve financial situation). On the contrary, we may even observe a negative

relationship, especially if it is extrinsically driven. On the other hand, in a high

income society, there is a better chance of transferring values to children that one

really intrinsically “believes in”. Frey (1997) points out that “increasing role of

intrinsic work motivation in economically advanced societies leads firm’s executives

to make a greater effort to maintain work morale which is better achieved             by

increasing participation” (p. 101).

       The following two figures represent the link between importance of work and

the importance of passing on the work ethic to children. There is indeed a relatively

strong negative relationship in Eastern Europe as shown in Figure 10 (r=-0.626)

compared to hardly any relationship in EU-15 countries (Figure 11).




                                               47
Figure 10: Work Importance and Hard Work as Quality to Encourage Children in

                                        Eastern Europe


                     Macedonia, Republic of            Albania
.8
                                               Bosnia and Herzegovina


                                                                         Turkey
.7




                                                           Poland
                                                                                     Armenia
                                                                         Romania
                     Slovenia
.6




                                                Serbia and Montenegro
                                                                    Slovakia
                                                                                   Georgia
                                                                                             Bulgaria
                                           Hungary                       Czech Republic
                                                                                         Kyrgyzstan
                                                                              Azerbaijan Latvia
                                                                                       Ukraine
                                                             Croatia
.5




                                                                                    Estonia
                                                                                        Republic of Moldova
                                                                                           Lithuania

      .2                   .4               .6                  .8                                      1
                       Hard work mentioned as an important child quality

                      Work is very important in life                         Fitted values




Figure 11: Work Importance and Hard Work as Quality to Encourage Children in

                                       EU-15 Countries


                                                                    France
.65




                      Austria

             Sweden                    Italy                 Spain
.6




                                                  Belgium
                                             Greece
                                          Ireland
.55




                                                                               Luxembourg
                      Finland
.5




                        Netherlands


                                           Great Britain
                                                                                             Portugal
.45




           Denmark

      0                     .2                .4                 .6                                     .8
                           Hard work mentioned as an important child quality

                      Work is very important in life                         Fitted values




                                                       48
We now return to Schwartz’s (1999) classification regarding societal norms about

work. He points out that societal norms are expected to define work as an entitlement

such that all workers deserve similar outcomes (Egalitarianism) providing the

opportunity for interesting and meaningful work (Intellectual Autonomy). On the other

hand, in societies where Conservatism and Hierarchy values are especially important,

societal norms are expected to define work as more of an obligation. This may require

workers to “accept the role obligations imposed on them and to fit into the

institutional arrangements provided, regardless of personal satisfactions” (p. 42).

        To get a better idea of elements such as interesting and meaningful work, we

need to take a closer look at the aspects of a job that are reported as important. We

therefore consider the following elements 10: Good job, pleasant people to work with,

not too much pressure, good job security, good chances for promotion, a job

respected by people in general, good hours, an opportunity to use initiative, a useful

job for society, generous holidays, meeting people, a job in which you feel you can

achieve something, a responsible job, a job that is interesting, and a job that meets

one’s abilities. These questions also allow us to explore what Schwartz (1999, p. 43)

defines as core goals: intrinsic (personal growth, autonomy, interest, and creativity),

extrinsic (pay and security), social (contact with people and contribution to society),

and power (prestige, authority, influence). Schwartz (1999) points out that these

elements depend in part on the prevailing cultural values in a society. Goals chosen by

managers to motivate workers will be more effective if they are in line with the

prevailing cultural emphases. The pursuit of power values should be more acceptable

in cultures where Hierarchy and Mastery values are emphasized. In such cultures, the

use of power and prestige is therefore a more effective tool with which to reward
10
  Question was framed: Here are some aspects of a job that people say are important. Please look at
them and tell me which ones you personally think are important in a job? (mentioned or not).


                                                    49
workers. The pursuit of these values is more individually or organisational driven

which would be less prevalent in a society where Harmony and Egalitarianism are

important. The pursuit of intrinsic work values, personal growth and the opportunity

for creativity and autonomy are more likely to be seen as desirable and justifiable in

societies where Autonomy is emphasized. In contrast, Conservatism diminishes such

work goals. A general summary of dimensions of work and the cultural values

emphasized is presented in Table 8. We use Schwartz’s (1999) classification and

apply it to proxies obtained from the WVS. As can be seen in Table 8, some work

values appear in more than one classification. For example, a job in which you feel

you can achieve something might be driven by power or intrinsic values. Clearly, our

classification within these different dimensions of work is not perfect, and is thus

open to criticism.

       Masuda et al. (2011) argue that intrinsic job characteristics are strongly related

with job satisfaction in individualistic and more economically developed countries.

Thus, we may expect to observe direct work value differences between Eastern and

Western Europe. Halman (1996) also points out that work “in modern affluent

societies is no longer only a biological and economic necessity. It is also and foremost

an intrinsically rewarding and creative activity” (p. 4). He also stresses in Halman

(2010) that an increase in prosperity goes hand in hand with the reinforcement of an

intrinsic work orientation. On the other hand, an economic recession and rising levels

of unemployment are likely to focus material priorities. Halman (1996, p. 4) argues

that in“terms of values, the shift occurred in the domain of work, has been more an

emphasis on extrinsic or instrumental work orientation towards values stressing

creativity, autonomy and self-expression and personal development” (Halman 1996,

p. 4). He also points out that countries in Eastern Europe are lagging behind with


                                              50
respect to modernization and individualization, which may reduce the emphasis on

self-expression.



                               Table 8: Work and Cultural Values

Dimensions of Work                                          Cultural Values Emphases

                                             Compatible                  Conflicting

Society Norms about Working
Entitlement vs. Obligation                   Egalitarianism              Conservatism
                                             Intellectual Autonomy       Hierarchy
Work Values
Power                                        Hierarchy                     Harmony
 - A job in which you feel you can Mastery                                 Egalitarianism
      achieve something
 - A job that meets one’s ability
 - Good pay
 - Good chances of promotion
 - A job respected by people in general
Intrinsic                                    Intellectual Autonomy         Conservatism
 - An opportunity to use initiative          Affective Autonomy
 - A job that is interesting
 - A job in which you feel you can
      achieve something
 - A job that meets one’s ability
Extrinsic                                    Conservatism                  Intellectual Autonomy
WVS proxies:                                 Hierarchy
 - Good pay
 - Good job security
 - Good chances for promotion
 - Good hours
 - Generous holidays
 - A job respected by people in general
Social                                       Egalitarianism                Hierarchy
WVS proxies:                                 Harmony                       Mastery
     - Pleasant people to work with.
     - Meeting people
     - A useful job for society
Source: Schwartz (1999, p. 41) and own categorization of factors based on the World Values Survey.




As mentioned previously, these variables have not been explored intensively on the

dependent side. Taking into account that national governments and supranational

bodies make references to more and better jobs, it is not difficult to build a case for

the importance of such variables (Green and Tsitsianis 2005). One of the aspects most

frequently analysed is probably job security. For example, Blanchflower and Oswald


                                                     51
(1999) explore individuals’ perceived job security directly by working with

International Social Survey Programme data that asks the question: “How much do

you agree or disagree that your job is secure?”. They find that job security is greater

among older workers, those who supervise, and people working in the public sector.

Moreover, as an independent variable, the expectations of possible job loss has one of

the largest reported negative effects on job satisfaction. The radical restructuring of

American business in the 1980s has transformed secure work environments into

insecure environments. More than a million white collar jobs were lost within a period

of two years, as merging, downsizing, divesting or restructuring were carried out

based on changing technological and economic conditions. Even the public sector was

affected by privatizations and budget cuts (Roskies et al. 1993). Similarly, 42 percent

of US organisations conducted employee layoffs in 2000 and 2001, reducing 10-13

percent of the workforce on average (Probst and Lawler 2006, p. 235). Moreover, the

anticipation of job security may exert effects similar to experiencing the harm itself,

and job insecurity is a predictor of increased psychological stress or medical

consultations (Roskies et al. 1993). A corporate downsizing also breaks the

psychological contract between hard work and corporate loyalty. Even after the

downsizing process is completed, this leads to distrust and speculation among the

remaining workers as to whether they will be next (Probst and Lawler 2006). It can

also reduce workers’ locus of control; defined by Chen et al. (2004) as the “belief that

people control outcomes at work, such as promotions, layoffs, and salary levels” (p.

355). Green and Tsitsianis (2005) observe that job security is a major determinant of

job quality, but job insecurity is not a plausible explanation of declining job

satisfaction in Britain. Furthermore, even as insecurity increased during the 1990s in

Germany, insecurity alone fails to account for the changes observed in that country.


                                              52
       The following empirical exercise will also allow a better exploration of further

work-role factors that are essential to an understanding of job satisfaction (Sousa-Poza

and Sousa-Poza 2000 but have not been intensively studied as dependent variables.

Previous research has found, for example, that preferences towards pay and promotion

(extrinsic factors) are negatively correlated with job satisfaction, whereas an emphasis

on relations (intrinsic element) at work is associated with higher job satisfaction

(Clark 1997).

       We report the results in Table 9 and 10. For simplicity, we only report the

estimations calculated on the full set of variables. Based on the results of the previous

estimations, it is relevant to include regional differences. Souza-Poza and Sousa-Poza

(2000) conclude that work-role factors differ substantially from country to country, a

result that is clearly borne out in our study. We observe that people from Eastern

Europe are driven by extrinsic rather than intrinsic motivations; and are more

interested in power than social aspects. They care more about good pay, job security,

and the chance of promotion than they do about the opportunity of using initiative, the

feeling that you can achieve something or a job with responsibility. They also care

less about meeting people and having the chance to work with pleasant people. On

average, Eastern Europeans care more about having a job that is respected by other

people and is useful for society. They also rank generous holidays, not too much

pressure, and good hours as important, although the last factor does not report a

statistically significant difference. These results also support our previous findings

and the classification developed by Schwartz (1999). Good pay and job security are

among the factors with the strongest regional differences when comparing the

marginal/quantitative effects. This may provide indirect validation of the speculations

regarding financial restrictions (see Figures 6 to 11).


                                               53
                                      Table 9: Elements of Work (Part I)

Dependent variables             Good pay     Pleasant     Limited      Job           Chance       Respected    Good          Use
                                             people       pressure     security      promotion    by people    hours         initiative
Independent variables           (29)         (30)         (31)         (32)          (33)         (34)         (35)          (36)
Eastern Europe                  0.502***     -0.123***    0.195***     0.272***      0.192***     0.277***     0.026         -0.215***
                                (17.45)      (-4.90)      (8.11)       (11.24)       (8.07)       (11.82)      (1.10)        (-9.11)
                                0.120        -0.040       0.073        0.099         0.074        0.110        0.010         -0.085
Age                             -0.012***    -0.006***    -0.001       -0.000        -0.012***    0.001        -0.005***     -0.007***
                                (-8.50)      (-4.78)      (-1.18)      (-0.18)       (-10.52)     (0.78)       (-4.30)       (-6.39)
                                -0.003       -0.002       -0.001       -0.000        -0.005       0.000        -0.002        -0.003
Female                          -0.198***    0.137***     -0.021       -0.024        -0.128***    -0.042*      0.109***      -0.061**
                                (-7.02)      (5.32)       (-0.85)      (-0.97)       (-5.29)      (-1.77)      (4.60)        (-2.57)
                                -0.050       0.044        -0.008       -0.009        -0.049       -0.017       0.043         -0.024
Education                       -0.008***    0.005*       -0.016***    -0.032***     0.004*       0.001        -0.015***     0.027***
                                (-3.29)      (1.91)       (-6.50)      (-12.45)      (1.80)       (0.56)       (-6.70)       (10.63)
                                -0.002       0.002        -0.006       -0.012        0.002        0.001        -0.006        0.011
Widowed                         -0.061       -0.072       -0.152*      0.042         -0.062       -0.046       -0.013        -0.214***
                                (-0.71)      (-0.89)      (-1.87)      (0.50)        (-0.78)      (-0.59)      (-0.17)       (-2.74)
                                -0.015       -0.024       -0.055       0.015         -0.024       -0.018       -0.005        -0.085
Divorced                        0.067        -0.083*      -0.056       -0.023        -0.061       -0.078*      -0.025        -0.049
                                (1.36)       (-1.84)      (-1.25)      (-0.52)       (-1.38)      (-1.82)      (-0.59)       (-1.14)
                                0.016        -0.027       -0.021       -0.008        -0.024       -0.031       -0.010        -0.020
Separate                        -0.093       -0.099       -0.044       -0.238***     -0.163*      -0.144*      -0.047        -0.053
                                (-0.95)      (-1.09)      (-0.49)      (-2.77)       (-1.89)      (-1.68)      (-0.55)       (-0.62)
                                -0.024       -0.033       -0.016       -0.091        -0.061       -0.057       -0.019        -0.021
Never married                   -0.010       0.137***     0.114***     -0.047        0.128***     0.023        -0.012        0.027
                                (-0.27)      (4.03)       (3.66)       (-1.48)       (4.17)       (0.75)       (-0.40)       (0.87)
                                -0.002       0.043        0.043        -0.017        0.050        0.009        -0.005        0.011
Part-time worker                -0.122***    -0.040       0.042        -0.128***     -0.086**     0.034        0.137***      -0.045
                                (-3.04)      (-1.02)      (1.15)       (-3.53)       (-2.37)      (0.95)       (3.81)        (-1.26)
                                -0.032       -0.013       0.016        -0.048        -0.033       0.013        0.054         -0.018
Self-employed                   -0.071       -0.090**     0.113***     -0.199***     -0.009       0.108***     -0.069*       0.247***
                                (-1.58)      (-2.22)      (2.94)       (-5.14)       (-0.24)      (2.83)       (-1.82)       (6.30)
                                -0.018       -0.030       0.043        -0.076        -0.004       0.043        -0.028        0.096
Church attendance               0.026***     0.011*       0.061***     0.046***      0.047***     0.043***     0.053***      0.042***
                                (3.92)       (1.81)       (10.81)      (8.18)        (8.46)       (7.90)       (9.72)        (7.68)
                                0.006        0.003        0.022        0.017         0.018        0.017        0.021         0.017
Religious                       -0.038       0.017        0.013        0.066***      -0.004       0.072***     -0.066***     -0.029
                                (-1.49)      (0.75)       (0.58)       (3.06)        (-0.18)      (3.40)       (-3.11)       (-1.36)
                                -0.010       0.006        0.005        0.024         -0.002       0.029        -0.026        -0.012
Belong to                       0.008        0.129***     -0.062**     0.037         -0.115***    -0.099***    0.060**       0.003
trade union                     (0.23)       (4.22)       (-2.15)      (1.28)        (-4.06)      (-3.55)      (2.14)        (0.10)
                                0.002        0.041        -0.023       0.135         -0.044       -0.039       0.024         0.001
Belong to                       -0.015       0.130***     0.079*       -0.079*       0.094**      0.230***     -0.124***     0.294***
 professional                   (-0.30)      (2.75)       (1.79)       (-1.80)       (2.14)       (5.33)       (-2.89)       (6.54)
 association                    -0.004       0.041        0.030        -0.029        0.036        0.092        -0.050        0.114
Unpaid voluntary                -0.088       -0.083       -0.028       0.056         0.168***     0.115**      -0.085        0.095*
 work for                       (-1.36)      (-1.40)      (-0.49)      (0.97)        (2.99)       (2.09)       (-1.54)       (1.72)
 trade union                    -0.023       -0.027       -0.010       0.020         0.066        0.046        -0.034        0.037
Unpaid voluntary                -0.082       0.011        -0.090       -0.114*       0.003        0.055        -0.029        0.094
 work for                       (-1.11)      (0.15)       (-1.30)      (-1.66)       (0.05)       (0.82)       (-0.44)       (1.34)
 professional associations      -0.021       0.003        -0.033       -0.043        0.001        0.022        -0.012        0.037
Trust in                        0.033*       0.047***     0.053***     0.038**       0.007        0.048***     0.058***      -0.007
trade unions                    (1.82)       (2.87)       (3.44)       (2.40)        (0.48)       (3.16)       (3.87)        (-0.48)
                                0.008        0.015        0.020        0.014         0.003        0.019        0.023         -0.003
Trust in                        0.031*       0.051***     -0.058***    0.072***      0.005        0.040***     -0.003        0.017
education system                (1.64)       (3.02)       (-3.63)      (4.41)        (0.33)       (2.58)       (-0.22)       (1.10)
                                0.008        0.016        -0.021       0.027         0.002        0.016        -0.001        0.007
Follow politics                 -0.036***    -0.038***    -0.069***    -0.023**      -0.004       -0.006       -0.050***     0.051***
in the news                     (-2.96)      (-3.40)      (-6.69)      (-2.15)       (-0.37)      (-0.62)      (-4.94)       (5.04)
                                -0.009       -0.012       -0.026       -0.008        -0.001       -0.002       -0.020        0.020
Rightist                        0.011        0.002        -0.016***    -0.030***     0.016***     0.001        -0.005        0.008
                                (1.56)       (0.40)       (-2.75)      (-5.08)       (2.69)       (0.20)       (-0.90)       (1.35)
                                0.003        0.001        -0.006       -0.011        0.006        0.000        -0.002        0.003
N                               14933        14927        14906        14932         14911        14915        14917         14921
Prob>chi2                       0.000        0.000        0.000        0.000         0.000        0.000        0.000         0.000
Pseudo R2                       0.047        0.018        0.024        0.036         0.029        0.021        0.019         0.031
Notes: Coefficients in bold, z-statistics in parentheses, marginal effects in italics. The symbols *, **, *** represent statistical
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                                         54
                                   Table 10: Elements of Work (Part II)
Dependent variables          Useful for   Generous     Meeting     Achieve     Responsible   Interesting   Meets own
                             society      holidays     people      something   job           job           abilities
Independent variables        (37)         (38)         (39)        (40)        (41)          (42)          (43)
Eastern Europe               0.089***     0.118***     -0.097***   -0.145***   -0.208***     -0.030        0.100***
                             (3.80)       (4.82)       (-4.15)     (-6.12)     (-8.92)       (-1.22)       (4.20)
                             0.035        0.041        -0.039      -0.056      -0.083        -0.010        0.038
Age                          0.002**      -0.002*      -0.003***   -0.009***   -0.004***     -0.005***     -0.002
                             (2.17)       (-1.75)      (-2.95)     (-7.39)     (-3.70)       (-4.15)       (-1.51)
                             0.001        -0.001       -0.001      -0.003      -0.002        -0.002        -0.001
Female                       0.008        -0.075***    0.140***    -0.065***   -0.119***     0.040         -0.045*
                             (0.35)       (-3.01)      (5.91)      (-2.69)     (-5.02)       (1.61)        (-1.86)
                             0.003        -0.026       0.056       -0.025      -0.047        0.014         -0.017
Education                    0.003        -0.015***    0.003       0.018***    0.004*        0.023***      0.009***
                             (1.39)       (-5.83)      (1.29)      (7.85)      (1.67)        (8.81)        (3.66)
                             0.001        -0.005       0.001       0.007       0.002         0.008         0.003
Widowed                      -0.141*      0.007        -0.065      -0.047      -0.103        -0.130*       -0.213***
                             (-1.79)      (0.09)       (-0.85)     (-0.61)     (-1.32)       (-1.65)       (-2.77)
                             -0.054       0.003        -0.026      -0.018      -0.041        -0.047        -0.082
Divorced                     -0.081*      0.011        -0.009      0.013       -0.006        -0.094**      -0.082*
                             (-1.86)      (0.23)       (-0.22)     (0.31)      (-0.13)       (-2.12)       (-1.90)
                             -0.032       0.004        -0.004      0.005       -0.002        -0.034        -0.031
Separate                     -0.088       -0.050       -0.029      -0.088      -0.039        -0.046        -0.081
                             (-1.01)      (-0.55)      (-0.34)     (-1.02)     (-0.46)       (-0.53)       (-0.94)
                             -0.034       -0.017       -0.012      -0.034      -0.015        -0.016        -0.031
Never married                0.006        0.073**      0.088***    0.033       -0.031        0.119***      0.024
                             (0.21)       (2.31)       (2.88)      (1.05)      (-1.01)       (3.68)        (0.75)
                             0.002        0.026        0.035       0.013       -0.012        0.041         0.009
Part-time worker             -0.039       0.031        0.057       -0.112***   -0.164***     -0.127***     -0.026
                             (-1.09)      (0.83)       (1.61)      (-3.17)     (-4.65)       (-3.48)       (-0.73)
                             -0.015       0.011        0.023       -0.044      -0.065        -0.046        -0.010
Self-employed                0.105***     -0.151***    0.108***    0.216***    0.049         -0.023        0.153***
                             (2.76)       (-3.78)      (2.83)      (5.37)      (1.28)        (-0.59)       (3.84)
                             0.041        -0.051       0.043       0.081       0.020         -0.008        0.056
Church attendance            0.066***     0.030***     0.025***    0.041***    0.035***      0.010*        0.034***
                             (11.96)      (5.23)       (4.60)      (7.39)      (6.45)        (1.68)        (6.08)
                             0.026        0.010        0.010       0.016       0.014         0.003         0.013
Religious                    0.038*       -0.053**     0.028       0.036*      -0.007        -0.036        0.006
                             (1.78)       (-2.40)      (1.33)      (1.66)      (-0.33)       (-1.63)       (0.29)
                             0.015        -0.019       0.011       0.014       -0.003        -0.013        0.002
Belong to                    -0.126***    -0.009       -0.043      0.012       -0.058**      0.075**       -0.090***
trade union                  (-4.48)      (-0.31)      (-1.53)     (0.41)      (-2.08)       (2.54)        (-3.21)
                             -0.049       -0.003       -0.017      0.004       -0.023        0.026         -0.034
Belong to                    0.218***     -0.002       0.145***    0.188***    0.240***      0.182***      0.141***
 professional                (5.06)       (-0.05)      (3.34)      (4.20)      (5.53)        (3.91)        (3.13)
 association                 0.086        -0.001       0.058       0.071       0.095         0.061         0.052
Unpaid voluntary             0.167***     -0.054       0.014       0.099*      0.097*        -0.014        0.085
 work for                    (3.03)       (-0.92)      (0.25)      (1.78)      (1.74)        (-0.24)       (1.50)
 trade union                 0.066        -0.018       0.006       0.038       0.038         -0.005        0.031
Unpaid voluntary             0.005        -0.017       0.125*      0.147**     0.075         0.039         0.086
 work for                    (0.07)       (-0.23)      (1.84)      (2.02)      (1.10)        (0.53)        (1.22)
 professional associations   0.002        -0.006       0.050       0.056       0.030         0.014         0.032
Trust in                     0.059***     0.046***     0.038**     -0.019      -0.016        -0.015        0.008
trade unions                 (3.87)       (2.91)       (2.52)      (-1.25)     (-1.09)       (-0.95)       (0.52)
                             0.023        0.016        0.015       -0.007      -0.007        -0.005        0.003
Trust in                     0.049***     0.018        0.024       0.026*      0.045***      0.059***      0.033**
education system             (3.11)       (1.11)       (1.55)      (1.65)      (2.91)        (3.57)        (2.09)
                             0.019        0.006        0.010       0.010       0.018         0.021         0.013
Follow politics              0.015        -0.047***    0.026***    0.033***    0.044***      0.046***      0.012
in the news                  (1.49)       (-4.46)      (2.59)      (3.20)      (4.32)        (4.32)        (1.21)
                             0.006        -0.016       0.010       0.013       0.017         0.016         0.005
Rightist                     -0.028***    -0.024***    0.005       0.008       0.003         0.001         -0.006
                             (-4.94)      (-3.95)      (0.94)      (1.44)      (0.54)        (0.17)        (-1.04)
                             -0.011       -0.008       0.002       0.003       0.001         0.000         -0.002
N                            14921        14907        14918       14928       14923         14926         14928
Prob>chi2                    0.000        0.000        0.000       0.000       0.000         0.000         0.000
Pseudo R2                    0.022        0.012        0.011       0.023       0.017         0.017         0.010
Notes: See previous table.

                                                      55
We obtain some interesting insights from the control variables. Women care more

about social factors (pleasant people, meeting people) and less about extrinsic or

power factors, such as good pay, the chance of promotion, or whether the job is

respected by other people. In addition, women care more about good hours than about

generous holidays, holding the marital status constant. Bender et al. (2005) find that

job satisfaction among females is driven by the flexibility of the job in

accommodating family commitments. Consistent with the results from Clark (1997),

we find that women are less concerned with certain intrinsic elements of a job, such as

having the opportunity to use initiative, feeling that you can achieve something in the

job; having a responsible job or a job that meets one’s ability. Men rank promotion

prospects, pay and job security more highly than do women, but women care more

about the relations within the job, the actual work itself and the hours worked.

Similarly, Sousa-Poza and Sousa-Poza (2000, p. 529) also find that women value

“soft” aspects of a job, whereas men value “hard” aspects such as pay and job

security. In general, family-responsive policies are correlated with significantly lower

turnover intentions than employees without access to such policies (Masuda et al.

2011).

         Age is often negatively correlated with many of the factors explored. Kanfer

and Ackerman (2004) point out that among older workers, constraints on learning,

pay, and promotion often lessen the value of these factors and recognition in general

recognition: “As individuals enter midlife, extrinsic rewards for higher levels of

performance and achievement lose their lustre, as interest in affirming one’s identity

and concerns for protecting the self-concept increase” (p. 453). To some extent, this

can be seen in our results. The only factor that is positively correlated with age is the

desire to have a job that is useful for society, which may reflect an increased


                                               56
willingness to help society. Kanfer and Ackerman (2004) point out: “Rewards related

to emergent motives for knowledge utilization, helping, collaboration, and enhancing

positive affect have yet to be addressed in either theory or practice. If theories of work

motivation suggest that older workers are, as a group, less motivated, perhaps the

problem lies in limitations of our current theories and organization practices, rather

than with the class of individuals” (p. 456). Our results are not in line with Halman’s

(1996) predictions. His argument is that the older generations were raised and

socialized in more traditional configurations and will opt for traditional values while

young people have been exposed to the influence of modernization and

individualization, leading to expressive work values (using initiative, responsibility,

achieving something, meeting one’s abilities and an interesting job).

       Moreover, it is interesting to note that education is strongly correlated with

intrinsic and social values rather than extrinsic factors. The highly educated care less

about job security and payment as they are more likely to enter jobs with better pay

and conditions and may be more flexible regarding job changes and evaluation of

different alternatives if they are unhappy (for a discussion see Halman 1996).

However, more educated people have power ambitions (e.g., higher importance of

promotion). Single/never married people care about social interaction, getting positive

feedback such as promotions, generous holidays, and an interesting job. Self-

employed people are more risk seeking (lower preferences for job security), care

about power and societal factors such as being respected by people, and about doing a

job that is useful for society or to achieve something. They like to meet people but

they care less whether their work-colleagues are pleasant. They care a lot whether

their job meets their own abilities as this consideration may increase likelihood of

surviving self-employment. Interestingly, belonging to professional associations is


                                               57
related to caring more about intrinsic work elements over extrinsic factors such as

good pay, job security, or generous holidays.

       In general, we require a better understanding with respect to these factors and

how they drive work motivation and not just work satisfaction or work centrality.

Elements such as affective and intrinsic experiences may be crucial for understanding

the development of societies. Modern theories of work motivation tend to emphasize

the importance of intrinsic elements (Kenfer and Ackerman 2004). Frey (1997, pp.

88-102) has explored the relationship between intrinsic and extrinsic incentives in the

work context. For example, when a work activity is supported by high work morale

and external intervention, an unstable psychological situation arises in which actors

seek to reduce “over-motivation”. The only motivation under the person’s control is

the intrinsic work motivation, and they decrease this in response to a crowding-out

effect. The problem is compounded by the fact that building up work morale is a

much slower process than destroying it. An external intervention may only raise

intrinsic work motivation when people employees regard this action as

acknowledging their (existing) high work morale. A crowding-out effect is

particularly problematic in situations where employees have a high work morale, an

interesting task, and where there are personal relationships between principal

(employer) and agent (employee) that supports intrinsic work motivation, or where

agents are able to participate in the decision process of the principal. Frey (1997)

points out that a crowding-out effect takes place when external interventions are

perceived as controlling. On the other hand, when the intervention is understood by

the workers as supportive, intrinsic motivation to work is unaffected or can even

improve (p. 93).




                                                58
         As the primary material reward for work, the results on income are especially

interesting. It seems that people with higher income care more about the ability to use

initiative, having an interesting job or achieving something and less about job

security, good hours, generous holidays, and meeting people.



                                Table 11: Income and Work Values


Dependent Variables from       Income       z-stat    Marg. Eff.    N         Prob>chi2     Pseudo R2
prior Specifications
Good pay                       0.001        (0.11)    0.000         12852     0.000         0.049
Pleasant people                -0.004       (-0.77)   -0.001        12847     0.000         0.017
Limited pressure               -0.045***    (-8.47)   -0.017        12833     0.000         0.031
Job security                   -0.036***    (-6.81)   -0.013        12852     0.000         0.043
Chance promotion               0.006        (1.14)    0.002         12834     0.000         0.033
Respected by people            -0.017***    (-3.31)   -0.007        12840     0.000         0.023
Good hours                     -0.035***    (-6.86)   -0.014        12840     0.000         0.023
Use initiative                 0.021***     (4.07)    0.008         12844     0.000         0.033
Useful for society             -0.025***    (-4.85)   -0.010        12843     0.000         0.024
Generous holidays              -0.015***    (-2.77)   -0.005        12832     0.000         0.011
Meeting people                 -0.022***    (-4.39)   -0.009        12841     0.000         0.013
Achieve something              0.010*       (1.85)    0.004         12849     0.000         0.025
Responsible job                0.003        (0.64)    0.001         12845     0.000         0.019
Interesting job                0.012**      (2.28)    0.004         12848     0.000         0.016
Meets own abilities            0.003        (0.65)    0.001         12848     0.000         0.011
Notes: The symbols *, **, *** represent statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels,
respectively.




Despite being a cross-sectional analysis, and advantage of the EVS is its ability to

cover a large set of work values. The key disadvantage (as discussed beforehand) is

clearly the fact that these are not large scale country surveys. Green and Tsitsianis

(2005) “call for larger samples that would permit more detailed analyses within

particular sectors or occupations. Moreover, future work in this mould can only be

supported if large-scale survey designers are willing and able to devote sufficient


                                                       59
interview time to proper instruments for measuring those intrinsic work

characteristics, which are known from many micro studies to have a major influence

on job satisfaction” (p. 423).



       V.       HETEROGENEITY AMONG COUNTRIES: A CLUSTER

                                                 ANALYSIS

So far we have classified countries into Eastern and Western Europe which has

allowed us to observe significant regional differences. However, a finer classification

of different countries could be interesting due to their different work values. We

therefore conduct a cluster analysis to determine the natural grouping of observations

at the country level. It is important to keep in mind the problems associated with

doing cross-country comparisons (Kristensen and Johansson 2008), however, the

advantage of a cluster analysis is to show relationships rather than providing rankings.

To visualize the finding of groups we will work with the hierarchical clustering

method. More precisely, we will use an average linkage hierarchical agglomerative

cluster analysis provided by the statistical software Stata. It has intermediate

properties of single and complete linkage clustering. It is based on “average

(dis)similarity of observations between the groups as the measure between the two

groups” (STATA Handbook on Cluster Analysis p. 13).

        Figure 12 presents a dendrogram focusing on mostly previously used proxies

for centrality. Since we are using WVS aggregated values over four time periods, we

can add another work value factor that is available in the WVS, but not in the EVS.11


11
  “Importance of work in your life” (% stating “very important”), “work as a duty towards society (%
agree strongly) and work should come first even it means less spare time (% agree strongly)11,
“mentioning that hard work is an important child quality”, and a new one, namely “in the long run,
hard work usually brings a better life” (scale for 1 to 10, 1=better life, 10= hard work doesn’t bring
success – it’s more a matter of luck and connections).

                                                      60
We have also added job satisfaction. 12 The first striking observation is that there are

two large clusters of nations. In the first group we find more Western European

countries compared to the second one. Northern European and Scandinavian countries

such as Sweden, Finland, Iceland, Ireland, and Lithuania form this first group. The

second covers more Southern, Western or Central European countries such as Spain,

Italy, Portugal, Poland, Ukraine, Netherlands, and Belgium. Interestingly, France

appears on the left-hand side with more of the Eastern European countries. In

addition, countries such as Denmark, Albania and Turkey can be seen as quite

different from the two main groupings.

                                        Figure 12: Cluster Analysis on Work Values




                                       Dendrogram for L2alnk cluster analysis
                                2
        L2 dissimilarity measure
           .5     1  0   1.5




                                    Serbia and Montenegro
                                           Czech Republic
                                                 Lithuania
                                               Netherlands
                                                    Poland




                                                   Finland


                                                  Sweden
                                                  Bulgaria




                                                  Slovenia


                                                  Slovakia
                                                   Albania




                                                 Romania
                                                   Ukraine
                                                  Belgium




                                                  Hungary




                                                 Denmark
                                                  Portugal




                                                   Estonia
                                                      Spain




                                                   Iceland
                                                    Ireland




                                                   Croatia




                                                     Latvia
                                                   France
                                                       Italy




                                                    Turkey




We next investigate the considerations evaluated as the most important factor when

looking for a job. The question was framed the following way:


12
     Overall, how satisfied or dissatisfied are you with your job? (1=Dissatisfied; 10=Satisfied).

                                                               61
       Now I would like to ask you something about the things which would seem to
       you, personally, most important if you were looking for a job. Here are some
       of the things many people take into account in relation to their work.
       Regardless of whether you're actually looking for a job, which one would you,
       personally, place first if you were looking for a job?

       A good income
       A safe job with no risk
       Working with people you like
       Doing an important job
       Do something for community


Figure 13 presents the results. We observe two groups, one large and one smaller that

includes Scandinavian countries such as Finland, Sweden, Norway in sub-group and

Slovenia, Switzerland and Turkey in another sub-group. The larger group is divided

into one group covering many Former Soviet Union countries such as Armenia,

Ukraine, Georgia, Azerbaijan. Another group includes Baltic countries such as

Estonia and Latvia together with countries such as Croatia, Czech Republic, Spain

and also (surprisingly) Kyrgyzstan. Ex-Yugoslavian countries such as Bosnia and

Herzegovina, Serbia and Montenegro, Macedonia are quite similar and are grouped

together with other Eastern European countries such as Hungary, Bulgaria, Albania,

Romania, or Moldova.




                                            62
                                 Figure 13: Cluster Analysis on Job Important Job Characteristics


                           .4           Dendrogram for L2alnk cluster analysis
   L2 dissimilarity measure
      .1     .2  0   .3




                                Bosnia and Herzegovina
                                 Macedonia, Republic of




                                 Serbia and Montenegro

                                   Republic of Moldova




                                        Czech Republic
                                              Lithuania




                                             Azerbaijan
                                               Slovakia

                                                Finland

                                               Sweden
                                               Slovenia
                                            Switzerland
                                               Bulgaria
                                                Albania




                                              Romania




                                                Ukraine
                                               Hungary




                                                Norway
                                                  Spain
                                                Estonia
                                                  Latvia
                                                Croatia




                                               Armenia

                                               Georgia
                                            Kyrgyzstan




                                                 Turkey
We now investigate particular work values based on Schwartz’s (1999) classification

developed in Table 8. In the earlier multivariate regression analyses, we only

differentiated between Eastern and Western Europe, although there are other theories

regarding the differences between regions. For example, Halman (1996) divides

Western Europe in three groups of countries based on the prevalent religion in a

country: Catholic (Italy, Spain, Portugal, and Ireland), Protestant countries (Iceland,

Norway, Sweden, Denmark) and mixed countries (Great Britain, Netherlands,

Belgium, Germany and France). He argues that individualized work values are most

prevalent in the Nordic countries of Europe, followed by countries in the north-

western part of Europe, and the southern countries. However, as mentioned, we are

not exploring rankings of regions in a cluster analysis; we are checking for regional

similarities.


                                                                   63
                             First, we take a look at the extrinsic factors (see Figure 14). Our cluster

analysis reports a large number of groups. Scandinavian countries such as Sweden,

Finland and Norway are quite similar, and Austria also fits into this group. Italy and

Spain are very similar, as are Great Britain and Ireland. This group is joined by

Luxembourg. Netherlands and Belgium are very similar as are Czech Republic and

Slovakia. Close to Czech Republic we find the Baltic countries Estonia, Latvia and

Lithuania. Bulgaria, Poland and Ukraine are also relatively similar. Interestingly,

there are also similarities between Portugal and Romania. Croatia is close to Hungary

while Greece is closer to Slovenia. Turkey is clearly an outlier. All of these results

indicate the general tendency towards similarities among neighbours or countries.

Looking at the two to three major groups of clusters we recognize the differences

between Eastern and Western Europe reflected in the multivariate analysis.



                             Figure 14: Extrinsic Elements as Dimension of Work


                                        Dendrogram for L2alnk cluster analysis
                            .8
   L2 dissimilarity measure
   .2       .4   0   .6




                                 Czech Republic



                                      Lithuania
                                   Luxembourg




                                    Netherlands



                                       Bulgaria

                                         Poland
                                        Finland
                                        Sweden




                                       Slovakia




                                        Ukraine


                                       Romania



                                       Slovenia
                                        Belgium


                                      Denmark




                                       Hungary
                                        Norway




                                       Portugal
                                            Spain


                                        Estonia
                                           Latvia



                                         Iceland




                                         Croatia
                                          Ireland




                                         France
                                         Austria




                                        Greece
                                   Great Britain


                                             Italy




                                          Turkey




                                                                 64
We now analyze intrinsic motivation (see Figure 15). Norway and Sweden are very

similar to each other. Finland is in the same group as Great Britain and Ireland.

Croatia is close to Moldova, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Armenia. Interestingly,

Greece and Poland are also quite similar. On this measure, Portugal is close to

Albania. There is also a group covering Austria, Italy, Denmark, Luxembourg.

Lithuania and Estonia are very close to each other as are Spain, France and Belgium.

Georgia and Latvia are also close. Here, the difference between Eastern Europe and

Western Europe is less clear when looking at larger clusters. Turkey is again an

outlier, this time also followed by Slovenia.



                                    Figure 15: Intrinsic Elements as Dimension of Work


                                     Dendrogram for L2alnk cluster analysis
                            .6
   L2 dissimilarity measure
         .2      0 .4




                                 Bosnia and Herzegovina
                                  Macedonia, Republic of
                                  Serbia and Montenegro




                                     Republic of Moldova
                                         Czech Republic

                                                Lithuania
                                            Luxembourg




                                              Azerbaijan
                                             Netherlands




                                                   Poland
                                                 Bulgaria


                                                 Slovakia
                                                  Albania




                                                  Ukraine




                                             Switzerland



                                                  Finland


                                                 Sweden
                                                 Slovenia
                                                Romania
                                                 Belgium
                                                Denmark




                                                 Hungary




                                                  Norway
                                                    Latvia
                                                  Estonia


                                                     Spain

                                                 Georgia
                                                 Armenia
                                                  Croatia
                                                 Portugal




                                                  Iceland

                                                   Ireland
                                                  France




                                                  Greece

                                              Kyrgyzstan
                                                  Austria




                                            Great Britain
                                                      Italy




                                                   Turkey




Figure 16 depicts Power as a dimension of work. The difference between Eastern and

Western Europe is neatly visible. Some countries are very similar, e.g., Great Britain

                                                           65
and Ireland, Norway and Sweden, Belgium and Spain, Lithuania and Slovakia

followed by Lithuania, Bulgaria and Poland, Croatia and Hungary. Turkey is again an

outlier.



                                        Figure 16: Power as a Dimension of Work


                                      Dendrogram for L2alnk cluster analysis
                .8
   L2 dissimilarity measure
    .2      .4  0     .6




                              Czech Republic

                                   Lithuania
                                Luxembourg




                                 Netherlands




                                      Poland




                                    Slovenia
                                    Slovakia

                                    Bulgaria




                                    Romania
                                      Finland




                                     Ukraine
                                     Sweden



                                     Belgium




                                    Hungary
                                   Denmark
                                     Norway




                                    Portugal
                                         Spain


                                     Estonia


                                        Latvia




                                      Croatia

                                      Iceland
                                       Ireland




                                     Greece
                                      Austria




                                      France
                                Great Britain




                                       Turkey
                                          Italy




                          Finally, we present the social element of work in Figure 17. There is a large

set of countries that are very close and the differentiation between Eastern and

Western Europe is less clear. Another group consists of Sweden, Norway, Iceland,

and the Netherlands. A further group is made up of Czech Republic, Poland,

Luxembourg, Slovakia and Spain. The largest group with a certain level of

dissimilarity with the countries consists of Austria, Ireland, Ukraine, Great Britain,

Finland, Denmark, Belgium, Lithuania, Estonia, and France. This kind of

heterogeneity in this large group somehow surprises.


                                                               66
                                  Figure 17: Power as a Dimension of Work


                                Dendrogram for L2alnk cluster analysis
                .8
   L2 dissimilarity measure
    .2        .40      .6




                              Czech Republic
                                   Lithuania




                                Luxembourg



                                 Netherlands
                                     Finland




                                      Poland
                                     Ukraine




                                    Slovakia




                                    Sweden
                                    Bulgaria


                                   Romania



                                    Slovenia
                                    Belgium
                                   Denmark




                                    Hungary
                                     Norway
                                      Ireland




                                     Estonia




                                        Spain




                                    Portugal
                                     Iceland




                                     Croatia



                                       Latvia
                                     Austria


                                Great Britain




                                     France




                                     Greece
                                         Italy




                                      Turkey
Overall, the trend observed in the multivariate analysis between Eastern and Western

Europe is reflected in the cluster analysis. However, looking at factors classified

under Power, Intrinsic, Extrinsic, and Social elements, we observe some

heterogeneity. The difference between Eastern and Western Europe is more obvious

for the power and extrinsic elements and less apparent for social and intrinsic factors.

We also observe some small clusters, of which the Scandinavian countries are one of

the strongest.




                                                       67
                    VI.     SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

Humans spend so much time in their life at ‘work’ that it is crucial for social sciences

to understand work values. The core (empirical) analysis investigates work centrality

and work values. job satisfaction, covering a large number of job elements. We also

discuss the literature on job satisfaction and we us scatterplots to show the correlation

of job satisfaction and happiness and GDP per capita. Understanding job satisfaction

can help to increase productivity and firm success, to understand the labour market

and other aspects of work behavior such as shirking or absenteeism. It may even help

to understand macro-economic business cycles. Researchers from psychology,

management and organizational sciences have been working on this topic for quite a

while, long before economists started to work on job satisfaction,. A paper by Wright

(2006) reports that more than 10,000 studies have been published on job satisfaction.

There have been many mixed results, even for core factors such gender and age.

Methodological improvements have developed over time, through the use of panel

data and better techniques for dealing with causal relationships. However, while the

literature on job satisfaction is extensive, the empirical investigation on (other) work

values has remained scarce in relative terms. Other work values such as intrinsic and

extrinsic job factors or job centrality have primarily been explored as factors that

influence job satisfaction rather than as the focus of intensive treatment as

endogenous or dependent factors.

       We have discussed key puzzles of interest to economists, such as the

development of different working hours between Europe and the US. It seems that

preferences and institutional conditions have shaped such differences. There is a

negative relationship between general well-being and working hours, and job



                                               68
satisfaction and working hours. Job satisfaction on the other hand is correlated with

the level of GDP and well-being.

       A key focus of this study is the difference between Eastern and Western

Europe. In previous research, Eastern Europe has not been explored in detail, and

there is a general lack of studies that analyze a large set of countries together. Most

existing studies are single-country investigations. Clearly, cross-country studies are

problematic and we discuss the shortcomings.

       Moreover, research on job satisfaction has attracted criticism for its

atheoretical nature. Therefore, we have worked with a theoretical framework on

values developed by Schwartz (1999), applying to the work environment it in line

with Schwartz (1999) by focusing empirically on elements provided by the EVS.

Our results indicate that work centrality is substantially more dominant in Eastern

Europe. Age is also positively related with work centrality which might be important

as a large share of people in the workforce are forty-five years or older (increasing

trend). On the other hand, work is less central for women compared with men. Part-

time workers (working less than 30 hours per week) are substantially less likely to

care about work compared to full-time employees. We report a negative relationship

between education and work centrality, yet trust in education is positively related with

work centrality. Work is more central to the lives of the self-employed than it is to

full-time employees. Interestingly, we observe a clear tendency in positive

correlations between religiosity and work centrality. Even in today’s society, there is

an observable impact of being Protestant (controlling for religiosity and church

attendance) on the extreme work centrality (“work should always come first, even if it

means less spare time”). Moreover, ideology is relevant: people who identify as



                                              69
‘rightist’ are more likely to rank work highly. On the other hand, there is a negative

correlation between income and work centrality.

Interestingly, there is a clear trade-off between work and leisure in Western Europe,

but not in Eastern Europe. This could be explained in a Maslovian framework in

which an increase of living standards and economic security allows for such a trade-

off, while people in Eastern Europe need to work harder to achieve their leisure

preferences. There is a strong correlation between family and work centrality in

Eastern Europe, while the effect is less strong for Western Europe. It might be that

work is more of a necessity rather than pleasure in Eastern Europe. A strong negative

correlation is reported between work centrality and the belief that hard work is an

important quality which children can be encouraged to learn at home. For Western

Europe (EU-15 countries) there is hardly any relationship between both variables.

       Seeking a better understanding of the differences between work values, we

looked closely at various domains. We observed clearly that people from Eastern

Europe are more driven by extrinsic rather intrinsic motivation, by power and less by

social aspects. They care more about good pay, job security and the chance of

promotion than they do about the opportunity to use initiative, a job in which it feels

possible to achieve something or a responsible job. They also care less about meeting

people and working with pleasant people. On the other hand, they care more about

having a job that is respected by other people and is useful for society. They also care

more about generous holidays, not too much pressure, and good hours (although the

last factor does not report a statistically significant difference). These results support

previous findings obtained and the classification developed by Schwartz (1999). Good

pay and job security are among the factors with the strongest regional differences

based on the marginal/quantitative effects. Moreover, it is interesting to note that

                                               70
education is strongly correlated with intrinsic and social values rather than extrinsic

factors. However, highly educated people have also ambitions for power (e.g., higher

importance of promotion). Women care more about social factors (pleasant people,

meeting people) and less about extrinsic or power factors, such as good pay, the

chance of promotion, or whether it is a job respected by people. On the other hand,

they care more about good hours than about generous holidays, holding the marital

status constant. People with higher income care more about the ability to use their

initiative, having an interesting job or achieving something and less about job

security, good hours, generous holidays, and meeting people.

       We explored whether there are general differences between Eastern and

Western Europe when controlling for a large set of factors. Future research could go

further and check whether the independent factors influence these two regions in a

different manner. Moreover, it may have been interesting to better explore differences

between Central Eastern European countries and the Former Soviet Union countries,

since communism may have had a less pervasive effect on the structure of life in

Central European countries (Schwartz and Bardi 1997, p. 388).

       Using the explorative approach afforded by an average linkage hierarchical

agglomerative cluster analysis, we investigated the similarities among countries. The

results reflect that there are differences between Eastern and Western Europe, as

observed in the multivariate analysis. However, looking at factors classified under

Power, Intrinsic, Extrinsic, and Social elements we find some heterogeneity. The

difference between Eastern and Western Europe is more visible for the elements

scored on power and extrinsic work values and less visible for social and intrinsic

factors. We also observe some small clusters, with the Scandinavian countries as one

of the strongest small clusters.

                                              71
       In general, it is important to better understand how institutions and

institutional changes shape work values (when referring to institutions we mean

country conditions and not just work conditions). General work values such as work

centrality rather than job satisfaction might be less affected by job and work

conditions. This raises the question regarding the extent to which work values are

stable. Previous research has investigated the link between genetics and job

satisfaction and work values. Arvey et al. (1993) observe that genetic factors account

for 27% of the variance of overall job satisfaction. They refer to other studies that

report a heritability of around 30% and a particular study that finds around 40% of the

variance of wok value scales are related to genetic factors. Arvey et al. (1993) also

find a significant genetic association with intrinsic satisfaction, but not with extrinsic

satisfaction. However, they state in their discussion: “We wish to note again that

simply because a variable demonstrates a significant heritability does not imply that

such a characteristic is unmalleable or unchangeable” (p. 31). Previous research on

moral values such as tax morale indicates that characteristics are strongly shaped by

institutional and political conditions (see, e.g., Torgler 2007). However, the work

environment is less affected by the social contract between citizens and the

government, even though institutional conditions can change the long-term

possibilities and constraints for workers. Dynamics of institutional and political

changes can best be analysed with panel data following the same individuals over

time. This would also provide the opportunity to explore how changes in the work

environment and changes in life circumstances (life shocks such as deaths within the

family, divorces etc.) influence work values (recovery periods). Such environmental

dynamics allow observation of the extent to which work values change, and the

conditions under which they change. Frey (1997) stresses that the “process of building


                                               72
up work morale is as a rule much slower than destroying it, and is less reliable” (p.

91). More empirical evidence in this area is required. The quasi-natural experiments

in history can provide valuable insights; for example, German unification or changes

over time in the Czech and Slovak Republics due to the separation in 1992. According

to Diamond and Robinson (2010, pp. 1-2) this is a “technique that frequently proves

fruitful…This approach consists of comparing – preferably quantitatively and aided

by statistical analyses – different systems that are similar in many respects but that

differ with respect to the factors whose influence one wishes to study… Of course,

natural experiments involve many obvious pitfalls. These pitfalls include the risk that

the outcome might depend on other factors that the “experimenter” had not thought to

measure; and the risk that the true explanatory factors might be ones merely

correlated with    the measured factors, rather than being the measured factors

themselves”. Frese et al. (1996) find substantial differences regarding the percentage

of people with very high initiative (13% in the East compared to 35% in the West).

They conclude that differences were driven by occupational socialization as

employees in East Germany had little control at work and low complexity in their job.

As Smola and Sutton (2002, p. 381) point out: “We know that time does not stand

still. Apparently, our work values also change with the times, some more significantly

than others.’’ Our comparative analysis between Eastern and Western European

countries can also be seen in a broad and long-term sense as a quasi-natural

experiment despite substantial differences: “Both parts of Europe share the

experiences of feudalism, medieval Christianity, the Renaissance, the Reformation

and Counter-Reformation, and the Enlightenment periods…” (Schwartz and Bardi

1997).




                                              73
REFERENCES


Alesina, A. F., Glaeser, E. L., & Sacerdote, B. (2005). Work and Leisure in the United
     States and Europe: Why So Different? NBER Macroecnomic Annual 2005, 20, 1-64.

Angrist, J. D. and Pischke, J.-S. (2009). Mostly Harmless Econometrics, Princeton:
    Princeton University Press.

Arvey, R. D., McCall, B. P., Bouchard, T. J., Taubman, P., & Cavanaugh, M. A. (1994).
    Genetic Influences on Job Satisfaction and Work Values. Personality and Individual
    Differences, 17(1), 21-33.

Bamundo, P. J., & Kopelman, R. E. (1980). The Moderating Effects of Occupation, Age,
   and Urbanization on the Relationship Between Job Satisfaction and Life Satisfaction.
   Journal of Vocational Behavior, 17(1), 106–123.

Bender, K. A., Donohue, Susan M., & Heywood, John S. (2005). Job Satisfaction and
    Gender Segregation. Oxford Economic Papers, 57(3), 479 -496.

Bielby, D. D. (1992). Commitment to Work and Family. Annual Review of Sociology, 18,
     281–302.

Birdi, K., Warr, Peter, & Oswald, A. (1995). Age Differences in Three Components of
     Employee Well‐being. Applied Psychology, 44(4), 345-373.

Blanchard, O. (2004). The Economic Future of Europe. Journal of Economic Perspectives,
    18(4), 3-26.

Blanchflower, D. G., & Oswald, A. J. (1999). Well-Being, Insecurity and the Decline of
    American job Satisfaction. NBER Working Paper.

Bonatti, L. (2008). Evolution of Preferences and Cross-Country Differences in Time
    Devoted to Market Work. Labour Economics, 15(6), 1341–1365.

Borooah, V. K. (2009). Comparing Levels of Job Satisfaction in the Countries of Western
    and Eastern Europe. International Journal of Manpower, 30(4), 304-325.

Brown, D., & McIntosh, S. (2003). Job Satisfaction in the Low Wage Service Sector.
    Applied Economics, 35(10), 1241–1254.

Bryson, A., Cappellari, L., & Lucifora, C. (2004). Does Union Membership Really Reduce
    Job Satisfaction? British Journal of Industrial Relations, 42(3), 439–459.

Chen, G., Goddard, T. G., & Casper, W. J. (2004). Examination of the Relationships
    among General and Work-Specific Self-Evaluations, Work-Related Control Beliefs,
    and Job Attitudes. Applied Psychology, 53(3), 349–370.

Clark, Andrew E. (1996). Job Satisfaction in Britain. British Journal of Industrial
     Relations, 34(2), 189-217.


                                                   74
Clark, A. E. (1997). Job Satisfaction and Gender: why are Women so Happy at Work?
     Labour economics, 4(4), 341–372.

Clark, A. E, & Oswald, A. J. (1996). Satisfaction and Comparison Income. Journal of
     Public Economics, 61(3), 359–381.

Clark, A. E., Georgellis, Y., & Stanfey, P. (1998). Job Satisfaction, Wages, and Quits:
     Evidence from German Panel Data. Research in Labor Economics, 17, 88-101.

Clark, A. E., Frijters, P, & Shields, M. A. (2008). Relative Income, Happiness, and Utility:
     An Explanation for the Easterlin Paradox and Other Puzzles. Journal of Economic
     Literature, 46(1), 95–144.

Cohen, A., & Vigoda, E. (1998). The Growth Value of Good Citizenship: An Examination
    of the Relationship between Civic Behaviour and Involvement in the Job. Applied
    psychology, 47(4), 559–570.

Davoine, L., & Méda, D. (2009). Work More to Earn More? The Mixed Feelings of
    Europeans. International Labour Review, 148(1-2), 15–46.

Diamond, J., & Robinson, J. A. (Eds.) (2010). Natural Experiments of History. Cambridge,
    Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.

Dong B. & Torgler, B. (2009). Corruption and Political Interest: Empirical Evidence at the
    Micro Level. Journal of Interdisciplinary Economics, 21, 295-325.

Donohue, S. M, & Heywood, J. S. (2004). Job Satisfaction and Gender: An Expanded
    Specification from the NLSY. International Journal of Manpower, 25(2), 211–238.

Drago, R., & Wooden, M. (1992). The Determinants of Labor Absence: Economic Factors
    and Workgroup Norms Across Countries. Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 45
    (4), 135-141.

Frey, B. S. (1997). Not Just for the Money. An Economic Theory of Personal Motivation.
     Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.

Frey, B. S. (2008). Happiness: A Revolution in Economics, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Freeman, R. B. (1978). Job Satisfaction as an Economic Variable. American Economic
    Review, 68 (2), 135-141.

Frese, M., Kring, W., Soose, A., & Zempel, J. (1996). Personal Initiative at Work:
     Differences Between East and West Germany. Academy of Management Journal,
     39(1), 37-63.

Ganzach, Y. (1998). Intelligence and Job Satisfaction. Academy of Management Journal,
    41(5), 526–539.

Gordon, M. E., & Denisi, A. S. (1995). A re-examination of the relationship between union
    membership and job satisfaction. Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 48(2), 222-
    236.


                                                   75
Green, F., & Tsitsianis, N. (2005). An Investigation of National Trends in Job Satisfaction
    in Britain and Germany. British Journal of Industrial Relations, 43(3), 401–429.

Greenhaus, J. H., & Beutell, N. J. (1985). Sources of Conflict between Work and Family
    Roles. Academy of Management Review, 10(1), 76–88.

Halman, L. (1996). Individualization and the fragmentation of work values: evidence from
    the European values study. WORC PAPER 96.07.013,Tilburg University, Work and
    Organization Research Centre.

Hamermesh, D. S. (2001). The Changing Distribution of Job Satisfaction. Journal of
   Human Resources, 36(1), 1-30.

Hansen, G. L. (1991). Balancing Work and Family: A Literature and Resource Review.
    Family Relations, 40(3), 348–353.

Hattrup, K., Mueller, K., & Joens, I. (2007). The Effects of Nations and Organisations on
     Work Value Importance: A Cross-Cultural Investigation. Applied Psychology, 56(3),
     479–499.

Hill, R. B. (1996). Historical context of the work ethic. University of Georgia at Athens.

Hirschfeld, R. R., & Feild, H. S. (2000). Work Centrality and Work Alienation: Distinct
     Aspects of a General Commitment to Work. Journal of Organizational Behavior,
     21(7), 789–800.

Hitlin, S., & Piliavin, J. A. (2004). Values: Reviving a Dormant Concept. Annual Review
     of Sociology, 30, 359–393.

Hochschild, A. R. (1997). The Time Bind: When Work Becomes Home and Home Becomes
    Work, New York: Metropolitan Books.

Inglehart, R. (1990). Cultural Shift in Advanced Industrial Society, Princeton: Princeton
     University Press.

Jürges, H. (2003). Age, Cohort, and the Slump in Job Satisfaction among West German
     Workers. Labour, 17(4), 489–518.

Judge, T. A., & Locke, E. A. (1993). Effect of Dysfunctional Thought Processes on
    Subjective Well-Being and Job Satisfaction. Journal of Applied Psychology, 78(3),
    475-490.

Judge, T. A., Thoresen, C. J., Bono, J. E., & Patton, G. K. (2001). The Job satisfaction-Job
    Performance Relationship: A Qualitative and Quantitative Review. Psychological
    Bulletin, 127(3), 376-407.

Kanfer, R., & Ackerman, P. L. (2004). Aging, Adult Development, and Work Motivation.
    The Academy of Management Review, 29(3), 440–458.

Kristensen, N., & Johansson, E. (2008). New Evidence on Cross-Country Differences in
     Job Satisfaction Using Anchoring Vignettes. Labour Economics, 15(1), 96–117.


                                                   76
Lane, R. E (1998). The joyless market economy. In A. Ben-Ner & L. Putterman (Eds.),
    Economics, values, and organization (pp. 461-488). Cambridge: Cambridge
    University Press.

Linz, S. J. (2003). Job Satisfaction among Russian Workers. International Journal of
     Manpower, 24(6), 626-652.

Lipset, S. M. (1992). The Work Ethic, Then and Now. Journal of Labor Research, 13(1),
     45–54.

Long, A. (2005). Happily Ever After? A Study of Job Satisfaction in Australia. Economic
    Record, 81(255), 303–321.

Masuda, A. D., Poelmans, S. A. Y., Allen, T. D., Spector, P. E., Lapierre, L. M., Cooper,
    C. L., Abarca, N., et al. (2011). Flexible Work Arrangements Availability and their
    Relationship with Work‐to‐Family Conflict, Job Satisfaction, and Turnover
    Intentions: A Comparison of Three Country Clusters. Applied Psychology,
    forthcoming.

Meyer, K. E., & Peng, M. W. (2005). Probing Theoretically into Central and Eastern
   Europe: Transactions, Resources, and Institutions. Journal of International Business
   Studies, 36(6), 600–621.

Oshagbemi, T. (2003). Personal Correlates of Job Satisfaction: Empirical Evidence from
    UK Universities. International Journal of Social Economics, 30(12), 1210–1232.

Petty, M. M., McGee, G. W., & Cavender, J. W. (1984). A Meta-Analysis of the
     Relationships between Individual Job Satisfaction and Individual Performance. The
     Academy of Management Review, 9(4), 712–721.

Poelmans, S., & Sahibzada, K. (2004). A Multi-Level Model for Studying the Context and
    Impact of Work-Family Policies and Culture in Organizations. Human resource
    management review, 14(4), 409–431.

Prescott, E. C. (2004). "Why Do Americans Work So Much More Than Europeans?," FRB
     Minneaplis - Quarterly Review, 28(1), 2-14.

Probst, T. M., & Lawler, J. (2006). Cultural Values as Moderators of Employee Reactions
    to Job Insecurity: The Role of Individualism and Collectivism. Applied Psychology,
    55(2), 234-254.

Renaud, S. (2002). Rethinking the Union Membership/Job Satisfaction Relationship: Some
    Empirical Evidence in Canada. International Journal of Manpower, 23(2), 137-150.

Rodríguez-Pose, A., & Vilalta-Bufí, M. (2005). Education, Migration, and Job
    Satisfaction: the Regional Returns of Human Capital in the EU. Journal of Economic
    Geography, 5(5), 545 566.

Roe, R. A., & Ester, P. (1999). Values and Work: Empirical Findings and Theoretical
     Perspective. Applied Psychology, 48(1), 1–21.



                                                  77
Rose, M. (2005). Job Satisfaction in Britain: Coping with Complexity. British Journal of
    Industrial Relations, 43(3), 455–467.

Roskies, E., Louis-Guerin, C., & Fournier, C. (1993). Coping with Job Insecurity: How
    Does Personality Make a Difference? Journal of organizational behavior, 14(7), 617–
    630.

Schaltegger, C., & Torgler, B. (2010). Work Ethic, Protestantism, and Human Capital,
    Economics Letters, 107(2), 99-101.

Schwartz, S. H. (1999). A Theory of Cultural Values and Some Implications for Work.
    Applied Psychology, 48(1), 23–47.

Schwartz, S. H., & Bardi, A. (1997). Influences of Adaptation to Communist Rule on
    Value Priorities in Eastern Europe. Political Psychology, 18(2), 385–410.

Shields, M. A., & Price, S. W. (2002). Racial Harassment, Job Satisfaction and Intentions
     to Quit: Evidence from the British Nursing Profession. Economica, 69(274), 295-326.

Smola, K. W., & Sutton, C. D. (2002). Generational Differences: Revisiting Generational
    Work Values for the New Millennium. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 23(4),
    363-382.

Sousa-Poza, A., & Sousa-Poza, A. A. (2000). Well-Being at Work: A Cross-National
    Analysis of the Levels and Determinants of Job Satisfaction. Journal of Socio-
    Economics, 29(6), 517–538.

Sousa-Poza, A., & Sousa-Poza, A. A. (2003). Gender Differences in Job Satisfaction in
    Great Britain, 1991–2000: Permanent or Transitory? Applied Economics Letters,
    10(11), 691–694.

Tambling, J. (2004). Dreaming the Siren: Dante and Melancholy. Forum for Modern
   Language Studies 40(1), 56-69.

Taris, R., & Feij, J. (2001). Longitudinal Examination of the Relationship between
     Supplies–Values Fit and Work Outcomes. Applied Psychology, 50(1), 52–80.

Torgler, B. (2003). Tax Morale in Transition Countries. Post-Communist Economies,
    15(3), 357-381

Torgler, B. (2006). The Importance of Faith: Tax Morale and Religiosity. Journal of
    Economic Behavior and Organization, 61(1), 81-109.

Torgler, B. (2007). Tax Compliance and Tax Morale: A Theoretical and Empirical
    Analysis, Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.

Torgler, B., Garcia-Valiñas, M. A., & Macintyre, A. (2011). Participation in
    Environmental Organizations: An Empirical Analysis. Environment and Development
    Economics, 16(5), 591-620.




                                                  78
van Beek, Hu Q., Schaufeli B., Taris, T. W., & Schreurs, B. H. J. (2011). For Fun, Love, or
    Money: What Drives Workaholic, Engaged, and Burned-Out Employees at Work?
    Applied Psychology, forthcoming.

Vila, L. E., & García-Mora, B. (2005). Education and the Determinants of Job Satisfaction.
     Education Economics, 13(4), 409–425.

Wright, T. A. (2006). The Emergence of Job Satisfaction in Organizational Behavior: A
    Historical Overview of the Dawn of Job Attitude Research. Journal of Management
    History, 12(3), 262–277.




                                                  79
