                                                                                            103801
                                         China and Eurasia Forum Quarterly, Volume 8, No. 4 (2010), pp. 3-9
                                           © Central Asia-Caucasus Institute & Silk Road Studies Program
                                                                                          ISSN: 1653-4212




 Remittances and the Macroeconomic
Impact of the Global Economic Crisis
    in the Kyrgyz Republic and
              Tajikistan
               Martin Brownbridge and Sudharshan Canagarajah*


Introduction
Several members of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS)
rely heavily on remittances sent back by migrant workers, mainly in the
Russian Federation, to support household incomes and the balance of
payments. Tajikistan is the most heavily dependent of the CIS countries
on remittances, followed by Moldova and the Kyrgyz Republic (Table 1).

Table 1. Remittances in 2008 as a Share of GDP and Imports
for Five CIS Economies.
                   Remittances Remittances as Remittances as
                  US$ millions   Percent of     Percent of
                                   GDP           Imports
 Armenia              1062           9              22
 Georgia                732          6              12
 Kyrgyz Republic       1205          23             25
 Moldova              1897           31             39
 Tajikistan           2670           52             94
Sources: World Bank and IMF

   During the 2000s, remittances have become an important channel
through which growth in the Russian Federation is transmitted to other
CIS economies, whereas the trade channel, which was traditionally the

*
  Martin Brownbridge is advisor to the Governor, Bank of Uganda. Sudharshan
Canagarajah is Lead Economist, The World Bank, Washington D.C., USA. All the views
expressed here are done in the authors’ personal capacity. They do not reflect the positions
or views of the organization(s) which they represent.
1
  Alturki, Fahad, Jaime Espinosa-Bowen, and Nadeem Ilahi, “How Russia affects the
neighbourhood: Trade, Financial and Remittance Channels,” International Monetary Fund,
Working Paper WP/09/277 (2009).
4               Martin Brownbridge and Sudharshan Canagarajah

dominant channel of economic integration, has declined in importance.
Outward transfers of remittances from Russia rose to US$25 million in
2008, of which other CIS countries were the destination for 90 percent.1
    Valued in U.S. dollars, remittances received by CIS countries other
than Russia fell by 25 percent in 2009, because of the economic crisis in
Russia. This note analyses the macroeconomic impact of the fall in
remittances in the Kyrgyz Republic and Tajikistan, the two smallest and
poorest (in terms of per capita incomes) economies in the CIS. The
following section (section 2) provides some background material on the
growth of remittances and the contribution that they have made to the
Kyrgyz and Tajik economies. This is followed by the third section which
examines how they adjusted to the fall in remittances. The fourth section
concludes.

The Contribution of Rem ittances to the Kyrgyz and Tajik
Economies
Figure 1 below shows annual gross inflows of remittances over the five
years to 2009 to the Kyrgyz Republic and Tajikistan. The growth of
remittances in the mid-2000s was dramatic. Between 2005 and 2008, the
U.S. dollar value of remittances rose fourfold in both Tajikistan and the
Kyrgyz Republic. The main forces driving worker migration from the
Kyrgyz Republic and Tajikistan are the large wage differentials between
them and the Russian Federation; the per capita income of Russia was 17
times that of Tajikistan and 12 times that of the Kyrgyz Republic in 2008.
Most migrants work in the construction industry or in service industries.

Figure 1. Annual Remittance Inflows to the Kyrgyz Republic
and Tajikistan, 2005-2009 : U.S. Dollar Millions.




Sources: National Bank of Tajikistan and the World Bank


    THE CHINA AND EURASIA FORUM QUARTERLY • Volume 8, No. 4
        Remittances and the Macroeconomic Impact of the Global Economic Crisis              5
                         in the Kyrgyz Republic and Tajikistan


   In the space of half a decade, remittances have become a dominant
feature of both the Tajik and Kyrgyz economies. The substantial
contribution that they made to household incomes fuelled a consumer
boom which in turn boosted real GDP growth. The consumer boom also
led to rapid growth in imports and widening trade deficits which were
largely funded by remittances. According to 2008 World Bank figures, at
least half of the decline in absolute poverty in Tajikistan, from 72 percent
in 2003 to 53.5 percent in 2007 is attributed to the growth of remittances.
Remittances also contributed to the fall in poverty in the Kyrgyz
Republic from 50 percent in 2003 to 35 percent in 2007.

The Impact of the Global Crisis on the Kyrgyz and Tajik
Economies
The Russian economy suffered a double blow in 2008; first from the steep
drop in world crude oil prices and second, from a reversal of capital
account inflows. The fall in national income and the adjustment of the
balance of payments (BOP) to the external shocks triggered a steep
recession. After recording real GDP growth of 8.1 percent in 2007, growth
fell to 5.6 percent in 2008 and then to negative 9 percent in 2009, one of
the steepest falls of any major economy. This affected remittances,
mainly to other CIS economies, through two channels: first because of a
contraction in employment, especially in the cyclically sensitive
construction industry 2 and secondly because the depreciation of the
Russian rouble, by 51 percent against the U.S. dollar between March 2008
and March 2009, reduced the dollar value of remittances.
    Remittances to both the Kyrgyz Republic and Tajikistan began to fall
in the final quarter of 2008, by more than can be attributed to seasonal
factors alone, with the fall continuing through 2009. Gross inflows of
remittances valued in U.S. dollars to the Kyrgyz Republic were 20
percent lower in 2009 than in 2008 while in Tajikistan gross inflows fell
by 31 percent in the same period, although remittances were still higher in
both countries in 2009 than they had been in 2007 (see Figure 1).3 Both
countries, therefore, suffered a substantial external shock as a result of
the fall in remittances in 2009. The Tajik economy incurred a fall in
national income of 16 percent and the Kyrgyz economy a fall of 5 percent
of their respective 2008 GDPs as a result of the fall in remittances. For
the Kyrgyz economy, the shock from the fall in remittances was
compounded by a fall in its export earnings of about 6 percent of GDP.

2
  There were also reports of migrant construction workers not being paid their wages,
World Bank (2008), “Migration in Tajikistan” mimeo.
3
  Remittances in 2009 fell by 30 percent in Armenia, 27 percent in Georgia and 20 percent
in Moldova from their levels in 2009.


    THE CHINA AND EURASIA FORUM QUARTERLY • Winter 2010
6                          Martin Brownbridge and Sudharshan Canagarajah

Tajikistan’s exports did not fall in 2009, but are far less important as a
source of foreign exchange earnings than remittances for its economy.

Table 2. Key Macroeconomic data for the Kyrgyz Republic
and Tajikistan.
                                                     Kyrgyz Republic                 Tajikistan

                                              2007        2008         2009   2007     2008       2009

Real GDP growth (%)                           8.5          8.4         2.3    7.8       7.9       3.4

Trade Balance goods and services (% of GDP)   -26          -33         -20    -48       -55       -40

Exports of goods and services ($ millions)    2244        3037         2702   385       457       458

Imports of goods and services ($ millions)    3218        4747         3622   2058     3179       2387

Remittances ($ millions)                      688         1205         967    1774     2670       1833

Private consumption (% of GDP)                 78          87          64     112       121       106

Nominal Exchange Rate change                   7          -1.7         17.4    0        -0.3      29
(+=depreciation)

Sources: IMF Country Documents

   How did the fall in remittances affect the macroeconomies of these
two countries? Faced with a negative external shock, an economy
essentially faces two choices. First, if the shock is expected to be purely
temporary, the economy might be able to avoid having to cut expenditure
and instead could run a larger current account deficit by accumulating net
foreign liabilities, either in the form of foreign borrowing or running
down international reserves. The second option is for the economy to
adjust to the external shock by reducing imports, thereby avoiding a
deterioration of the current account of the BOP and the overall BOP.
   The first option was not available for Tajikistan because it did not
have anywhere near sufficient international reserves. At the end of 2008,
the central bank held gross international reserves equivalent to less than
one month’s worth of imports of goods and services. It also did not have
the creditworthiness to access external capital markets, other than on a
very limited scale from official concessional sources such as the IMF.
The Kyrgyz Republic was in a somewhat stronger position with reserves
equivalent to 4.1 months of imports at the end of 2008; hence it could
have funded a modest temporary BOP deficit. However funding a BOP
deficit with international reserves would have been a risky strategy to
pursue given that the duration of the external shock was, and still is, very
uncertain and the Kyrgyz Republic did not take this path.
   Consequently, both countries adjusted to the external shock by
reducing imports, thereby improving their trade balances, by 13 and 15
percent of GDP in the Kyrgyz Republic and Tajikistan respectively; an
adjustment which was facilitated by exchange rate depreciation (see
Table 2). Imports valued in U.S. dollars contracted by 24 percent in the
Kyrgyz Republic and by 25 percent in Tajikistan. The fall in imports was
brought about mainly by a contraction in private consumption, by 23


     THE CHINA AND EURASIA FORUM QUARTERLY • Volume 8, No. 4
          Remittances and the Macroeconomic Impact of the Global Economic Crisis   7
                           in the Kyrgyz Republic and Tajikistan
percent of GDP in the Kyrgyz Republic and 15 percent of GDP in
Tajikistan. Hence the burden of adjustment to the external shock was
borne by households, not surprisingly as the fall in remittances directly
cut their disposable incomes by a substantial amount. Given that the
financial sectors in both countries are very shallow and underdeveloped,
it is unlikely that households were able to access sufficient credit, or de-
cumulate financial savings, to smooth their consumption in the face of a
shock of this magnitude. In both countries, bank deposits provide the
main vehicle for household saving in the form of financial assets (there
are few other financial assets available to savers), but non government
deposits are small as a share of GDP: at the end of 2008 they were 8.6 and
9.3 percent of GDP respectively in Tajikistan and the Kyrgyz Republic.
Hence the liquid financial assets which could potentially have been used
to smooth consumption in the face of an adverse household income shock
were small. It is likely that households invest some of their savings in
other assets besides bank deposits, such as residential construction, but
these assets are not very liquid and so cannot easily be used to smooth
income shocks.
    Real GDP growth fell sharply in both countries, but remained
positive; unlike most other countries in the CIS, the Kyrgyz Republic and
Tajikistan avoided recession, despite the substantial contraction in
private consumption and import spending. From the 2008 level of GDP
growth, preliminary estimates indicate that real growth decelerated by 6
percentage points in the Kyrgyz Republic and by 4.5 percentage points in
Tajikistan. This compares favourably with the average for the CIS
(excluding Russia) in which real growth fell by 9.2 percentage points to
negative 3.9 percent in 2009.4 It also compares very favourably with the
other small low income CIS economies of Armenia, Georgia and
Moldova which all suffered steep recessions in 2009, with real growth of -
15.6 percent, -10 percent and –4 percent respectively.5
    As such, real output of the Kyrgyz Republic and Tajikistan proved
rather more resilient to the external shock than most of their regional
partners in the CIS. This is surprising in some respects. Both economies
are not well diversified and are still dominated by state owned
enterprises, which impede flexible supply side adjustment to price
incentives. It is worth exploring possible explanations for this
conundrum and in particular whether the adjustment to an external
shock arising from a fall in remittances might be less disruptive for the
real economy than a shock arising from the trade or capital accounts.
    As noted above, the immediate impact of the fall in remittances was
on household incomes. This was transmitted into a fall in consumer

4
    Data from the IMF, World Economic Outlook, January 2010.
5
    Data from World Bank ECA Statistical Annexes, September 2009.


      THE CHINA AND EURASIA FORUM QUARTERLY • Winter 2010
8                  Martin Brownbridge and Sudharshan Canagarajah

demand, for both domestically produced and imported consumer goods.
However, the impact on demand for domestic consumer goods (mostly
non-traded goods) was muted because of the exchange rate depreciation
which had two beneficial effects. First, it meant that the fall in
remittances, when valued in national currency, was much less than the
fall when denominated in U.S. dollars. For example, remittances fell by
31 percent in Tajikistan in 2009, but the Tajik Somoni value of these
remittances, in real terms, fell by only 18 percent. As a result, private
disposable incomes in real terms probably fell by only about 1 percent in
2009.6 Secondly, the depreciation of the real exchange rate encouraged
consumers to switch demand from imports to non-traded goods. It is also
plausible that imported consumer goods are much more income elastic
than non-traded consumer goods; this would be especially likely if some
of these imports are purchased directly by migrant workers in Russia and
then brought home themselves or by fellow workers when they return to
their country of origin. As a consequence, most of the contraction in
household consumption which took place appears to have fallen on
imports rather than on demand for domestic non-traded goods.
    An external shock transmitted through the trade channel, emanating
from a fall in export demand or a fall in export commodity prices, which
affected several CIS economies, including to a limited extent the Kyrgyz
Republic, is potentially much more disruptive than a shock which entails
only remittances. A fall in export demand directly affects output in the
export industries as well as having second round effects through the
impact of fall in incomes in the export sector on private consumption.
Real exchange rate depreciation will be ineffective in alleviating the
impact of the first channel if the price elasticises of export supply and
demand are small.

Conclusion
As a result of their very rapid growth in the 2000s, worker remittances
have emerged as one of the most important channels of economic
integration within the CIS for its smaller and poorer economies. The
economic crisis in Russia, from where almost all remittances originate,
triggered a sharp fall in remittances beginning in the second half of 2008.
This is due to, first, recession in the industries employing most migrant
workers, such as construction; and second, the depreciation of the
Russian rouble against major international currencies. Valued in U.S.
dollars, remittances to Tajikistan fell by 31 percent in 2009 compared to
2008, while those to the Kyrgyz Republic fell by 20 percent. With limited
access to external capital, the economies of these two countries were

6
 This is calculated as the nominal value of GDP product minus taxes, plus the domestic
currency value of remittances, all deflated by the consumer price index.


    THE CHINA AND EURASIA FORUM QUARTERLY • Volume 8, No. 4
       Remittances and the Macroeconomic Impact of the Global Economic Crisis   9
                        in the Kyrgyz Republic and Tajikistan
forced to adjust to the fall in remittances through a reduction in imports,
which fell by about a quarter in 2009. The fall in imports was largely
matched by a reduction of private consumption. Hence households bore
the brunt of the adjustment to the external shock through a contraction of
consumption.
   Despite the substantial magnitude of the external adjustment, the
impact on the domestic economies of the Kyrgyz Republic and Tajikistan
was less severe than in most other CIS economies; although real GDP
growth fell in both countries in 2009, the fall was smaller than in other
CIS economies and they both avoided a recession in output. Three
reasons may explain why the sharp fall in remittances did not trigger a
recession in the Kyrgyz Republic and Tajikistan. First, in contrast to an
external shock emanating from lower export demand or lower export
prices, a shock to remittances does not directly affect domestic
production; the effects are indirect, mainly through their impact on
demand for non-traded consumer goods. Second, the large exchange rate
depreciation of the Kyrgyz Som and Tajik Somoni dampened the fall in
the real value, denominated in domestic currency, of remittances and
hence household disposable incomes. Third, real exchange rate
depreciation encouraged consumers to switch demand from imported to
non-traded consumer goods. In addition, demand for imported goods by
remittance dependent households may be more income elastic than
demand for non-traded goods. As a consequence, most of the real fall in
private consumption demand fell on imported consumer goods, allowing
the domestic non-traded goods sectors escaped recession.
   In conclusion, the experience of the Kyrgyz Republic and Tajikistan
during the global economic crisis tentatively suggests that remittances
may have a role to play in helping to dampen the impact of external
shocks on domestic output in the remittance receiving countries, at least
when supportive macroeconomic policies are implemented, such as
exchange rate depreciation.




   THE CHINA AND EURASIA FORUM QUARTERLY • Winter 2010
