South Asia
   Water Initiative

 Annual Report from the World Bank
               to Trust Fund Donors
                         July 2014 – June 2015
The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed
in this report are entirely those of the authors and should
not be attributed in any manner to the World Bank, or
its affiliated organizations, or to members of its board or      The World Bank Group
executive directors or the countries they represent. The World   Copyright © 2015
Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included
in this publication and accepts no responsibility whatsoever     The International Bank for Reconstruction
for any consequence of their use. The boundaries, colors,        and Development / The World Bank Group
denominations, and other information shown on any map            1818 H Street, NW
in this volume do not imply on the part of the World Bank        Washington, DC 20433, USA
Group any judgment on the legal status of any territory or the
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.                    All rights reserved




Photo Credits (from left to right):
Cover - First row:
Sundarbans Enbarkment. Priyanka Chatuverdi / World Bank -- Brahmaputra landscape, China. World Bank -- Tarbela Dam. Laila
Kasuri / World Bank -- Rice field, Southern Bangladesh. Stephan Bachenheimer / World Bank

Cover - Second row:
The Hindu Kush Himalaya. NOSHIQ, ICIMOD -- The Maha Kumbh at Allahabad on River Ganges. Genevieve Connors --
The Hindu Kush Himalaya in Afghanistan. Christina Leb -- Buthan. Netopaek | Thinkstock.com

Inside Pages:
Page 14: Punjab Plains, Indus Basin. Laila Kasuri / World Bank -- Indus River. World Bank -- Indus Mountain. World Bank
Page 16: Ganges River. Genevieve Connors / World Bank -- Nepal. Simone D. McCourtie / World Bank -- Bangladesh. Scott
Wallace / World Bank
Page 19: Bhutan. Curt Carnemark / World Bank -- Buthan Landscape. Flowminator | Dreamstime.com -- Bangladesh. Scott
Wallace / World Bank
Page 22: Bangladesh. Thomas Sennett / World Bank -- Sundarbans Fisherman. Priyanka Chatuverdi / World Bank -- Sundarbans
Boat Repair. Priyanka Chatuverdi / World Bank
Page 25: Regional Workshop. World Bank -- Himalayan Mountains. NOSHIQ, ICIMOD -- Regional Workshop. World Bank
South Asia
   Water Initiative

 Annual Report from the World Bank
               to Trust Fund Donors
                         July 2014 – June 2015
                        TABLE OF CONTENTS

ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS                                       5
FOREWORD                                                         6
1. Strategic Overview                                            7
2. Focus Area Summaries                                          13
   Indus Basin Focus Area                                        14
   Ganges Basin Focus Area                                       16
   Brahmaputra Basin Focus Area                                  19
   Sundarbans Landscape Focus Area                               22
   Regional Cross-Cutting Focus Area                             25
3. Appendices                                                    28
   Appendix 1 – Summary of Activities by Focus Area              29
     Indus Basin Focus Area                                      29
     Ganges Basin Focus Area                                     29
     Brahmaputra Basin Focus Area                                31
     Sundarbans Landscape Focus Area                             32
     Regional Cross-Cutting Focus Area                           33
   Appendix 2 – SAWI Results Framework and FY15 Performance      35
     Performance Targets and Achievements for FY15               35
     Outcome and Result Indicators                               36
     Program and Focus Area Indicator Targets                    37
     Focus Area Results Chains                                   43
     Definitions                                                 51
   Appendix 3 – Financial Report FY15                            52
   Appendix 4 – FY15 Publications                                55
   Appendix 5 – FY16 Implementation Plan                         56
     Program Management, Communications & Knowledge Management   58
     Indus Basin Focus Area                                      59
     Ganges Basin Focus Area                                     61
     Brahmaputra Basin Focus Area                                64
     Sundarbans Landscape Focus Area                             66
     Regional Cross-Cutting Focus Area                           69
      ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS

B			Billion

BRB			         Brahmaputra River Basin

CoP			         Community of Practice

EnGIO			       Environment Governed Integrated Organization

FA			Focus Area

FY			Fiscal Year

FY15			        Fiscal Year 15 (1 July 2014 – 30 June 2015)

GBM 			Ganges-Brahmaputra-Meghna

GDP			         Gross Domestic Product

GIS			         Geographic Information System

GRB			         Ganges River Basin

HEP			         Hydro Electric Power

IDA			         International Development Association

IUCN			        International Union for Conservation of Nature

IWRM			        Integrated Water Resources Management

KRB			         Kabul River Basin

km			Kilometer

M			Million

MDTF			        Multi Donor Trust Fund

MoU			         Memorandum of Understanding

MW			Megawatt

NGO			Non-governmental Organization

NHP			         National Hydrology Project

SAWI			        South Asia Water Initiative

WWF			         World Wildlife Fund
                                    FOREWORD

“Water is the number one global risk of highest impact in the next ten years,” according to the World
Economic Forum’s 2015 Global Risk Report. Rising world population, urbanization and economic growth
are placing increasing pressure on scarce water resources for food and energy security. Climate change
is expected to exacerbate water challenges with increased variability in water availability both within and
between years, especially in South Asia, where the likely impacts on the monsoon system are still poorly
understood. In South Asia, a large fraction of the available water occurs in transboundary river basins.
Increasingly, countries in the region will need to turn to these basins to meet growing demands. While
there is a long history of tensions surrounding cooperation in water management in the region, there
are currently important signals of political change that are leading to new opportunities for cooperative
development and management of water resources.

The South Asia Water Initiative (SAWI) is a trust fund that aims to increase regional cooperation in the
management of the major Himalayan river systems to deliver sustainable, fair and inclusive development
in addition to climate resilience. The SAWI Trust Fund is managed by the World Bank and financed by the
governments of the United Kingdom, Australia and Norway.

This Annual Report summarizes SAWI activities for the 2015 fiscal year. Over the course of the year SAWI
has brought together policymakers, technical experts and key stakeholders—within individual countries
and across the Region—to stimulate dialogue, inform policy, build capacity, and share new knowledge.
The program is increasingly working toward supporting long-term basin development, and investment
and regional cooperation in water resources management.

The World Bank appreciates the continued support of the governments of the United Kingdom, Australia
and Norway, through their strong partnership in SAWI. The World Bank values the productive coordination
among the partners of SAWI in fostering its objectives and program, which are closely aligned with the
partners’ strategic vision and programs for the region.

The World Bank looks forward to the continuation of this collaboration to promote water as a catalyst of
sustainable economic growth opportunities and regional integration in the coming years in South Asia.



Akihiko Nishio
Director, Strategy and Operations
World Bank - South Asia Region
1. Strategic Overview
Strategic Overview




                                             Strategic Overview




              Established at the end of 2012, the second phase of the South Asia Water Initiative (SAWI) is a trust
              fund managed by the World Bank on behalf of the governments of the United Kingdom, Australia
              and Norway. The development objective of the trust fund is to increase regional cooperation in the
              management of the major Himalayan river systems in South Asia to deliver sustainable, fair and inclusive
              development and climate resilience. The program thus addresses poverty alleviation, gender and climate
              change issues in the context of river basin management, and these issues are expanded upon below.
              The major Himalayan river systems all span multiple countries (Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, China,
              India, Nepal and Pakistan); SAWI supports activities relating to transboundary water cooperation in all
              of these countries.

              The current bilateral trust fund agreements are for a five-year period, and hence the end of the Fiscal
              Year 2015 (FY15) marks the halfway point in the currently planned life of the program. The outcome
              indicators used by SAWI to measure achievement of the development objective relate to governance
              and investments in water resources management. For governance, SAWI aims to inform new or existing
              bilateral or multilateral governance processes. For investments, SAWI aims to: (i) inform new investments
              secured through bilateral or multi-lateral governance processes, and (ii) improve the quality of the
              planning processes leading to new investments; improvements may be through more approaches that
              are more participatory, better informed technically, and/or quicker. Given the geopolitical challenges of
              increasing regional water cooperation the targets for these indicators are focused on the final years of
              the trust fund life. Progress towards achieving the targets for the outcome indicators is described below.




                                                                8
                                                                                                          South Asia Water Initiative




Transboundary Governance
In terms of governance processes, SAWI is implementing several influential activities. For the Sundarbans
Landscape, SAWI is directly informing implementation of the conservation-focused Sundarbans
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between India and Bangladesh. Signed in September 2011,
this MoU is for an initial period of five years; SAWI is working to ensure both parties agree in September
2016 to extend the life of the agreement.

The Farakka Treaty between India and
Bangladesh is a thirty-year agreement for
the sharing of the water of the Ganges that
was signed in December 1996. SAWI is
working extensively on activities to improve the
understanding of the hydrology, water resources
and ecological health of the Ganges River, and
to raise the awareness and acceptance of the
importance of data and knowledge sharing to
support evidence-based participatory water
resources planning and development. SAWI
supported work in the Ganges Basin, including
through informing the design of a loan to
support improved water resources information
and planning, is expected to become a leading
source of new information and thinking that will                                    Bangladesh. Photo: Scott Wallace / World Bank
guide deliberations by India and Bangladesh on
future options for the Farakka Treaty. This could encompass cooperation on a broader range of water-
related benefits (including flood management, inland navigation and ecosystem services) in a basin
context rather than simply focusing on lean season water sharing arrangements.

Water cooperation between India and Bangladesh is guided by an Indo-Bangladesh Joint Rivers
Commission established in 1972. As well as facilitating the discussions leading to the Farakka Treaty, this
Commission has facilitated discussions on many joint rivers (including the Teesta) and has established
arrangements for sharing of flood flow data. On the Bangladesh side, the commissioners are supported
by the Bangladesh Joint Rivers Commission. In addition to the generation of new knowledge relevant to
India-Bangladesh cooperation, SAWI is working actively through capacity building initiatives to support
both technical and diplomatic capacity in both countries to enhance the quality and balance of water
dialogue and negotiations.

SAWI is demonstrating improved approaches to flood forecasting that may offer new opportunities
for sub-regional water cooperation between India and Bangladesh as well as the upstream riparian
countries (Bhutan, China and Nepal). India and China have an active MoU on sharing of flood data
for the Brahmaputra Basin that was renewed for a further five years in May 2013. A separate MoU
was signed with China in October 2013 for “Strengthening Cooperation on Trans-border Rivers”; the
implementation plan for this MoU (signed June 2014) extended by two weeks the period for which
flood data on the Brahmaputra are shared. SAWI work on flood forecasting, and the technical data
requirements for improved forecasting, has the potential to inform future revision to these MoUs.




                                                            9
Strategic Overview




              India and Bhutan have for many decades cooperated on a scheme for hydro-met monitoring and flood
              forecasting on their joint rivers. The network supporting this includes 32 hydro-met stations in Bhutan
              operated by the Government of Bhutan with funding from the Government of India. In spite of good
              bilateral cooperation, infrastructure remains inadequate and the technical capacity in Bhutan is low.
              SAWI is therefore working to inform hydro-met infrastructure in the Brahmaputra with a focus on Bhutan,
              and is building capacity across the sub-region to improve operational flood forecasting.

              In the Indus Basin, SAWI is supporting the governments of Afghanistan and Pakistan as they explore
              options and opportunities for cooperative development of the water resources of the Chittral/Kunar and
              Kabul river basins, in particular for hydropower generation. SAWI has also undertaken technical studies
              to ensure planning processes are based on improved technical knowledge, and is working with both
              governments to explore appropriate joint governance arrangements and to build the professional and
              institutional capacity for joint governance.



              Facilitating Investments
              In terms of investments secured via bilateral or multilateral processes, there are emerging
              opportunities in different parts of the region that SAWI is positioning itself to actively support. In the
              Sundarbans, SAWI is supporting the design of an integrated landscape-scale hydro-met monitoring
              network spanning Bangladesh and India. There are strong indications that Afghanistan and Pakistan
              desire to cooperatively advance hydropower investments in the Kunar Basin. In the eastern sub-region,
              discussions at multiple levels are exploring opportunities for investments to further develop the Ganges
                                                                                     and Brahmaputra rivers for inland navigation
                                                                                     in ways that protect or restore the ecological
                                                                                     integrity of the rivers. Such developments would
                                                                                     not only greatly support commerce and trade
                                                                                     between countries, but would improve people-
                                                                                     to-people connectivity and thus facilitate deeper
                                                                                     regional integration. Similarly, discussions are
                                                                                     progressing at multiple levels on investments to
                                                                                     improve power grid connectivity in the eastern
                                                                                     sub-region to distribute energy from new
                                                                                     hydropower investments, with new power trading
                                                                                     agreements that could benefit the four nations
                                                                                     of the sub-region. SAWI continues to participate
                                                                                     where appropriate in relevant dialogue on these
                                                                                     issues (especially in the technical “Track II”
                                                                                     space) and facilitates sharing of relevant data
                                            Buthan. Photo: Netopaek | Thinkstock.com
                                                                                     and information to inform debate.



              Cross-cutting Themes
              Across the region as program implementation progresses, a number of key themes are emerging that
              will further enrich the water centric focus of the SAWI objectives and results framework. The first of these
              is poverty alleviation. Around 40 percent of the world’s poorest live in South Asia, and of these, around
              two-thirds live in the Indus, Ganges and Brahmaputra basins – concentrated especially in the Ganges
              Basin. The basic livelihoods of these people are intimately linked to water and water management,




                                                                      10
                                                                                                         South Asia Water Initiative




through water supply and sanitation, irrigation
for subsistence agriculture and often direct
dependence on ecosystem goods and services
including inland fisheries. As pressures on
the water resource increases with population
growth, urbanization and industrialization, the
impacts on the poor are often most obvious and
most severe through reduced access to water
for basic needs and through reduced water
quality with negative health consequences. In
addition, the poor people of these river basins
are among the world’s most at-risk communities
from recurrent flooding, which is a major factor
in reinforcing poverty in the region. Improving
                                                                                                  Assam Flood. Photo: World Bank
water resources management should deliver
firstly on more economically efficient, socially equitable and environmentally sustainable use of water,
and secondly on mitigation of flood impacts, that together significantly contribute to poverty alleviation.
Improved water management should also deliver increased water use efficiency, improved security of
water access for basic needs, improved food and energy security and improved water quality.

Closely linked to poverty alleviation is gender, because the negative consequences of flooding, poor
water management and increased water competition and pollution disproportionately affect women
and children. Impacts are felt through time spent fetching water, washing and cleaning, and the dire
health consequences of poor quality drinking water and poor sanitation, which are exacerbated by
floods. Reducing the impacts on women in particular from flooding and poor water management can
deliver significant health benefits, create opportunities for greater access to education for girls, and
create greater opportunities for women to contribute economically through diversified employment
opportunities. As well as identifying women as prime beneficiaries of improved water management,
SAWI seeks to proactively engage women, in all its dialogue and engagement processes, in professional
capacity building efforts.

The third emerging theme is climate vulnerability and resilience. South Asia is the region of the world
with the largest number of people at risk from climate variability and change – vulnerability and exposure
to climate impacts are already high and are expected to increase, including more extreme flooding
(including from cyclonic storm surges in Bangladesh exacerbated by sea-level rise) and changing
seasonal patterns of river flows driven by glacier melting and earlier onset of monsoon precipitation.
On average, around 21 million people in the world are affected by river flooding each year, nearly
5 million in India (mostly in the Ganges and Brahmaputra basins) and 3.5 million in Bangladesh. India
has the greatest total economic exposure to flooding (over US$15 billion) while Bangladesh has the
highest proportional economic exposure (approximately 5 percent of GDP). Recent assessments by the
World Resources Institute suggest that by 2030, the number of people affected by flooding is projected
to more than double across the Indus, Ganges and Brahmaputra basins, largely as a result of climate
change. The economic cost is projected to increase three-fold in the Indus Basin and more than eight-
fold in the Ganges-Brahmaputra basins, with socio-economic change the dominant cause but climate
change a key contributor. Given these vulnerabilities, building climate resilience is emerging as a key
development priority in the region. SAWI is increasing its efforts in improving flood forecasting and early
warning systems, exploring options for improving the resilience of the Sundarbans Landscape in the face
of a changing climate, assessing the consequences of warming on glacier melt processes, developing
and piloting risk frameworks to deliver resilient hydropower development and operation under climate
change, and beginning to explore opportunities for improved groundwater management as a critical




                                                           11
Strategic Overview




              water resources buffer given the increasing variability and uncertainty of surface water resources. The
              nexus between these emergent themes (poverty, gender and climate resilience) provides a compelling
              rationale for increased effort in water resources management including increased efforts in regional
              cooperation.



              Program Performance
              This report summarizes progress in FY15 in achieving the program’s intermediate result targets. The
              program performed well in FY15 with all the program-level targets for all intermediate results indicators
              for the year achieved or significantly exceeded. This included major efforts on numerous technical
              and awareness raising workshops, study tours and capacity building events (directly engaging with
              over 500 professionals across the region) that lay a foundation for greater cross-border dialogue and
              knowledge sharing as the program matures. By the end of FY15 there were 28 active grants to approved
              activities. Cumulative allocation of funds to these activities by the end of FY15 was US$19.3 million (over
              60 percent of the entire fund). Total expenditure for FY15, was US$2.63 million, and total expenditure
              over the life of the trust fund to-date is US$4.84 million. Cumulative expenditure to the end of FY15
              was 25 percent of the total funding allocated to-date to approved activities and around 15 percent of the
              entire fund. Projections based on program planning indicate funding allocations to approved activities
              will reach 85 percent by the end of FY16 and 100 percent by the end of FY17. Cumulative expenditure
              is expected to reach 40 percent of the total fund by the end of FY16 and 70 percent by the end of FY17.




                                                                12
2. Focus Area
   Summaries
Focus Area Summaries




                                        Indus Basin Focus Area




             Given complex water challenges, high glacier dependency and growing per capita water scarcity, the
             Indus River Basin is one of the most at-risk river basins in Asia. Glacier and snow meltwater currently
             contribute more than 40 percent of the average annual flow, but climate change is expected to significantly
             change the hydrological regime of the basin with potentially severe impacts for the basin population. The
             average annual flow to the Indus delta has been significantly reduced because of irrigation diversions
             upstream. Greatly improved water management and new investments (for water storage and hydropower
             generation) are needed to achieve water and energy security for the expanding population in the basin.

             Because of the World Bank’s role in the 1960 Indus Waters Treaty, and the importance of engaging in a
             neutral way in the basin, SAWI continues to maintain transparency on World Bank basin engagement.
             In response to communications from riparian stakeholders, the relative investment in this focus area (FA)
             has been decreased and the focus moved to areas and issues not falling directly under the purview of
             the Indus Waters Treaty. Activities focus on strengthening water resources management and coordination
             among riparian countries to improve water and energy security, especially where client demand is clear.
             These include: (i) capacity building for cross-border dialogue and facilitation of institutional development
             for joint hydro-electric power (HEP) development in the Kabul River Basin (KRB) and the Chittral/Kunar
             sub-basin; (ii) technical assistance to enhance transboundary water resources management capacity at
             the inter-provincial/state and national levels; and (iii) basin-level dialogue.



             Building Trust and Confidence
             The uneasy relationship between riparian countries, capacity asymmetry, and the fragility of post-
             conflict Afghanistan pose challenges for regional cooperation in water resources management. SAWI
             has supported a four-country basin-level dialogue since 2013 – the Indus Forum. The Indus Forum
             participants identified climate change as a promising entry point for cooperation and coordinated action,
             and thus the 3rd Indus Forum (Lahore, March 2015) discussed “Climate Change and Vulnerability of
             Indus Water Resources”. Participants included senior government officials and non-government experts
             from Afghanistan, China, India and Pakistan. The Forum established a working group (with at least two
             participants from each country) to develop a joint research proposal to strengthen the evidence base and



                                                                14
                                                                                                                   South Asia Water Initiative




enhance the reliability of basin-level climate adaptation and resilience models in the region. The working
group, through virtual discussions and a scientific study tour to China, is finalizing a research proposal
that will be presented to national and international donors for co-funding.



Generating and Sharing Knowledge
In FY15, SAWI supported analytical work on
joint river management in the KRB and reviewed
investment opportunities for water and energy
security. As part of this analytical work, regional,
basin/landscape and sub-basin level knowledge
products were produced and draft studies
shared with key stakeholders for comment.
Knowledge products include: (i) a synthesis note
describing the opportunities and challenges
of developing HEP in the KRB; (ii) a report on
institutional options for transboundary water
and infrastructure projects in the KRB, based on
relevant international experience; (iii) a strategic
assessment for the KRB of water resources and
hydropower production potential under a range
of operational and climate change scenarios;                            China Study Tour Group Discussion. Photo: Christina Leb / World Bank
(iv) geospatial analysis of the KRB based on
remotely sensed data; and (v) a review of existing technical assessments and feasibility studies for the
KRB. This work helped build momentum in both Afghanistan and Pakistan for joint HEP development in
the KRB.



Building Institutional Capacity
SAWI provided technical assistance and implementation support to projects in both Afghanistan and
Pakistan to build water resources management capacity. This informed the preparation of additional
financing for two projects involved in the management of shared river basins and transboundary water
governance: the Water Sector Capacity Building and Advisory Services Project (WCAP) in Pakistan, and
the Irrigation Restoration and Development Project (IRDP) in Afghanistan. WCAP is currently tackling
transboundary water resources management at the inter-provincial level, but with the growing interest,
KRB opportunities expansion into international transboundary water management is expected. IRDP is
supporting inter-ministerial institutional capacity building for transboundary water management. SAWI is
providing complementary support for the design and implementation of a training curriculum.



Scoping Interventions and Investments
Analytical work on KRB HEP development potential has identified opportunities for joint or coordinated
investments by Afghanistan and Pakistan. The KRB has the potential for several hydropower and multi-
purpose projects on both sides of the border, with an aggregate generation capacity of about
3,000 MW. These developments would also help control floods in the Kabul River and improve the utility
of the existing Warsak Dam on the Kabul River in Pakistan.




                                                                 15
Focus Area Summaries




                                     Ganges Basin Focus Area




             Countries are unlikely to cooperate for effective transboundary basin management if water resources
             are not well managed in river basins nationally. In South Asian countries, basin management of water
             resources is in its infancy. In the Ganges Basin, SAWI is therefore actively supporting adoption of river
             basin planning within India and in Nepal, and connecting between countries through dialogue processes
             and capacity building. Strengthening river basin planning in India is especially important for two reasons.
             Firstly, India has many inter-state river basins that have been the focus of extended water disputes,
             but increasingly the country is recognizing the need to adopt a more cooperative approach to river
             basin management. Secondly, India is the dominant country in the Ganges Basin and so it is important
             for Indian water planners and policy makers to have a sound understanding of the benefits of basin-
             scale planning and management, without which increased longer-term water cooperation with riparian
             neighbors in the region is unlikely.



             Building Trust and Confidence
             In both India and Nepal, there is increasing awareness of the importance of a river basin approach for
             managing water resources – both surface and groundwater. In India this is driven by multiple pressures
             – increasing relative scarcity, increasing water pollution and increasing competition for water among
             different sectors of the economy. While the World Bank has supported hydro-met data collection and
             river modelling across the peninsular states for the last two decades, there was no effort to tackle these
             issues in the international river basins. This is now changing fast, with the World Bank actively preparing
             a major “National Hydrology Project” with a strong focus on the Ganges and Brahmaputra basins.
             SAWI is providing technical support to the preparation of this program by bringing international best
             practice in river modelling and hydro-met technologies, and leading the policy dialogue with the central
             and state water ministries on river basin modelling, planning and management, and open access
             water information systems. SAWI is also providing support through a major international consultancy
             to demonstrate – in close collaboration with government – the river basin planning approach based
             on robust system modelling and analysis and multi-stakeholder consultation. These efforts are leading
             to greater sharing of hydrologic data and information, and increasing the internal dialogue on water
             management and cooperation in India among states, and between the central and state governments.



                                                               16
                                                                                                        South Asia Water Initiative




Generating and Sharing Knowledge
In FY15, SAWI established a Ganges Basin modelling “Community of Practice” (CoP) to connect non-
government professionals around the world who are engaged in modelling the hydrology or water
resources of the Ganges Basin. Members of the CoP include professionals from the UK, US, Australia,
India, Bangladesh, Nepal and Sri Lanka. The CoP has been connected virtually through an online platform
to facilitate the sharing ideas, data and information. A structured survey of members guided SAWI on how
to best support the CoP going forward. Once the SAWI-supported international consultancy on strategic
basin planning is fully established, it will be used as a focus for CoP activities. Subsequently, the CoP
will be used as a means to engage with government officials (technical and policy) across the countries
of the basin to share emerging basin understanding and to explore development and management
scenarios. A review of published modelling work on the Ganges was conducted and a bibliography of
modelling literature was shared across the CoP     . A compilation of current models and modelling work
was also prepared to describe the various models in use, their data requirements, licensing and access
arrangements, and institutional support.



Building Institutional Capacity
In Nepal, chronic energy shortages that hamper economic growth and the environmental and social
risks of an emerging pattern of uncoordinated HEP development are the key drivers for adopting a
more strategic approach to hydropower planning. This in turn is leading to a recognition of the need to
embrace river basin modelling and analysis to guide river basin planning. The World Bank is supporting
the reforms and institutional capacity building required to enable this to happen, with important financial
and technical support from SAWI. Since SAWI support in FY15 was largely tied to IDA support, this
required prolonged negotiations and hence some delay. Implementation will now commence in FY16. In
the interim, an important workshop was held in September 2014 in partnership with the Government of
Nepal (GoN) to share international best practice in river basin modelling and planning, and to coordinate
donor and NGO activities on this issue.

In India, the key political focus in the Ganges
Basin is on Ganga “rejuvenation”. While
perhaps originally seen as only a pollution
“clean-up” program, it is being increasingly
recognized as an integrated water quantity and
quality challenge, and more importantly as an
economic and social rejuvenation of the basin
rather than just an environmental rejuvenation
of the river. SAWI is providing active support
through policy dialogue with central authorities,
through participation in the multiple forums
in India on Ganga rejuvenation, and through
establishing a major international consultancy
to demonstrate the consultative basin planning
approach in a collaborative partnership with the
central government.                                                                   Drain in Uttar Pradesh, India. Photo: The World Bank




                                                       17
Focus Area Summaries




                                                                                                   In FY15, SAWI supported major workshops in
                                                                                                   India to raise awareness of, and build capacity
                                                                                                   in: (i) modern basin modelling and analytical
                                                                                                   tools, (ii) technologies and methods for modern
                                                                                                   hydro-met data collection and management,
                                                                                                   and (iii) the concepts of and implementation
                                                                                                   approaches for Integrated Water Resources
                                                                                                   Management. Each of these workshops
                                                                                                   attracted over 100 people from across India.
                                                                                                   The first two workshops drew largely the same
                                                                                                   audience – primarily technical – while the third
                                                                                                   was a separate audience of senior planning and
                                                                                                   policy professionals. In each case, SAWI support
                                                                                                   enabled the participation of international experts
               National Workshop on Integrated Water Resources Management. Photo: The World Bank
                                                                                                   from both technical and policy domains.



             Scoping Interventions and Investments
             Scoping interventions and investments is important for the Ganges Basin but has not been the primary
             focus in FY15. Rather, this will follow once modelling platforms and consultative process are well
             advanced. As indicated above, the work in Nepal will focus strongly on HEP investments, while in India
             the focus will be on interventions to improve river health, including prioritization of pollution mitigation
             works and measures and options for environmental flows.




                                                                                         18
                                                                                                     South Asia Water Initiative




                  Brahmaputra Basin Focus Area




Cooperative management and development of the Brahmaputra Basin – shared by China, India,
Bangladesh and Bhutan – has thus far been lacking, with investment activities planned and undertaken
in a piecemeal fashion at the country level. This has resulted in missed opportunities for economic
growth and a general inability to tackle joint water-related challenges, including natural hazards (floods
and droughts) and environmental threats (e.g., high rates of erosion and sedimentation). The varying
capacities of the countries that share the Brahmaputra Basin and a prolonged history of mistrust has
prevented cooperation for economic growth and resilience. Cooperation can only be achieved by leveling
the playing field, working from the “bottom-up” (local, country, regional), while at the same time fostering
“top-down” cooperative processes, including through knowledge sharing and dialogue. FY15 activities
under SAWI focused on increasing the understanding of the complex river system, addressing common
water-related challenges, such as flooding and erosion, and exploring potential economic opportunities
from collaboration, including in hydropower. Knowledge exchange activities, study tours and workshops
provided a critical platform for riparian countries to engage, build a shared understanding of the basin’s
opportunities and risks, and begin to identify opportunities for basin-wide collaboration.



Building Trust and Confidence
In FY15, SAWI supported several activities that contribute to trust and confidence building in the
Brahmaputra Basin. This included support to the “National Hydrology Project” – which includes the
Brahmaputra and Ganges basins – described in the Ganges Basin Focus Area Summary. In addition,
two major study tours to river basins that confront similar challenges to the Brahmaputra Basin were
conducted in FY15. First, a study tour of the Yellow River in China (July 2014) was conducted involving
officials from Bangladesh, Bhutan, India and Myanmar. The tour included visits to the Yellow River Water
Resources Commission in Zhengzhou City and the Xiaolangdi Multipurpose Dam, as well as meetings
with various officials from the Ministry of Water Resources in Beijing. Second, a study tour of the Mississippi
River in USA (June 2015) was conducted involving senior officials from Bangladesh, Bhutan, and India.
This included visits to the Mississippi River Commission, the US Army Corps of Engineers, the Engineer
Research and Development Center, various levee boards along the Lower Mississippi River and the New
Orleans District.



                                                         19
Focus Area Summaries




             These study tours allowed participants to learn from international experience in river basin management,
             to gain a better understanding of common challenges and to discuss opportunities for collaboration,
             thereby providing an important first step towards greater cooperation in the Brahmaputra Basin.
             Following a request from China for a reciprocal visit to India to learn about water management in the
             Ganges Basin, a senior delegation from Anhui Province visited New Delhi in November 2014 to discuss
             shared irrigation and water resources management challenges with the World Bank and officials from
             the Government of India. SAWI is now actively exploring modalities for establishing a more formal basin-
             level forum (“Brahmaputra Forum”).



             Generating and Sharing Knowledge
                                                                                                    The Brahmaputra Basin is a highly complex
                                                                                                    yet very poorly analyzed or understood system.
                                                                                                    To help fill this void, SAWI is establishing
                                                                                                    the requisite knowledge base for informed
                                                                                                    investment planning and decision-making,
                                                                                                    including through the development of analytical
                                                                                                    and decision support tools and the strengthening
                                                                                                    of institutional capacity. While the aim is to
                                                                                                    build a comprehensive knowledge base that
                                                                                                    covers the entire basin, SAWI support in FY15
                                                                                                    took a ‘bottom up’ approach and focused on
                                                                                                    areas where knowledge gaps are arguably the
                       Field Visit: Classroom Conference to River Confluence. Photo: The World Bank
                                                                                                    largest and where capacity is comparatively
                                                                                                    the weakest. This included closely linked
             activities on river basin modelling in India, Bangladesh, and Bhutan (the latter focusing on hydropower
             development). In FY15, SAWI also supported knowledge generation and sharing in areas that are of
             common interest to riparians, including targeted work on erosion management (in India) and hydro-met
             modernization to improve disaster preparedness and build climate resilience (in Bangladesh). These
             national engagements have clear cross-border dimensions that require the basin-wide perspective that
             SAWI support is providing.



             Building Institutional Capacity
             Cross-country capacity building through the sharing of good practice in integrated water resources
             management was a central element of the study tours conducted. The Mississippi River study tour included
             exposure trainings on a range of analytical tools for flood management and sessions on institutional
             frameworks for basin management. Each of the activities that contribute to knowledge generation and
             sharing (refer above) include an explicit capacity building component, targeting areas such as modelling
             and analytical tools for basin planning, management and development. Under the Brahmaputra Focus
             Area, SAWI support is informing the preparation of a number of World Bank-financed projects that have
             direct and/or indirect regional linkages, each of which also includes work on institutional strengthening.
             Of these, the two-day “Classroom Conference to River Confluence” event held in Assam, India (January
             2015), was a particular highlight. The event – held in collaboration with the Assam Water Resources
             Management Institute and the Indian Institute of Management (IIT-Guwahati) – provided a platform for
             academics and central and state government officials to identify key knowledge, institutional and capacity




                                                                             20
                                                                                                           South Asia Water Initiative




gaps that exist in the Brahmaputra Basin and to chart a roadmap to tackle them. The event included
extensive field visits and boat trips for consultative sessions with the local communities most critical to
and affected by the management of the Brahmaputra Basin. The Classroom Conference culminated with
a call to establish a Centre of Excellence in Assam that would address water resources issues across the
northeast, including human resources and capacity building needs; this is under consideration by the
central and Assam governments in India.



Scoping Interventions and Investments
The scoping of cooperative interventions and investments in the Brahmaputra Basin can only take place
once the analytical platform and consultative processes are in place, and establishing these processes
was the focus for FY15. Targeted SAWI support was provided at the country level for project preparation
including support to the River Management Improvement Program in Bangladesh; the proposed Flood,
Sediment and Erosion Management Project in
Assam; and proposed hydro-met modernization
for Bangladesh. SAWI’s technical and financial
support is improving project designs by
enabling a basin-scale perspective that ensures
transboundary impacts and opportunities are
correctly identified and addressed.

This dual ‘top-down’ and ‘bottom-up’ approach
– working concurrently at the basin level and
at the country (and below) level – reflects the
underlying SAWI philosophy: both regional
cooperative processes and country-level
support and engagement are equally critical
for improving water resources management.
This approach is adopted as countries are most
likely to cooperate on clearly established and                                 Community meeting, Brahmaputra Basin. Photo: The World Bank

recognized joint concerns.




                                                       21
Focus Area Summaries




                          Sundarbans Landscape Focus Area




             In 2011, Bangladesh and India signed non-binding bilateral agreements for the joint management of the
             Sundarbans. These sit under an umbrella agreement with a framework for collaboration in international
             waters, information-sharing, disaster management and addressing climate change issues. SAWI support
             is designed to assist the two countries move from agreement to joint action. This will be achieved by
             funding: (i) advocacy to generate wider public support, (ii) joint research and dissemination to build
             capacity and build confidence for early joint actions, (iii) establishment of governance arrangements
             for joint planning, and (iv) development of shared plans and policies for conservation and sustainable
             development of the Sundarbans. The key ultimate expected outcome is shared or a coordinated approach
             to water resources management to underpin and promote sustainable development across the entire
             Sundarbans Landscape.



             Building Trust and Confidence
             In FY15, SAWI supported multiple events to build trust and strengthen working relationships between India
             and Bangladesh for sustainable management of Sundarbans, encompassing both country-specific needs
             and landscape-level priorities. An international “Risk Management and Adaptation to Climate Change
             for Sustainable Growth in the Deltaic Region” workshop was held in Kolkata, India (January 2015), in
             collaboration with the Disaster Management Department, Government of West Bengal, India, WWF
             (World Wildlife Fund) and EnGIO (Environment Governed Integrated Organization). A transboundary
             media workshop (aboard the MV Paramhansa) was organized for 28 media personnel representing
             prominent print and electronic media houses in Bangladesh and India (March 2015) to build trust and
             collaboration among the key media outlets in the two countries. The workshop held an introductory
             meeting with political delegates from India and Bangladesh.

             SAWI organized informal meetings on water resources management in the West Bengal Sundarbans, and
             facilitated a workshop for ministers, members of parliament and civil society groups from Bangladesh
             and West Bengal (March 2015). The workshop considered how bilateral management mechanisms
             could best be established.




                                                              22
                                                                                                                              South Asia Water Initiative




SAWI is supporting targeted environmental studies that are helping to build confidence and momentum
for a Sundarbans “Joint Platform” for guiding long-term planning and collaborative work. Initial work
has included studies on livelihood implications of climate change in the Sundarbans and studies on flora
and fauna at risk in a changing climate.



Generating and Sharing Knowledge
Both the international workshop and the transboundary media workshop described above were
important knowledge sharing events. The international workshop focused on sharing global scientific
knowledge with regional decision makers. It provided over 100 policy makers and experts with an
overview of the disaster risks and climate change induced risks to the Sundarbans, shared experiences
from other deltas in mitigating natural disasters and sea level rise impacts and in achieving sustainable
development and climate resilience. Key workshop recommendations include: (i) mainstream climate
change ecosystem based disaster risk reduction approaches into policies and development planning,
(ii) enhance scientific and technical work on disaster risk reduction, (iii) ensure the use of traditional,
indigenous and local practices to complement
scientific knowledge in disaster risk assessment,
and (iv) encourage parliamentarians to support
disaster risk reduction by developing new or
amending relevant legislation.

Participants in the transboundary media
workshop discussed and prepared a first draft
of a media collaboration plan, planned ways to
sustain media coverage on joint management
of the Sundarbans and began development of
a transboundary Sundarbans media strategy.
Field visits exposed participants to fishing
communities, forest camps; village-level
                                                    International Workshop on Risk Management and Adaptation to Climate Change for Sustainable Growth in
climate change impacts; integrated livelihood                                                                      Deltaic Regions. Photo: The World Bank
management and ecotourism; and ecosystem
dynamics and ecosystem services. An introductory meeting with political delegates from India and
Bangladesh was held. Media workshop recommendations address: (i) communication and knowledge
management issues, (ii) policy and technical issues and (iii) environmental and social issues. Smaller
subsequent media discussions are helping to advance the agreed actions.

Building Institutional Capacity
During FY15, SAWI facilitated discussions with the Government of Bangladesh on the scope of “Delta
Plan 2100” (under which the Sundarbans Landscape is important for achieving higher and more resilient
economic growth in Bangladesh) and on the broader scope of World Bank engagement in water resources
management and development. These discussions contribute to strengthening the central government
institutions for water management in Bangladesh.




                                                                       23
Focus Area Summaries




            Scoping Interventions and Investments
                                                             The Sundarbans Focus Area strategy does not target scoping of
                                                             interventions and investments in FY15. In FY16, work will commence
                                                             on the design of an integrated and joint landscape scale hydro-met
                                                             monitoring network. As well as supporting improved understanding,
                                                             the cooperation required to design, establish and operate a joint
                                                             network is expected to strengthen institutional arrangements for
                                                             joint management of the Sundarbans.




                       Visit to Sonaga village. Photo: WWF




                                                                         24
                                                                                                  South Asia Water Initiative




             Regional Cross-Cutting Focus Area




Each of SAWI’s four geographic Focus Areas is unique, but there are common challenges and opportunities
that cut across them. The Regional Cross-Cutting Focus Area fosters cross-fertilization and sharing of
experience and knowledge, and both complements and supplements the activities under the basin/
landscape Focus Areas.

In FY15, significant progress was made on Regional Cross-Cutting Focus Area activities that contribute
to SAWI’s overall objective – to increase cooperation in the management and development of the
major Himalaya river systems in South Asia through enhanced dialogue, improved knowledge, and
strengthened capacity. This included activities that supported: (i) trust and confidence building via Track
II processes; (ii) knowledge generation and sharing on issues of regional relevance – climate change
and disaster risk management; and (iii) capacity building in water diplomacy, water quality services, and
climate risk management. Several activities also contributed to ongoing work in the basin/landscape
Focus Areas to scope investments in cooperative transboundary water management and development.



Building Trust and Confidence
An important mechanism for building trust and confidence across the region is dialogue, which is most
effective if centered on a particular topic or theme that is of wide interest and avoids potential political
tensions. In FY15, the first major regional dialogue event supported by SAWI since December 2012
was held in Nepal (February, 2015) around the neutral and unifying theme of the water-energy-food
nexus. The flagship “Water-Energy-Food Nexus Forum” was convened in partnership with the Fulbright
Commission, the International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development (ICIMOD), and the Nepal
Water Conservation Foundation. It brought together over 100 participants, including representatives
from government and NGOs, national and international experts, and recognized specialists on nexus
thinking and analysis. The event focused on the transboundary dimensions of managing the water-
energy-food nexus complemented by reflections on success factors in past and current Track II processes
relating to water in South Asia. Two reports from the forum (proceedings and a Track II dialogue mapping
report) were published and plans are underway to build on this successful event to further broaden and
enrich the dialogue on transboundary waters.



                                                       25
Focus Area Summaries




            Generating and Sharing Knowledge
            In FY15, several activities that contribute to generating and sharing regionally-relevant knowledge were
            advanced, with a focus on strengthening resilience to climate change and disaster risk management.
            Various methods for screening climate change and disaster risks and for integrating resilience measures
            into basin water investment planning were compiled and evaluated. The most promising methods were
            trialed at the project level (for the Upper Arun Hydropower Project) and at basin level (for the Kosi River
            Basin) in Nepal to provide proof of concept and to establish the feasibility of broader future application.
            The contribution of snow and glacier melt to streamflow, including the potential effects of climate change,
            was also analyzed for the Kosi River Basin in Nepal. This study included a compilation of the current state
            of knowledge and relevant data, mapping and hypsometries for glaciated areas, and analysis of glacier-
            origin flows and the potential climate change impacts.

            Two activities to improve disaster risk management neared completion in FY15. The first developed an
            innovative approach using remote sensing technologies for flood forecasting to overcome significant
            data limitations in the region. This approach will be trialed in an operational mode in a transboundary
            sub-basin of the Ganges. The second activity focused on assessing and mapping flood risks at the
            basin scale, using the greater Ganges Basin as a test case. These activities link closely to the National
            Hydrology Project in India (under preparation) with a view to exploit opportunities for scaling up.



            Building Institutional Capacity
            While most activities under the Regional Cross-Cutting Focus Area have a capacity building dimension,
            three activities in FY15 explicitly target critical capacity development needs in key areas: (i) water diplomacy
            and transboundary water governance, (ii) water quality services, and (iii) climate risk management.
            These three areas are discussed below.

                                                                                International and regional experience has shown
                                                                                that varying degrees of capacity can affect
                                                                                country engagement in complex negotiations
                                                                                around transboundary waters. With the aim of
                                                                                “leveling the playing field” for more effective
                                                                                and balanced negotiations, capacity building
                                                                                in water diplomacy and transboundary water
                                                                                governance commenced in FY15. The focus
                                                                                was on: (i) preparatory activities to design short
                                                                                training modules and curriculum for universities
                                                                                and other institutions in the region, (ii) design
                                                                                of a two-year capacity building program for
                                                                                the Bangladesh Joint Rivers Commission and
                                              Visit to Bali village. Photo: WWF
                                                                                other Bangladesh government officials, and (iii)
            technical assistance to the Indian Foreign Services Institute for the development of hydro-diplomacy
            modules to train diplomats.

            In FY15, work progressed on increasing the use of modern technologies and techniques for water
            quality monitoring, analysis, use and dissemination, which is a recognized need in a region confronting
            widespread challenges of surface water pollution. This included two days of hands-on training for staff




                                                                    26
                                                                                                 South Asia Water Initiative




of the National Mission Clean Ganga in India (November 2014), focusing on data visualization tools to
strengthen data analysis capability with the use of high-tech, low-cost open source knowledge products.
A report on analysis of real-time water quality monitoring was presented to the Indian Central Pollution
Control Board and the National Mission Clean Ganga, which will now be disseminated widely across
the region.

Progress was made in enhancing the management of shared climate risks by evaluating international
best practices in transboundary risk management and their relevance to South Asia. This work assessed
existing protocols, institutional arrangements and modalities for hydro-meteorological risk management
and data sharing between South Asia countries, and identified data and information gaps and needs.



Scoping Interventions and Investments
While most work on scoping of interventions
and investments falls under the basin/landscape
Focus Areas, activities under the Regional
Cross-Cutting Focus Area support these
efforts. Specifically, in FY15, work provided
the knowledge-base to inform investment
planning, tackled shared regional challenges
(climate change, disaster risk management,
and water quality services); strengthened the
institutional foundation for improved planning
and management of shared water resources;
and broadened the dialogue on cooperation
in transboundary waters to include issues
of common interest to a wider range of
stakeholders.                                                                            Regional Workshop. Photo: The World Bank




                                                     27
3. Appendices
                                                                                                South Asia Water Initiative




              Appendix 1 – Summary of Activities by Focus Area

Indus Basin Focus Area

Pillar 1: Long-term Basin Development and Investment Planning
SAWI is providing support in Afghanistan and Pakistan to projects that help strengthen water resources
management capacity. SAWI informed the preparation of additional financing for two projects that
will enhance capacity for shared river basin management and transboundary water governance in
Afghanistan and Pakistan, respectively. Project implementation support in Pakistan identified a new SAWI
activity on groundwater management in the Punjab that will commence in FY16.

Pillar 2: Investments and Capacity Building for Water and Energy Security
Integrated Management of the Kunar River Basin: SAWI is supporting World Bank engagement
in sustainable, cooperative management and development of water resources within the Kunar River
Basin. In FY15, SAWI supported technical and analytical work on joint Kunar River Basin management
and helped identity investment opportunities for water and energy security. The following reports were
shared with key stakeholders for comment prior to finalization: (i) a synthesis of the opportunities and
challenges of developing HEP in the KRB, (ii) a study on institutional design options for transboundary
management, (iii) a water balance and climate change analysis, evaluating the water balance impacts
and power production potential of future HEP development in the KRB under a range of operational
scenarios, (iv) a remote sensing assessment and terrain analysis for the KRB and (v) a review of prior
technical assessments and feasibility studies. Overall, the activity contributed to the momentum in both
Afghanistan and Pakistan toward joint development of the Kunar River Basin.

Pillar 3: Basin-Level Dialogue
Indus Basin Dialogue: Since 2013 SAWI has supported a four-country dialogue for Indus riparian
countries. The Third Indus Forum (Lahore; March 2015) addressed “Climate Change and Vulnerability
of Indus Water Resources”. Senior government and non-government participants from the four riparian
countries participated and established a working group, with at least two participants from each country
to develop a joint research proposal on basin-level adaptation and climate resilience models. The
working group, following virtual discussions and a scientific visit to China, is finalizing a proposal for
presentation to international, national and bilateral donors.



Ganges Basin Focus Area

Pillar 1: Valuing the Environment and Ecosystem Services
Ganges Strategic Basin Planning: SAWI is providing technical assistance to the Government of India
and relevant state governments for strategic water resources planning of the Ganges Basin. The work will
consider surface-groundwater interactions, environmental flows and water quality, using best practice
modelling and structured consultation with key stakeholders. A procurement process in FY15 led to a
US$3.5 million contract being awarded to Deltares (Netherlands).
In February 2015, in New Delhi, a workshop was convened to discuss environmental flows for the
Ganges River. The workshop shared international experience on environmental flows in the context of
IWRM and discussed how to approach this challenge in the Ganges Basin. Over 100 participants from
central and state governments, NGOs and academia participated, and reached broad consensus on a




                                                      29
Appendices




             staged approach to scoping environmental flow options. A workshop report was produced that includes
             a roadmap for future action.

             Sustainable Water Resources for HEP in Nepal: In October 2014, in Kathmandu, a river basin
             planning workshop was convened to raise understanding and generate buy-in among key governmental
             and non-governmental actors on the value of integrated river basin planning. River basin planning is
             critical to enable a strategic approach to HEP planning and development in Nepal. Hosted jointly with
             the Government of Nepal, the workshop laid the foundations for the substantive technical work that SAWI
             will support on river basin planning for HEP development. Key workshop conclusions were: (i) there is a
             clear rationale for Nepal to pursue integrated basin planning in the context of sustainable energy sector
             development, (ii) the Government of Nepal needs to strengthen planning capacity, sectoral coordination
             and ownership, and (iii) coordination among donors needs to be improved to effectively support capacity
             building for government. The workshop reached consensus on: (i) the need for integrated river basin
             planning (including consideration of environment values), (ii) terms of reference for consulting services
             for the IWRM for selected river basins in Nepal and (iii) an agreement to establish a cross-agency
             committee to coordinate government efforts in environment protection, hydropower development,
             irrigation development and water supply.

             Pillar 2: Moving from Data to Information Services
             Water Resources Management in Transboundary Basins: SAWI is supporting preparation of the
             National Hydrology Project (NHP) in India that will strengthen water resources monitoring, planning
             and management, especially in the Ganges River Basin (GRB) and Brahmaputra River Basin (BRB). NHP
             builds on earlier projects in peninsular India to now address the Ganges and Brahmaputra basins and
             to move from hydro-met data collection to cooperative river basin planning and flood management.
             SAWI has provided access to international best practice in basin modelling, basin planning and flood
             management, has highlighted the importance of the river basin approach, and is show-casing examples
             of successful river basin organizations in diverse settings. Additionally, SAWI provided training in real-
             time hydro-met for more than 60 professionals; a hydro-met manual was produced.
             In February 2015, in New Delhi, a National IWRM Workshop was convened for 100 relevant central and
             state government officials and other stakeholders. The workshop showcased international experiences
             in IWRM and river basin organizations including key transboundary examples, discussed and provided
             guidance on finalizing the National IWRM Guidelines and considered potential IWRM investments. The
             workshop called for broad stakeholder consultation to inform a participatory approach to IWRM, noted
             the importance of legislative reform to enable the establishment of effective river basin organizations and
             noted the benefits for IWRM of formalizing water access rights.

             Pillar 3: Basin-Level Dialogue
             Ganges Basin Dialogue: SAWI is facilitating technical interactions amongst institutions around the
             world involved in water resources modelling of the GRB. A Community of Practice (CoP) has been
             established with interactions to-date limited to virtual interactions and email dialogue. A survey of CoP
             members was conducted on the preferred scope and modality for the CoP        , a compilation of literature
             relating to hydrologic and water resources modelling in the GRB was undertaken and a baseline audit
             of recent/current/planned modelling work for the GRB was completed. It is expected that in FY16 the
             CoP will be linked to the strategic basin planning work in both India and Nepal to provide a forum for
             technical engagement with government and non-government stakeholders.




                                                               30
                                                                                               South Asia Water Initiative




Brahmaputra Basin Focus Area

Pillar 1: Knowledge and Capacity Building for Basin Management and Investment Planning
Yellow River IWRM Study Tour: In July 2015, a study tour to the Yellow River in China provided
an opportunity for water managers from India, Bangladesh, Bhutan and Myanmar to learn from
international experience on basin-level IWRM. Similar to the BRB, the Yellow River is characterized by
high sediment loads and frequent floods. The tour visited the Yellow River Water Resources Commission
and the Xiaolangdi Multi-purpose Dam and meetings were held with officials from the Ministry of Water
Resources in Beijing. Discussion among participants identified areas for BRB collaboration and activity.
Participants recommended formation of a “Brahmaputra Forum” in each riparian country, with
representatives coming together to form a basin-level forum to address regional problems that require
joint or coordinated responses by two or more riparians. A request from China for a reciprocal visit led
to a delegation from Anhui Province, China, visiting New Delhi in November 2014.
Hydro-met Modernization in the Brahmaputra Basin: Technical analysis of existing hydro-met
networks for monitoring, forecasting and early warning, has scoped the required hydro-met modernization
for the Brahmaputra. A consulting firm has been hired to conduct an economic analysis of hydro-
met modernization in Bangladesh, informed by a stakeholder consultation workshop in Dhaka (March
2015), to assess user needs. This workshop and other consultations have helped raise awareness of the
importance of hydro-met modernization in Bhutan and Bangladesh.

Pillar 2: Reducing Vulnerability to Floods and Erosion
River Management Improvement in Bangladesh: SAWI preparation support for the River Management
Improvement Project (Bangladesh) funded economic assessments, modelling studies and embankment
scour analyzes to inform the design of the project. Support also included cumulative impact assessments,
plans for embankment asset management systems and a technical note on cost-effective technologies.
Experts reviewed delta challenges, and key stakeholders were consulted to inform an integrated river
basin plan to manage challenges in the built environment.
Flood and Erosion Management in Northeast India: SAWI support for the proposed Erosion
Management Project in Assam, India, emphasized the importance of knowledge generation and
stakeholder engagement to identify challenges and opportunities for basin investments and to
contribute to longer-term water resource management. This occurred through participation in the 2014
Assam Water Conference, and through convening a consultative conference (January 2015) with key
stakeholders and local project beneficiaries. As no formal request for the project has been forthcoming
from the Government of India, SAWI will use other mechanisms in FY16 to engage with central and state
governments in India (notably NHP) on BRB modelling and analysis to inform a river basin approach to
planning and management.

Pillar 3: Basin-level Dialogue
Brahmaputra Basin Dialogue: SAWI is supporting discussions on BRB management through multiple
mechanisms. In collaboration with the Assam Water Resources Management Institute and the Indian
Institute of Management (IIT)-Guwahati, a two-day “Classroom Conference to River Confluence”
event was organized in Assam, India (January 2015). The event included field visits to consult local
communities. Attended by academics, central and state government officials, the meeting identified BRB
knowledge, institutional and capacity gaps, and provided a roadmap to guide future SAWI engagement
in the basin. The meeting stressed the importance of long-term planning for socially-responsible and
environmentally-sustainable water resources development and management in the basin, and proposed
a Water Resources Centre of Excellence in Assam to maintain a comprehensive basin database, study
and monitor river behavior, address human resources and capacity building needs of the stakeholder
departments, and work on long-term river development plans.




                                                     31
Appendices




             A study tour to the Mississippi River (June 2015) for 15 senior officials from Bangladesh, India and
             Bhutan showcased international experience in flood management and river navigation and provided an
             opportunity for multi-country basin dialogue on BRB management issues. The tour visited the Mississippi
             River Commission, the US Army Corps of Engineers (including the Engineer Research and Development
             Center and the New Orleans District) and levee boards along the lower river.



             Sundarbans Landscape Focus Area

             Pillar 1: Enhancing Bilateral Cooperation
             Joint Landscape Planning: A draft narrative that combines existing single-country narratives to provide
             an integrated view of the Sundarbans Landscape to guide joint planning has been prepared. This will
             enable stakeholders to better understand common challenges and opportunities for management of the
             Sundarbans, rather than focusing on political-administrative differences between the two countries. This
             study will be completed and disseminated in FY16.
             Sundarbans Dialogue: SAWI supported multiple events to build trust and strengthen working relationships
             between India and Bangladesh for sustainable management of Sundarbans encompassing both country-
             specific needs and landscape-level priorities. An international workshop on “Risk Management and
             Adaptation to Climate Change for Sustainable Growth in the Deltaic Region” was held in Kolkata, India
             (January 2015), in collaboration with the Disaster Management Department, Government of West
             Bengal, India, WWF (World Wildlife Fund) and EnGIO (Environment Governed Integrated Organization).
             The workshop provided over 100 policy makers and experts with an overview of the disaster risks and
             climate change induced risks to the Sundarbans, and shared experiences from other deltas in mitigating
             natural disasters and sea level rise impacts and in achieving sustainable development and resilience.
             Key workshop recommendations include: (i) mainstream climate change ecosystem based disaster risk
             reduction approaches into policies and development planning, (ii) enhance scientific and technical work
             on disaster risk reduction, (iii) ensure the use of traditional, indigenous and local practices to complement
             scientific knowledge in disaster risk assessment and (iv) encourage parliamentarians to support disaster
             risk reduction by developing new or amending relevant legislation.
             A transboundary media workshop (aboard the MV Paramhansa) was organized for 28 media personnel
             representing prominent print and electronic media houses in Bangladesh and India (March 2015). The
             workshop: (i) discussed and prepared a first draft of a media collaboration plan, (ii) planned ways to
             sustain media coverage on joint management of the Sundarbans, and (iii) began development of a
             transboundary Sundarbans media strategy. Field visits exposed participants to fishing communities, forest
             camps; village-level climate change impacts; integrated livelihood management and ecotourism; and
             ecosystem dynamics and ecosystem services. An introductory meeting with political delegates from India
             and Bangladesh was held. Workshop recommendations address: (i) communication and knowledge
             management issues, (ii) policy and technical issues, and (iii) environmental and social issues. Smaller
             subsequent media discussions are helping to advance the agreed actions.
             SAWI facilitated discussion with the Government of Bangladesh on the scope of “Delta Plan 2100” (under
             which the Sundarbans Landscape is important for achieving higher and more resilient economic growth
             in Bangladesh) and on World Bank engagement in water resources management and development.
             SAWI organized informal meetings on water resources management in the West Bengal Sundarbans,
             and facilitated a workshop for ministers, other members of parliament and civil society groups from
             Bangladesh and West Bengal (March 2015). The workshop considered how bilateral management
             mechanisms could best be established.




                                                                32
                                                                                                   South Asia Water Initiative




Pillar 2: Technical Cooperation to Support Joint Management
Targeted Environmental Studies: SAWI is supporting targeted environmental studies that help build
confidence and momentum for a Sundarbans “Joint Platform” for guiding long-term planning and
collaborative work. Initial work has included studies on livelihood implications of climate change in the
Sundarbans and studies on flora and fauna at risk in a changing climate. These will be completed in
early FY16. In FY15, SAWI also provided analytical inputs on the Sundarbans to NHP (India) and to the
proposed Bangladesh hydro-met project.



Regional Cross-Cutting Focus Area

Pillar 1: Knowledge Related Activities
Climate Change Impacts on HEP: Various scientific methods for screening climate change and disaster
risks, and for integrating appropriate resilience measures in water, hydropower and dam investments in
the South Asia region were assessed during FY15. A decision tree analysis method for climate change
risk was trialed for the proposed Upper Arun Hydropower Project and for the entire Kosi River Basin
considering multiple potential development. This trial demonstrated how the approach could support
national level energy sector planning in Nepal. A synthesis report and a full report were prepared and
shared with stakeholders via videoconference (March 2015).
Snow/Glacier Contributions to Streamflow and Climate Change Impacts: In FY15, SAWI
developed and applied a method to estimate the contribution of snow and glaciers to river flow in
selected basins/sub-basins across the Himalayas, and to assess how these contributions will be affected
by climate change. Reports on the analysis for the Kosi River Basin, presented in the context of the existing
cryosphere hydrology knowledge for the Kosi River Bain, have been completed.
Transboundary Risk Management and Data Sharing: SAWI is supporting of analytical work to improve
regional dialogue and collaboration in South Asia with respect to transboundary risk management and
hydro-meteorological data sharing. In FY15, a consulting firm was hired to carry out an analysis to better
understand international best practices with respect to transboundary management; existing protocols,
institutional arrangements and modalities for hydro-meteorological risk management and data sharing
between the South Asia countries; and existing data gaps and types of data sharing that could improve
cross border risk management. An inception report has been prepared, and an extensive process of
selecting three transboundary river basins for detailed analysis was completed. Regional consultations
and a study tour to one of the analyzed basins (with participants from Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, and
Nepal) are planned as part of follow up to the activity.
Improving Watershed Management: SAWI is strengthening coordination between the Neeranchal
National Watershed Project (NNWP) (India) and other regional programs addressing basin level water
resources, watershed management and climate resilience. Activities planned for FY15 were, however,
delayed pending cabinet clearance for NNWP .

Pillar 2: Capacity Building Activities
Capacity Building – Transboundary Water Governance: SAWI is building capacity in transboundary
water governance and hydro-diplomacy for current and future water leaders across the seven SAWI
countries. Courses on transboundary waters governance are not regularly taught at South Asian universities
and training seminars for government officials occur on an ad hoc basis and usually delivered by experts
from outside the region. Preparatory work in FY15 supported the design of short training modules
and curriculum in water diplomacy and basin governance for use by participating universities in South
Asia. In February 2015, SAWI received a request from the Ministry of Water Resources, Bangladesh, for
transboundary water governance training for officials from the Joint Rivers Commission, Bangladesh,
as well as government officials. In response, SAWI designed a two-year capacity building program;




                                                        33
Appendices




             implementation commenced in June 2015. SAWI also helped the India Foreign Service Institute take it
             first steps into hydro-diplomacy teaching, and provided support for one Government of Bhutan official
             to participate in external hydro-diplomacy training.
             Capacity Building – Water Quality Monitoring and Analysis: SAWI is raising awareness and increasing
             the use of modern technologies in water quality monitoring, and the techniques for water quality analysis,
             use and dissemination. In FY15, two days of hands-on training was provided for Government of India
             officers on data visualization using low-cost, high-tech, open source tools. The report on analysis of
             real-time water quality monitoring, presented to the Central Pollution Control Board (India) and the
             National Mission Clean Ganga will be disseminated via the SAWI website. Further training and regional
             distribution of training materials is planned.

             Pillar 3: Regional Flood Forecasting
             Improving Flood Forecasting in South Asia: SAWI is providing technical assistance to improve basin-
             scale flood forecasting in the GRB and BRB. In FY15, a basin-scale flood risk assessment for the GRB
             was prepared and a study on development of flood forecasting for the GRB and BRB commenced using
             satellite based precipitation, ensemble weather forecasts, and remotely sensed river widths and height.
             In FY16, this work will be completed and disseminated with a view to operationalizing in Bihar with SAWI
             support and up-scaling more broadly in India via NHP  .

             Pillar 4: Dialogue Processes
             Regional Dialogue: To advance regional Track II dialogue on water cooperation, SAWI supported the
             Fulbright Water-Energy-Food Nexus Dialogue Forum, in Kathmandu (February 2015). The event was a
             partnership between SAWI, the Fulbright Commission (with many regionally-based alumni attending),
             ICIMOD, and the Nepal Water Conservation Foundation. The Forum focused on the transboundary
             dimensions of managing the water-energy-food nexus, especially via a river basin approach. The event
             was designed to broaden regional dialogue beyond water resources, to include the agriculture and
             energy sectors, and thus assembled over 100 participants; numbers were eventually limited by logistic
             constraints and the desire to not compromise the dialogue character of the event. The Forum also
             reflected on past and current Track II processes relating to water in South Asia and identified key success
             factors. The reports from the workshop (forum proceedings and a Track II dialogue mapping report) will
             be shared via the SAWI website. The Forum generated energy and enthusiasm, and a call for an ongoing
             series of such regional events on water-relevant topics.




                                                               34
                                                                                                           South Asia Water Initiative




     Appendix 2 – SAWI Results Framework and FY15 Performance

SAWI is providing support in Afghanistan and Pakistan to projects that help strengthen water resources
management capacity. SAWI informed the preparation of additional financing for two projects that
will enhance capacity for shared river basin management and transboundary water governance in
Afghanistan and Pakistan, respectively. Project implementation support in Pakistan identified a new
SAWI activity on groundwater management in the Punjab that will commence in FY16.The SAWI results
framework describes both intermediate results and the outcomes being sought from the program, and
provides indicators for these as well as annual target values for each indicator by Focus Area. In addition,
“results chains” are provided that link the portfolio of activities through their expected outputs to the
results and outcomes being sought. Finally, definitions of key terms are provided to help interpret the
monitoring framework. A summary table of FY15 performance (i.e., the numerator) against agreed
target values (i.e., the denominator) is provided below.
Relative to the agreed targets, progress for FY15 was highly satisfactory. Intermediate results met all
program-level targets and significantly exceeded the target for indicator 3.1 (Number of professionals
trained). For FY16, the forward targets for this indicator will be revised to better reflect the diverse nature
of training being delivered, that includes important one-off awareness raising and “exposure” events.


Performance Targets and Achievements for FY15

 Results Indicators                                          I           G         B         S       X       Total

 1.1 Number of regional and basin/landscapes dialogue
                                                            1/1         1/1       1/1       1/1     1/1       5/5
 processes facilitated or supported by SAWI

 2.1 Number of regional, basin/landscape or sub-basin
 level participatory processes that support transboundary
                                                            1/1         1/1       2/0       1/0     0/0       5/2
 knowledge generation and sharing and stakeholder
 input to government decision making

 3.1 Number of professionals trained in the aspects of
 water management, water policy or water diplomacy
                                                            6/5        260/10    60/5      130/5   10/15    466/40
 relevant to basin scale planning and management or
 regional cooperation

 3.2 Number of key water management organizations
 with policy or technical capacity significantly
                                                            0/0         6/1       0/0       2/0     1/1       8/2
 strengthened by SAWI activities in areas relevant to
 basin scale planning or regional cooperation

 4.1 Number of regional, basin/landscape or sub-basin-
 level knowledge products produced and shared with key      0/1         2/2       1/2       3/1     2/2       8/8
 stakeholders, including decision makers

 5.1 Number of regional, basin or sub-basin-level
 feasibility studies or intervention designs informed by    2/0         0/0       1/2       0/0     0/0       3/2
 SAWI activities

FA Legend: I: Indus; G: Ganges; B: Brahmaputra; S: Sundarbans; X: Regional Cross-cutting




                                                                  35
Appendices




             While the program’s macro-scale water management perspective may be seen as far removed
             from the immediate concerns of women and disadvantaged groups, efforts are made in program
             implementation to ensure that concerns and opportunities relating to gender and inclusiveness are
             addressed. This especially includes consideration in the thematic and participation design of dialogue
             processes, workshops and trainings. For the Classroom Conference to River Confluence (Brahmaputra
             FA), consultations were conducted with riverine communities to understand their concerns and needs
             and to seek their planning recommendations. The workshop on Risk Management and Adaptation to
             Climate Change for Sustainable Growth in Deltaic Regions (Sundarbans FA) discussed integration of
             gender aspects in holistic multi-disciplinary analyses to catalyze positive change for development. The
             transboundary media workshop (Sundarbans FA) discussed the need to emphasize news coverage on
             migration, especially of women and girls as an impact of climate change. Gender balance on expert
             panels, team lead roles for women delegates during group discussions, and active participation of
             women during interactive sessions were all part of deliberate conference design of the Water-Energy-
             Food Nexus Workshop (Regional FA). Participation of women delegates in dialogue processes was at a
             ratio of 34/146 and among the 466 professionals trained, 35 were women.


             Outcome and Result Indicators

              Program Development Objective                                   Outcome Indicators for PDO
                                                                              A1. Governance: Number of existing or new bilateral or
                                                                              multilateral governance processes that support cooperative
                                                                              water management that have been informed by SAWI
                                                                              activities.

              To increase regional cooperation in the management of           B1. Investments: Value of investments secured though bilateral
              the Himalayan River systems to deliver sustainable, fair and    or multilateral governance processes that have been informed
              inclusive development and climate resilience                    by SAWI activities.
                                                                              B2. Investments: Quality of the planning processes
                                                                              underpinning new investments in terms of: (i) the breadth and
                                                                              strength of stakeholder consultation, (ii) a stronger technical
                                                                              basis for investment designs, and/or (iii) the pace at which
                                                                              investment designs are agreed.
              Intermediate Results                                            Results Indicators
              1. Trust and confidence in regional or basin water management   1.1 Number of regional and basin/landscape dialogues
              increased by dialogue processes                                 facilitated or supported by SAWI.
                                                                      2.1 Number of regional, basin/landscape or sub-basin level
              2. Stakeholder input to government decision making
                                                                      participatory processes that support transboundary knowledge
              strengthened by participatory processes that facilitate
                                                                      generation and sharing and stakeholder input to government
              transboundary knowledge generation and sharing
                                                                      decision making.
                                                                           3.1 Number of professionals trained in the aspects of water
                                                                           management, water policy or water diplomacy relevant
                                                                           to basin scale planning and management or regional
              3. Capacity of water resources organizations strengthened in cooperation.
              areas relevant to transboundary cooperation                  3.2 Number of water management organizations with policy
                                                                           or technical capacity significantly strengthened by SAWI
                                                                           activities in areas relevant to basin-scale planning or regional
                                                                           cooperation.
                                                                              4.1 Number of regional, basin/landscape or sub-basin-
              4. Regional, basin or sub-basin-level knowledge increased
                                                                              level knowledge products produced and shared with key
              and accessible to stakeholders including decision makers
                                                                              stakeholders including decision makers.
              5. Regional, basin or sub-basin-level interventions designed    5.1 Number of regional, basin or sub-basin-level feasibility
              to improve livelihoods and ecosystem sustainability             studies or intervention designs informed by SAWI activities.




                                                                         36
                                                                                                                      South Asia Water Initiative




Program and Focus Area Indicator Targets

Program Level Target Values


                                                                                          Target Values


                                                                                                                       Data
                                                                                                                     Collection
 Outcome Indicators                                                           FY14   FY15     FY16   FY17     FY18
                                                                                                                       and
                                                                                                                     Reporting


 A1. Number of existing or new bilateral or multilateral governance                                                  SAWI
 processes that support cooperative water management that have been            0      0        1          3    1     Program
 informed by SAWI activities.                                                                                        Leader


 B1. Investments: Value (US$B) of investments secured though bilateral                                               SAWI
 or multilateral governance processes that have been informed by SAWI          0     0.1       0.2    0.2     0.5    Program
 activities.                                                                                                         Leader


 B2. Investments: Quality of the planning processes underpinning new
                                                                                                                     SAWI
 investments in terms of: (i) the breadth and strength of stakeholder
                                                                              Low    Low      Med    Med      High   Program
 consultation, (ii) a stronger technical basis for investment designs, and/
                                                                                                                     Leader
 or (iii) the pace at which investment designs are agreed.


 Results Indicators


 1.1 Number of regional and basin/landscape dialogues facilitated or                                                 Focus Area
                                                                               3      5        5          5    5
 supported by SAWI.                                                                                                  Leader


 2.1 Number of regional, basin/landscape or sub-basin level
 participatory processes that support transboundary knowledge                                                        Focus Area
                                                                               1      2        2          2    1
 generation and sharing and stakeholder input to government decision                                                 Leader
 making.


 3.1 Number of professionals trained in the aspects of water
                                                                                                                     Focus Area
 management, water policy or water diplomacy relevant to basin scale          20     40        50     50      20
                                                                                                                     Leader
 planning and management or regional cooperation.


 3.2 Number of key water management organizations with policy or
                                                                                                                     Focus Area
 technical capacity significantly strengthened by SAWI activities in areas     0      2        2          4    2
                                                                                                                     Leader
 relevant to basin scale planning or regional cooperation.


 4.1 Number of regional, basin/landscape or sub-basin-level
                                                                                                                     Focus Area
 knowledge products produced and shared with key stakeholders                  3      8        8          8   10
                                                                                                                     Leader
 including decision makers.


  5.1 Number of regional, basin or sub-basin-level feasibility studies or                                            Focus Area
                                                                               0      2        4          4    4
 intervention designs informed by SAWI activities.                                                                   Leader




                                                                     37
Appendices




             Indus Focus Area Target Values



                                                                                                                    Target Values


              Outcome Indicators                                                                        FY14   FY15     FY16   FY17     FY18


              A1. Number of existing or new bilateral or multilateral governance processes that
                                                                                                         0      0        0          1    0
              support cooperative water management that have been informed by SAWI activities.


              B1. Investments: Value (US$B) of investments secured though bilateral or multilateral
                                                                                                         0      0        0          0   0.3
              governance processes that have been informed by SAWI activities.


              B2. Investments: Quality of the planning processes underpinning new investments
              in terms of: (i) the breadth and strength of stakeholder consultation, (ii) a stronger
                                                                                                        Low    Low      Low     Low     High
              technical basis for investment designs, and/or (iii) the pace at which investment
              designs are agreed.


              Results Indicators


              1.1 Number of regional and basin/landscape dialogues facilitated or supported by
                                                                                                         2      1        1          1    1
              SAWI.


              2.1 Number of regional, basin/landscape or sub-basin level participatory processes
              that support transboundary knowledge generation and sharing and stakeholder input          0      1        0          0    0
              to government decision making.


              3.1 Number of professionals trained in the aspects of water management, water policy
              or water diplomacy relevant to basin scale planning and management or regional             0      5        5          5    0
              cooperation.


              3.2 Number of key water management organizations with policy or technical capacity
              significantly strengthened by SAWI activities in areas relevant to basin scale planning    0      0        1          1    0
              or regional cooperation.


              4.1 Number of regional, basin/landscape or sub-basin-level knowledge products
                                                                                                         1      1        1          1    1
              produced and shared with key stakeholders including decision makers.


               5.1 Number of regional, basin or sub-basin-level feasibility studies or intervention
                                                                                                         0      0        1          0    1
              designs informed by SAWI activities.




                                                                           38
                                                                                                                          South Asia Water Initiative




Ganges Focus Area Target Values



                                                                                                      Target Values


Outcome Indicators                                                                        FY14   FY15     FY16   FY17         FY18


A1. Number of existing or new bilateral or multilateral governance processes that
                                                                                           0      0        0          1         0
support cooperative water management that have been informed by SAWI activities.


B1. Investments: Value (US$B) of investments secured though bilateral or multilateral
                                                                                           0      0        0      0.2           0
governance processes that have been informed by SAWI activities.


B2. Investments: Quality of the planning processes underpinning new investments
in terms of: (i) the breadth and strength of stakeholder consultation, (ii) a stronger
                                                                                          Low    Low      Low    Med          Med
technical basis for investment designs, and/or (iii) the pace at which investment
designs are agreed.


Results Indicators


1.1 Number of regional and basin/landscape dialogues facilitated or supported by
                                                                                           0      1        1          1         1
SAWI.


2.1 Number of regional, basin/landscape or sub-basin level participatory processes
that support transboundary knowledge generation and sharing and stakeholder input          0      1        0          1         0
to government decision making.


3.1 Number of professionals trained in the aspects of water management, water policy
or water diplomacy relevant to basin scale planning and management or regional             0     10        10     10            0
cooperation.


3.2 Number of key water management organizations with policy or technical capacity
significantly strengthened by SAWI activities in areas relevant to basin scale planning    0      1        0          2         0
or regional cooperation.


4.1 Number of regional, basin/landscape or sub-basin-level knowledge products
                                                                                           0      2        2          2         2
produced and shared with key stakeholders including decision makers.


 5.1 Number of regional, basin or sub-basin-level feasibility studies or intervention
                                                                                           0      0        1          0         1
designs informed by SAWI activities.




                                                                  39
Appendices




             Brahmaputra Focus Area Target Values



                                                                                                                   Target Values


             Outcome Indicators                                                                        FY14   FY15     FY16   FY17     FY18


             A1. Number of existing or new bilateral or multilateral governance processes that
                                                                                                        0      0        0          1    0
             support cooperative water management that have been informed by SAWI activities.


             B1. Investments: Value (US$B) of investments secured though bilateral or multilateral
                                                                                                        0     0.1       0          0   0.2
             governance processes that have been informed by SAWI activities.


             B2. Investments: Quality of the planning processes underpinning new investments
             in terms of: (i) the breadth and strength of stakeholder consultation, (ii) a stronger
                                                                                                       Low    Low      Low     Low     Med
             technical basis for investment designs, and/or (iii) the pace at which investment
             designs are agreed.


             Results Indicators


             1.1 Number of regional and basin/landscape dialogues facilitated or supported by
                                                                                                        0      1        1          1    1
             SAWI.


             2.1 Number of regional, basin/landscape or sub-basin level participatory processes
             that support transboundary knowledge generation and sharing and stakeholder input          1      0        1          0    1
             to government decision making.


             3.1 Number of professionals trained in the aspects of water management, water policy
             or water diplomacy relevant to basin scale planning and management or regional             8      5        5          5    0
             cooperation.


             3.2 Number of key water management organizations with policy or technical capacity
             significantly strengthened by SAWI activities in areas relevant to basin scale planning    0      0        0          1    1
             or regional cooperation.


             4.1 Number of regional, basin/landscape or sub-basin-level knowledge products
                                                                                                        1      2        1          2    1
             produced and shared with key stakeholders including decision makers.


              5.1 Number of regional, basin or sub-basin-level feasibility studies or intervention
                                                                                                        0      2        0          2    1
             designs informed by SAWI activities.




                                                                          40
                                                                                                                          South Asia Water Initiative




Sundarbans Focus Area Target Values



                                                                                                      Target Values


Outcome Indicators                                                                        FY14   FY15     FY16   FY17         FY18


A1. Number of existing or new bilateral or multilateral governance processes that
                                                                                           0      0        1          0         0
support cooperative water management that have been informed by SAWI activities.


B1. Investments: Value (US$B) of investments secured though bilateral or multilateral
                                                                                           0      0        0.2        0         0
governance processes that have been informed by SAWI activities.


B2. Investments: Quality of the planning processes underpinning new investments
in terms of: (i) the breadth and strength of stakeholder consultation, (ii) a stronger
                                                                                          Low    Low      Med     Med         Med
technical basis for investment designs, and/or (iii) the pace at which investment
designs are agreed.


Results Indicators


1.1 Number of regional and basin/landscape dialogues facilitated or supported by
                                                                                           1      1        1          1         1
SAWI.


2.1 Number of regional, basin/landscape or sub-basin level participatory processes
that support transboundary knowledge generation and sharing and stakeholder                0      0        1          1         0
input to government decision making.


3.1 Number of professionals trained in the aspects of water management, water
policy or water diplomacy relevant to basin scale planning and management or               0      5        5          5         0
regional cooperation.


3.2 Number of key water management organizations with policy or technical capacity
significantly strengthened by SAWI activities in areas relevant to basin scale planning    0      0        1          0         1
or regional cooperation.


4.1 Number of regional, basin/landscape or sub-basin-level knowledge products
                                                                                           0      1        2          1         2
produced and shared with key stakeholders including decision makers.


 5.1 Number of regional, basin or sub-basin-level feasibility studies or intervention
                                                                                           0      0        2          2         2
designs informed by SAWI activities.




                                                                    41
Appendices




             Regional Cross-cutting Focus Area Target Values



                                                                                                                    Target Values


              Outcome Indicators                                                                        FY14   FY15     FY16   FY17     FY18


              A1. Number of existing or new bilateral or multilateral governance processes that
                                                                                                         0      0        0          0    0
              support cooperative water management that have been informed by SAWI activities.


              B1. Investments: Value (US$B) of investments secured though bilateral or multilateral
                                                                                                         0      0        0          0    0
              governance processes that have been informed by SAWI activities.


              B2. Investments: Quality of the planning processes underpinning new investments
              in terms of: (i) the breadth and strength of stakeholder consultation, (ii) a stronger
                                                                                                        NA     NA        NA     NA      NA
              technical basis for investment designs, and/or (iii) the pace at which investment
              designs are agreed.


              Results Indicators


              1.1 Number of regional and basin/landscape dialogues facilitated or supported by
                                                                                                         0      1        1          1    1
              SAWI.


              2.1 Number of regional, basin/landscape or sub-basin level participatory processes
              that support transboundary knowledge generation and sharing and stakeholder input          0      0        0          0    0
              to government decision making.


              3.1 Number of professionals trained in the aspects of water management, water policy
              or water diplomacy relevant to basin scale planning and management or regional            12     15        25     25      20
              cooperation.


              3.2 Number of key water management organizations with policy or technical capacity
              significantly strengthened by SAWI activities in areas relevant to basin scale planning    0      1        0          0    0
              or regional cooperation.


              4.1 Number of regional, basin/landscape or sub-basin-level knowledge products
                                                                                                         1      2        2          2    4
              produced and shared with key stakeholders including decision makers.


               5.1 Number of regional, basin or sub-basin-level feasibility studies or intervention
                                                                                                         0      0        0          0    0
              designs informed by SAWI activities.




                                                                           42
                                                                                                                           South Asia Water Initiative




   Focus Area Results Chains

   Indus Focus Area


      Activities                Output               Results           Results Indicators           Outcome         Outcome Indicators

Pillar 1: Knowledge      •	 Training and       •	 Knowledge and       3.1 Number of            •	 New investments   B1. Value of
and capacity for           awareness raising     capacity among       professionals              planned via        investments secured
long-term basin            events                riparian countries   trained in the             cooperative and    through bilateral
development and
investment planning
                         •	 Models and           increased            aspects of water
                                                                      management,
                                                                                                 consultative
                                                                                                 processes and
                                                                                                                    or multilateral
                                                                                                                    governance
                           modelling reports
•	Groundwater              including options                          water policy or
                                                                      water diplomacy
                                                                                                 informed by
                                                                                                 robust analysis
                                                                                                                    processes that have
                                                                                                                    been informed by
  Management in            assessment
                                                                      relevant to basin          including of       Indus FA activities
  the Punjab
                                                                      scale planning             climate change
                                                                      and management             impacts            B2. Quality of the
                                                                      or regional
                                                                      cooperation
                                                                                               •	 Improved          planning processes
                                                                                                                    underpinning new
                                                                                                 coordination
                                                                                                                    investments in terms
                                                                                                 and cooperation
                                                                      4.1 Number of                                 of: (i) the breadth
                                                                                                 among
                                                                      regional, basin/                              and strength
                                                                                                 responsible
                                                                      landscape or                                  of stakeholder
                                                                                                 agencies,
                                                                      sub-basin-level                               consultation, (ii) a
                                                                                                 stakeholders
                                                                      knowledge products                            stronger technical
                                                                                                 on water
                                                                      produced and                                  basis for investment
                                                                                                 management
                                                                      shared with key                               designs, and/or (iii)
                                                                                                 (including
                                                                      stakeholders                                  the pace at which
                                                                                                 between
                                                                      including decision                            investment designs
                                                                                                 countries)
                                                                      makers                                        are agreed
Pillar 2: Facilitating   •	 Knowledge          •	 Regional and        1.1 Number of
                                                                                                                    A1. Number
investments in Indus       products on           basin-level          regional and basin/
                                                                                                                    of existing or
Basin management           Kunar/Kabul           interventions        landscape dialogue
                                                                                                                    new bilateral
and development            Basins assessing      designed             meetings facilitated
                                                                                                                    or multilateral
•	 Strategic Analysis      HEP potential         to improve           by Indus FA
                                                                                                                    governance
  of HEP Potential       •	 Workshops/           basin water
                                                 management           5.1 Number of
                                                                                                                    processes that
  of the Kunar             training: 2-3                                                                            support cooperative
                                                                      regional, basin or
  Basin                    joint; 2-4 per                                                                           water management
                                                                      sub-basin-level
•	 Institutional           country
                                                                      feasibility studies or
                                                                                                                    that have been
  Options for HEP        •	 High-level                                intervention designs
                                                                                                                    informed by Indus
  in the Kunar             meeting                                                                                  FA activities
                                                                      informed by Indus
  Basin                    facilitated                                FA activities
                         •	 Reports (not
                           public) on
                           institutional
                           options for HEP
                           development




                                                                       43
Appendices




              Indus Focus Area (continuation)



                   Activities          Output                Results        Results Indicators   Outcome   Outcome Indicators

             Pillar 3: Basin     •	 Indus Forum        •	 Increased
             Dialogue              established and       dialogue
             •	 Indus Dialogue     meeting regularly     processes among
               – Indus Basin     •	 Complementarity      Indus Forum
                                                         members and
               Forum               with other
                                                         stakeholders
             •	 Learning           dialogue
                                   processes             to improve
               Innovative                                understanding
                                   identified
               Approaches                                of benefits of
               to Glacier        •	 Messages/            coordinated
               Monitoring          statements of         management and
               to Address          Track II dialogue     communication
               Climate Change      processes             cross-border
               Challenges          align in favor
                                   of promoting
                                   coordinated
                                   water resources
                                   management
                                 •	 Study on climate
                                   change impacts
                                   on cryosphere
                                   / hydrosphere
                                   finalized and
                                   disseminated




                                                                       44
                                                                                                                          South Asia Water Initiative




   Ganges Focus Area



      Activities               Output                Results           Results Indicators         Outcome          Outcome Indicators

Pillar 1: Valuing the   •	 Basin and sub-      •	 Knowledge           2.1 Number of          •	 New investments    B1. Value of
Environment and           basin water            and capacity         regional, basin/         planned via         investments secured
Ecosystem Services        resources models       environmental        landscape or             cooperative and     through bilateral
•	 Strategic basin      •	 Basin and sub-        water uses
                                                 among officials,
                                                                      sub-basin level
                                                                      participatory
                                                                                               consultative
                                                                                               processes and
                                                                                                                   or multilateral
                                                                                                                   governance
  planning for the        basin databases
                                                 researchers and      processes                informed by         processes that have
  Ganges in India         and GIS portal
                                                 NGOs in all          that support             robust analysis     been informed by
•	 Sustainable          •	 Reports of            riparian countries   transboundary            including of the    Ganges FA activities
  water resources         analytical             increased            knowledge                environment
  management for          work including                              generation and           dimensions          B2. Quality of the
  HEP development         scenario                                    sharing and              of water            planning processes
  in Nepal                assessments,                                stakeholder input        management          underpinning new
•	 Managing               documentation
                          of software
                                                                      to government                                investments in terms
  watersheds to                                                       decision making                              of: (i) the breadth
                          and models,                                                                              and strength
  reduce sediment
                          reports on basin                            3.1 Number of                                of stakeholder
  in hydropower in
                          consultation                                professionals                                consultation, (ii) a
  Nepal
                          and stakeholder                             trained in the                               stronger technical
                          engagement                                  aspects of water                             basis for investment
                          processes                                   management,                                  designs, and/or (iii)
Pillar 2: Moving        •	 Trainings, study    •	 Improved sharing    water policy or                              the pace at which
from Data to              tours, seminars        of data and          water diplomacy                              investment designs
Information Services      undertaken             information          relevant to basin                            are agreed
                                                                      scale planning
•	 Support in           •	 Operational pilot     for basin water
                                                 management,          and management                               A1. Number
  India for water         flood forecasting                           or regional                                  of existing or
                                                 flood forecasting
  resources               system                                      cooperation.                                 new bilateral
                                                 and early
  management in                                                                                                    or multilateral
                                                 warning
  transboundary                                                       4.1 Number of                                governance
  river basins                                                        regional, basin/                             processes that
•	 Flood forecasting                                                  landscape or                                 support cooperative
  in the Baghmati                                                     sub-basin-level                              water management
  sub-basin                                                           knowledge products                           that have been
                                                                      produced and                                 informed by
                                                                      shared with key                              Ganges FA activities
                                                                      stakeholders
                                                                      including decision
                                                                      makers.

                                                                      5.1 Number of
                                                                      regional, basin or
                                                                      sub-basin-level
                                                                      feasibility studies
                                                                      or intervention
                                                                      designs informed
                                                                      by Ganges FA
                                                                      activities.
Pillar 3: Dialogue,     •	 Ganges basin        •	 Ganga basin         1.1 Number of          •	 Improved
Communications,           modelling              modelling CoP        regional and basin/      coordination
Knowledge                 Community of           actively engaged     landscape dialogue       amongst
Management                Practice                                    meetings facilitated     responsible
and Business
Development
                        •	 Activities and                             by Ganges FA             agencies and
                                                                                               stakeholders
                          outputs of the
•	 Ganges basin           Ganga Focus                                                          including between
                                                                                               countries
  dialogue                Area actively
                          disseminated to
                          the public




                                                                       45
Appendices




              Brahmaputra Focus Area



                   Activities              Output                Results              Results Indicators          Outcome         Outcome Indicators

             Pillar 1: Knowledge    •	 The State of the    •	 Improved               3.1 Number of           •	 New investments   B1. Value of
             and Capacity             Brahmaputra            capacity and            professionals trained     to reduce flood    investments secured
             Building For Basin       River Basin Report     knowledge               in the aspects of         and erosion        though bilateral
             Management             •	 Basin sediment        sharing of the          water management,         vulnerability      or multilateral
             •	 River Basin           and erosion            overall water
                                                             resources and
                                                                                     water policy or
                                                                                     water diplomacy
                                                                                                               developed by
                                                                                                               cooperative and
                                                                                                                                  governance
                                                                                                                                  processes that have
               Modelling and          assessment report
                                                             management              relevant to basin         consultative       been informed by
               Analysis; India      •	 Brahmaputra           situation in the        scale planning            processes and      Brahmaputra FA
             •	 River Basin           Basin hydrologic       Brahmaputra             and management            informed by        activities
               Modelling              and climate GIS        River Basin to          or regional               robust analysis
               and Analysis;          database               inform basin            cooperation             •	 Improved          B2. Quality of the
               Bangladesh           •	 Guidance notes        management                                        coordination       planning processes
             •	 Environmental         for sustainable                                3.2 Number of             and cooperation    underpinning new
               and Social             HEP development                                water management                             investments in terms
                                                                                                               among
               Management                                                            organizations with                           of: (i) the breadth
                                                                                                               responsible
               for Sustainable                                                       technical capacity                           and strength
                                                                                                               agencies and
               Hydropower in                                                         strengthened by                              of stakeholder
                                                                                                               stakeholders on
               Bhutan                                                                SAWI activities                              consultation, (ii) a
                                                                                                               erosion control
                                                                                     in areas relevant                            stronger technical
                                                                                                               and flood
                                                                                     to basin-scale                               basis for investment
                                                                                                               management
                                                                                     planning or regional                         designs, and/or (iii)
                                                                                     cooperation                                  the pace at which
                                                                                                                                  investment designs
                                                                                     4.1 Number of                                are agreed
                                                                                     regional, basin/
                                                                                     landscape or                                 A1. Number
                                                                                     sub-basin-level                              of existing or
                                                                                     knowledge products                           new bilateral
                                                                                     produced and                                 or multilateral
                                                                                     shared with key                              governance
                                                                                     stakeholders                                 processes that
                                                                                     including decision                           support cooperative
                                                                                     makers                                       water management
                                                                                                                                  that have been
             Pillar 2: Reducing     •	 Guideline for       •	 Improved               5.1 Number of
                                                                                                                                  informed by
             Vulnerability to         land accretion in      investment              basin or sub-basin
                                                                                                                                  Brahmaputra FA
             Floods and Erosion       the GBM Delta          planning                level feasibility
                                                                                                                                  activities
             •	 Informing the       •	 Best practice         and flood
                                                             management
                                                                                     studies or
                                                                                     intervention designs
               Brahmaputra River      for river bank
                                                             and forecasting         informed by SAWI
               Management             improvement
                                                             capabilities            activities
               Improvement
               Project
                                    •	 Best practice for
                                      flood and erosion
             •	 Support for           management
               Assam Flood,
               Erosion and
                                    •	 Hydro-met
                                      modernization
               Sediment               data collection
               Management             and modelling
               Project                system
             •	 Hydro-met
               Modernization,
               Disaster Risk
               Management and
               Climate Resilience
               in Bhutan




                                                                                46
                                                                                                                            South Asia Water Initiative




  Brahmaputra Focus Area (continuation)


     Activities              Output                 Results           Results Indicators          Outcome            Outcome Indicators

Pillar 3:             •	 Meetings of          •	 Increased           1.1 Number of           •	 Improved
Stakeholder             Brahmaputra             dialogue             regional and basin/       coordination
Dialogue                dialogue forum          processes among      landscape dialogue        among
•	 Brahmaputra        •	 Disseminated           Brahmaputra
                                                Forum members
                                                                     meetings facilitated
                                                                     by SAWI
                                                                                               responsible
                                                                                               agencies and
  Basin Dialogue        Brahmaputra
                                                and stakeholders                               stakeholders
•	 Brahmaputra          knowledge and
                        results                 for better                                     including between
  IWRM Study Tour                               understanding                                  countries
                      •	 Science-to-            of benefits of
                        Policy River            coordinated
                        Basin Modelling         management
                        workshop
                      •	 IWRM Study Tour
                        complete


  Sundarbans Focus Area


     Activities              Output                  Results           Results Indicators          Outcome           Outcome Indicators

Pillar 1:             •	 “Joint Platform”     •	 Framework of         1.1 Number of          •	 Improved             A1. Number
Enhancing bilateral     established             cooperative           regional and basin/       coordination         of existing or
cooperation             and operating           arrangements          landscape dialogue        and cooperation      new bilateral
to support              regularly               established in        meetings facilitated      among                or multilateral
operationalization
of the Sundarbans
                      •	 “Joint Platform”       the form of a
                                                “joint platform”
                                                                      by Sundarbans FA          responsible
                                                                                                agencies and
                                                                                                                     governance
                                                                                                                     processes that
                        landscape
agreements              level dialogues         to support            2.1 Number of             stakeholders for     support cooperative
•	 Landscape-           organized               operationalization
                                                of long term
                                                                      basin/landscape
                                                                      or sub-basin
                                                                                                joint sustainable
                                                                                                management of
                                                                                                                     water management
                                                                                                                     that have been
  scale Joint
  Environmental
                      •	 A plan for a           cooperative           level participatory       the Sundarbans       informed by
                        formal long-
  Planning              term institutional
                                                institutional
                                                arrangements
                                                                      processes
                                                                      that support
                                                                                             •	 New investments      Sundarbans FA
                                                                                                                     activities
•	 Sundarbans           arrangement
                                              •	 Enhanced             transboundary
                                                                                                planned
                                                                                                to reduce
  Dialogue and          prepared                                      knowledge                                      B1. Value of
                                                government and                                  vulnerability from   investments secured
  Joint Platform      •	 Communities            non-government        generation and            extreme weather      though bilateral
                        of practice                                   sharing and
                                                dialogue processes                              events and           or multilateral
                        established                                   stakeholder input
                                                for coordinated                                 climate change       governance
                                                                      to government
                      •	 Number of High-        water resources
                                                                      decision making
                                                                                                impacts in the       processes that have
                        level exchanges         management                                      Sundarbans           been informed by
                        facilitated                                                             developed by         Sundarbans FA
                                                                                                cooperative and      activities
                      •	 Number of                                                              consultative
                        enhanced                                                                processes and        B2. Quality of the
                        media coverage                                                          informed by          planning processes
                        of issues on                                                            robust analysis      underpinning new
                        Sundarbans                                                                                   investments in terms
                      •	 Proposals on                                                                                of: (i) the breadth
                        initial confidence                                                                           and strength
                        building activities                                                                          of stakeholder
                        finalized and                                                                                consultation, (ii) a
                        funding source                                                                               stronger technical
                        identified                                                                                   basis for investment
                                                                                                                     designs, and/or
                                                                                                                     (iii) the pace at
                                                                                                                     which investment
                                                                                                                     designs are agreed




                                                                      47
Appendices




              Sundarbans Focus Area (continuation)



                   Activities             Output                  Results          Results Indicators   Outcome   Outcome Indicators

             Pillar 2: Enhancing   •	 A plan (with         •	 Improved capacity   3.2 Number of
             technical               financing options)      and knowledge        water management
             cooperation to          for improved            sharing for joint    organizations with
             support joint           hydro-met               water resources      technical capacity
             water resources         and weather             management in        strengthened
             management in the       forecasting             the Sundarbans       by Sundarbans
             Sundarbans            •	 Adaptation           •	 Improved process    FA activities in
             •	 Sundarbans           plans for select        of coordinated or    areas relevant
                                                                                  to landscape
               Hydro-met             vulnerable              joint actions for
                                                                                  -scale planning
               Design                communities             better planning of
                                                                                  or regional
             •	 Targeted           •	 Fisheries              new investments
                                                             that consider        cooperation
               Environmental         conservation plan
                                                             climate change,
               Studies             •	 Habitat map for        joint estuarine      4.1 Number of
                                     aquatic species                              regional, landscape
                                                             systems, and
                                     important for                                or sub-basin-
                                                             geomorphological
                                     community                                    level knowledge
                                                             characteristic in
                                     livelihood                                   products produced
                                                             the Sundarbans
                                                                                  and shared with
                                   •	 A plan for                                  key stakeholders
                                     establishing joint                           including decision
                                     marine protected                             makers
                                     area
                                   •	 A plan for                                  5.1 Number of
                                     managing and                                 regional, landscape
                                     adapting to                                  or sub-basin-level
                                     increased salinity                           feasibility studies
                                     intrusion                                    or intervention
                                                                                  designs informed
                                   •	 A plan for                                  by Sundarbans FA
                                     providing safe
                                                                                  activities
                                     and appropriate
                                     environs for the
                                     local communities
                                   •	 A program for a
                                     “regional coastal
                                     process study”
                                   •	 A web knowledge
                                     portal developed
                                     for public
                                     access to data
                                     for decision
                                     makers and other
                                     stakeholders
                                   •	 A water
                                     resources asset
                                     management plan
                                   •	 A scheme for
                                     innovative
                                     ecosystem
                                     management
                                     finalized
                                   •	 Proposals on joint
                                     actions finalized
                                     and funding
                                     source identified




                                                                             48
                                                                                                                         South Asia Water Initiative




   Regional Cross-cutting Focus Area



      Activities               Output                Results          Results Indicators        Outcome          Outcome Indicators

Pillar 1: Increasing    •	 Reports, papers                           4.1 Number of         •	 Improved           A1. Number
trust and confidence      and other                                  regional, basin/        bilateral or        of existing or
through dialogue          knowledge                                  landscape or            multilateral        new bilateral
and knowledge             products                                   sub-basin-level         governance          or multilateral
sharing                 •	 Synthesis report                          knowledge products      processes,          governance
•	 Impacts of             on HUC research                            produced and
                                                                     shared with key
                                                                                             coordination, and
                                                                                             policy decisions
                                                                                                                 processes that
                                                                                                                 support cooperative
  Climate Risks           grants program
                                                                     stakeholders            supporting          water management
  on Water,
  Hydropower and
                        •	 Tools for climate                         including decision      regional water      that have been
                          risk screening for                         makers                  cooperation         informed by
  Dams                    HEP                                                                                    Regional Cross-
•	 Snow and Glacier                                                                                              cutting FA activities
  Contributions to
  River Flow
•	 Climate Change
  in Water
  Resources
  Management
•	 Small Grants
  Program –
  Himalayan
  University
  Consortium
Pillar 2: Capacity      •	 University          •	 Capacity           3.1 Number of
building for decision     Partnership for        strengthened        professionals
making                    Water Diplomacy        to facilitate       trained in the
•	 Water Quality        •	 Mid-career level      transboundary
                                                 water cooperation
                                                                     aspects of water
                                                                     management,
  Monitoring,             officials, water
                                                 and policy          water policy or
  Data Analysis           practitioners,
                                                 development         water diplomacy
  and Information         students
                                                                     relevant to basin
  Services                trained in water
                                                                     scale planning
•	 Capacity Building      diplomacy
                          (negotiation,                              and management
  – Transboundary                                                    or regional
                          transboundary
  Water                                                              cooperation
                          water
  Governance
                          governance) and
•	 Capacity Building      IWRM Report on
  in Basin Planning       State of IWRM in
  and IWRM                South Asia




                                                                      49
Appendices




              Regional Cross-cutting Focus Area (continuation)



                   Activities            Output                 Results          Results Indicators    Outcome   Outcome Indicators

             Pillar 3: Regional   •	 Reports on                                 4.1 Number of
             flood forecasting      options for                                 regional, basin/
             •	 Improving           improved
                                    forecasting
                                                                                landscape or
                                                                                sub-basin-level
               Regional Flood
                                    methods                                     knowledge products
               Forecasting
                                  •	 Interactive web                            produced and
                                                                                shared with key
                                    flood atlas for the
                                                                                stakeholders
                                    Ganges basins
                                                                                including decision
                                                                                makers
             Pillar 4: Dialogue   •	 Face-to-face         •	 Increased          1.1 Number of
             processes              consultations           regional dialogue   regional and basin/
             •	 Regional            with relevant
                                    stakeholders
                                                            processes among
                                                            stakeholders
                                                                                landscape dialogue
                                                                                meetings facilitated
               Dialogue
                                  •	 Two regional           for better
                                                            understanding
                                                                                by SAWI.
                                    dialogue
                                                            of benefits of      2.1 Number of
                                    meetings with
                                                            coordinated         regional, basin/
                                    broadened
                                                            management          landscape or
                                    participation
                                  •	 Stakeholder          •	 Improved           sub-basin level
                                                                                participatory
                                                            knowledge
                                    analysis                                    processes
                                                            production
                                  •	 International          and sharing         that support
                                    conference on                               transboundary
                                                            for regional
                                    transboundary                               knowledge
                                                            cooperation
                                    water topic                                 generation and
                                                            in water
                                                                                sharing and
                                  •	 Knowledge and          management
                                                                                stakeholder input
                                    data sharing                                to government
                                  •	 Web-based                                  decision making
                                    dissemination
                                    platform and
                                    tools




                                                                           50
                                                                                               South Asia Water Initiative




Definitions

Governance process: formal or semi-formal ongoing governmental processes (including treaties, pol-
icies, agreements, MoUs, etc.) for making or operationalizing water management decisions. Includes
processes for water data/information sharing, water planning, operational management and monitor-
ing, as well as for negotiation and/or dispute resolution.

Participatory process: interactive process across multiple sectors (government organizations, non-gov-
ernmental organizations, representatives, civil society, research community, and media) for giving, get-
ting and exchanging information with relevant stakeholders on regular basis; securing widest possible
engagement of relevant stakeholders to inform community, or authority or both.

Knowledge product: published book, report, paper, webpage or website that presents new knowledge
relevant to management of the Himalayan River systems.

Feasibility study: documented assessment of the practicality of a proposed plan or method.

Intervention: infrastructure or other investment project (for example, ecosystem restoration work),
water or environmental management policy, guideline or plan.

Stakeholders: decision makers, government representatives, affected communities, academia, media,
civil society, and opinion leaders with interest or stake in basin/landscape scale water management
and/or regional cooperation.

Organization capacity: infrastructure/equipment and human resources (quantity and expertise) that
enable an organization to fulfill its responsibilities.




                                                     51
Appendices




                                         Appendix 3 – Financial Report FY15
             The cumulative commitment to approved activities at the end of FY15 total US$19.3 million which
             represents the whole amount received in paid-in contributions at that time. Total disbursements in FY15
             were US$2.6 million, and cumulative disbursements since the inception of the trust funds equaled
             US$4.8 million with an additional US$5.6 million in contract commitments. 7 percent of the total paid-
             in contributions has been allocated according to the terms of the administration agreement for the
             management and administration of the program. During FY15 implementation, a grant was set up for
             strategic communications supporting the implementation of the SAWI Communications Strategy, which
             ensures that new knowledge generated by SAWI is shared widely with interested stakeholders. Details
             are provided in Table 3.1below. Financial statements of the trust fund are provided to all development
             partners via the Donor Center website.


             Table 3.1: Summary Financial Information for SAWI Program and Focus Areas since MDTF Inception (in US$)

                                                          Planned                              Actual Cumulative
                                    Allocated to                          Actual Expenditure                         Contract
                 Focus Area                            Expenditure for                         Expenditure since
                                 Approved Activities                          for FY15                             Commitments
                                                            FY15                                MDTF Inception


                      I                  1,423,559             750,000             301,787              835,020           53,740


                     G                   9,747,302           2,600,000             516,462              842,866        3,713,401


                      B                  2,079,507           1,600,000             532,232              834,569          209,399


                      S                  1,750,000           1,000,000             361,791              365,589          776,457


                      X                  2,464,933           1,800,000             587,852            1,010,587          665,306


                     PM                  1,333,604             300,000             139,556              764,771            7,908


                    COM                    500,000                 N/A             189,916              189,916          177,799


                    Total              19,298,905            8,050,000           2,629,596            4,843,319        5,604,010

             Legend: I: Indus; G: Ganges; B: Brahmaputra; S: Sundarbans; X: Regional Cross-cutting; PM: Program Management; COM:
             Communications




                                                                     52
                                                                                                                South Asia Water Initiative




Table 3.2: Disbursement by Grant1 2 and Focus Area (as of June 30, 2015)


                                                                                                        Actual Cumulative
                                                                                   Actual Expenditure
                                                                    Grant Amount                        Expenditure Since
    Grant                       Grant Name                                             for FY15
                                                                       (US$)                             MDTF Inception
                                                                                         (US$)
                                                                                                              (US$)
 Program

 TF014265     Program Administration & Management                      1,333,603            139,556              764,770

 TF017869     Strategic Communications                                   500,000            189,916              189,916

 Indus Basin Focus Area

 TF014935     Indus FA Engagement3                                       271,734             38,879              271,734

 TF016430     Integrated Management of the Kunar River Basin             450,000            125,168              329,997

              Project Development: Glacier Monitoring in the
 TF015737                                                                101,824               6,275             101,824
              Upper Indus Basin

 TF018455     Indus Basin Dialogue                                       500,000            144,628              144,628

 Ganges Basin Focus Area

 TF015480     SAWI Ganges FA Engagement3                                 348,611             22,206              348,611

 TF018717     Ganges Strategic Basin Planning                          4,000,000            201,012              201,012

              Sustainable Water Resources Development for
 TF018129                                                              1,700,000            102,631              102,631
              HEP

              Water Resources Management in Transboundary
 TF018488                                                                500,000             97,375               97,375
              Basins

 TF018509     Ganges Basin Dialogue                                      500,000             93,235               93,235

 Brahmaputra Basin Focus Area

              Concept Note Development
 TF015001                                                                195,807                   0             195,807
              Brahmaputra FA3

 TF016429     Brahmaputra River Basin Assessment                         450,000             13,839               35,525

 TF017526     Brahmaputra IWRM Study Tour                                183,699            142,415              183,699

              Hydro-met Modernization in the Brahmaputra
 TF018637                                                                250,000             68,660               68,660
              Basin

 TF017496     River Management Improvement (Bangladesh)                  350,000            201,281              206,929

 TF016291     Flood and Erosion Management in NE India                   150,000               2,305              40,217

 TF018849     Brahmaputra Dialogue                                       500,000            115,305              115,305




                                                               53
Appendices




                                                                                                                       Actual Cumulative
                                                                                                  Actual Expenditure
                                                                                  Grant Amount                         Expenditure Since
                    Grant                       Grant Name                                            for FY15
                                                                                     (US$)                              MDTF Inception
                                                                                                        (US$)
                                                                                                                             (US$)
                 Sundarbans Landscape Focus Area

                 TF017032     SAWI Sundarbans FA Engagement3                           450,000              308,391              312,189

                 TF0A0121     Sundarbans-Targeted Environmental Studies                500,000               53,399               53,399

                 Regional Cross-Cutting Focus Area

                 TF015757     Regional Cross-Cutting FA Engagement3                    252,365               56,587              252,365

                 TF017907     Climate Change Impacts on HEP                            275,000               66,711               66,711

                              Snow/Glacier Contributions to Streamflow and
                 TF018522                                                              150,000               46,500               46,500
                              Climate Change Impacts

                              Transboundary Risk Management and Data
                 TF016326                                                              200,000               84,155               98,544
                              Sharing

                 TF018290     Improving Watershed Management                             65,000                9,487               9,487

                              Learning Innovative Approaches to Glacier
                 TF016290     Monitoring to Address Climate Change                     212,567                     0             212,567
                              Challenges

                              Preparation for Flood Forecasting Services in the
                 TF018731                                                              500,000               81,143               81,143
                              Region

                              Capacity Building – Transboundary Water
                 TF018768                                                              350,000               66,910               66,910
                              Governance

                 TF019090     Capacity Building – WQ Monitoring & Analysis             310,000               35,426               35,426

                 TF018766     Regional Dialogue                                        150,000              140,054              140,054

             1
               Grants approved towards the end of FY15 which have had no disbursement in FY15 are not included.
             2
               All grants in this table were executed by the World Bank.
             3
               This grant pertains to a previous implementation approach and was closed as it is not relevant to the current implementation
             approach.




                                                                          54
                                                                                           South Asia Water Initiative




                             Appendix 4 – FY15 Publications
This list includes publications supported entirely or partially by SAWI resources.


 creman, M., and R. Hirji. 2015. “Summary Report – Workshop on Environmental Flows for Strategic
A
 Planning for the Ganga Basin.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

 arinath, A.S., P
H                . Dogra, T. Paul, K.M. Gaba, and R. Mittal. 2015. “Study on Assessing and
 Strengthening Monitoring and Institutional Mechanisms for Appropriate Environmental Flows.” Final
 Report. Austrian Partnership Trust Fund and South Asia Water Initiative. Washington, DC.

 ay, P
R    ., Y. Yang, S. Wi, A. Khalil, V. Chatikavanij, and C. Brown. 2015. “Room for Improvement:
 Hydroclimatic Challenges to Poverty-Reducing Development of the Brahmaputra River Basin.”
 Environmental Science & Policy. 54 (12): 64-80.

 asily, Laurie, Bill Young, Philippus Wester and Dipak Gyawali. 2015. Proceedings of the South
V
 Asia Regional Fulbright Alumni Workshop on the Water-Energy-Food Nexus 2015 (workshop held in
 Kathmandu). World Bank, Washington, DC.

World Bank. 2015. “National Workshop on Integrated Water Resources Management Summary Report”
  (workshop held in New Delhi). World Bank, Washington, DC.

World Bank. 2015. “Transboundary Media Workshop on Challenges and Management of Sundarbans
  Landscape: Finding a Shared Way Forward on Sundarbans” (workshop held aboard the MV Paramhansa
  ship, locations in Bangladesh and India). World Bank, Washington, DC.

World Bank. 2014. “International Workshop on Risk Management and Adaptation to Climate Change
  for Sustainable Growth in Deltaic Regions” (workshop held in Kolkata). World Bank, Washington, DC.




                                                       55
Appendices




                                      Appendix 5 – FY16 Implementation Plan
             The South Asia Water Initiative (SAWI) is a five-year (2013–2017) US$32M multi-donor trust fund that
             aims to increase regional cooperation in the management of the major Himalayan river systems in South
             Asia to deliver sustainable, fair and inclusive development and climate resilience. The trust fund program
             is structured into five Focus Areas: the three major Himalayan river basins of South Asia (Indus, Ganges
             and Brahmaputra), the Sundarbans Landscape and Regional activities. The program is framed by Focus
             Area strategies and a program results framework.

             SAWI Focus Area strategies identify pillars that describe areas of activity designed to directly or indirectly
             increase cooperation in water management across countries of the region. The results framework is
             structured around outcome indicators that measure improved governance and the value and quality of
             new investments that have been informed by SAWI activities. The program aims to inform six bilateral
             or multilateral governance processes (new or improved existing processes) and inform US$1.5 billion
             of investment through improved planning processes. The results framework also includes intermediate
             results indicators that will be used to measure: (i) increases in trust and confidence in regional or
             basin water management as a result of dialogue processes, (ii) strengthening of stakeholder inputs to
             government decisions as a result of participatory processes that facilitate transboundary knowledge
             generation and sharing, (iii) strengthening of the capacity of water resources organizations in areas
             relevant to transboundary cooperation, (iv) increases in accessible regional, basin or sub-basin-level
             knowledge, and (v) design of regional, basin or sub-basin-level interventions that improve livelihoods
             and ecosystem sustainability.

             Guided by ongoing consultations with governments, World Bank management, donors and key
             stakeholders, SAWI activities are designed consistent with the approved program strategies to:
             (i) increase support to strengthening water management at the national level in the major river basins
             through technical assistance and support to World Bank investments, (ii) build regional cooperation in
             capacity building, analytical work and modelling, and (iii) link these efforts through basin and regional
             dialogue focused on improving governance and identifying joint investments. The activities supported
             by the program are formally reviewed annually by an internal Steering Committee. The progress for the
             prior year and the implementation plan for the year ahead are discussed annually with trust fund donors.

             The implementation plan for FY16 presents the theory of change for each Focus Area and indicates how
             the 32 approved activities will deliver on Focus Area and program objectives. The current portfolio of
             activities has a total value of around US$26 million with planned FY16 expenditure of US$8.8 million.


                                                                                                          (US$)    Total   FY16

              SAWI Program                                                                                         $1.8M   $0.5M
              Objective: To increase regional cooperation in the management of the major Himalayan river systems
              in South Asia to deliver, fair and inclusive development and climate resilience

               Activity 1: Program Management
               Activity 2: Communications and Knowledge Management

              Indus Basin Focus Area                                                                               $2.2M   $0.5M
              Objective: To improve water resources management and coordination among the riparian countries,
              Afghanistan, China, India and Pakistan, to enhance water and energy security

              Pillar 1 – Long-term Basin Development and Investment Planning
               Activity 1.1: Groundwater Management in the Punjab (New in FY16)




                                                                       56
                                                                                                                  South Asia Water Initiative




                                                                                              (US$)      Total       FY16

Pillar 2 – Investments and Capacity Building for Water and Energy Security
 Activity 2.1: Strategic Analysis of HEP Potential of the Kunar Basin (Closing in FY16)
 Activity 2.2: Institutional Options for HEP in the Kunar Basin (Deferred from FY15)

Pillar 3 – Basin-Level Dialogue
 Activity 3.1: Indus Dialogue (Continuing)

Ganges Basin Focus Area                                                                                  $10.7M     $2.6M
Objective: To improve management and development of water resources in the Ganges Basin to support
economic growth and improve resilience to climate variability and change

Pillar 1 – Valuing the Environment and Ecosystem Services
 Activity 1.1: Strategic Basin Planning for the Ganges in India (Continuing)
 Activity 1.2: Sustainable Water Resources Development for HEP in Nepal; Bank-executed (Deferred from FY15)
 Activity 1.3: Sustainable Water Resources Development for HEP in Nepal B; GoN-executed (Deferred from FY15)
 Activity 1.4: Managing Watershed to Reduce Sediment in Hydropower; Nepal (New in FY16)

Pillar 2 – Moving from Data to Information Services
 Activity 2.1: Support for Water Resources Management in Transboundary Basins (Continuing)
 Activity 2.2: Flood Forecasting in the Baghmati Sub-basin; Bank-executed (New in FY16)
 Activity 2.3: Flood Forecasting in the Baghmati Sub-basin; Government of Bihar-executed (New in FY16)

Pillar 3 – Basin-level Dialogue
 Activity 3.1: Ganges Basin Dialogue (Continuing)

Brahmaputra Basin Focus Area                                                                              $3.3M     $1.0M
Objective: To improve the shared understanding and management of the Brahmaputra Basin as means
to strengthen resilience and economic growth for the riparian countries

Pillar 1 – Knowledge and Capacity Building for Basin Management and Investment Planning
 Activity 1.1: River Basin Modelling and Analysis in India (Deferred from FY15)
 Activity 1.2: River basin Modelling and Analysis in Bangladesh (Deferred from FY15)
 Activity 1.3: Environmental and Social Management for Sustainable Hydropower in Bhutan (New in FY16)

Pillar 2 – Reducing Vulnerability to Floods and Erosion
 Activity 2.1: Informing the Brahmaputra River Management Improvement Project (Continuing)
 Activity 2.2: Hydro-met Modernization, Disaster Risk Management and Climate Resilience (Continuing)

Pillar 3 – Basin-level Dialogue
 Activity 3.1: Brahmaputra Basin Dialogue (Continuing)

Sundarbans Landscape Focus Area                                                                           $2.7M     $1.0M
Objective: To operationalize joint management of the Sundarbans for sustainable development that
delivers mutual benefits for the two countries

Pillar 1 – Enhancing Bilateral Cooperation
 Activity 1.1: Landscape-scale Joint Environmental Planning (Continuing)
 Activity 1.2: Sundarbans Dialogue and Joint Platform (Continuing)

Pillar 2 – Technical Cooperation to Support Joint Management
 Activity 2.1: Sundarbans Hydromet Design (Continuing)
 Activity 2.2: Targeted Environmental Studies (Continuing)

Regional Cross-Cutting Focus Area                                                                         $6.0M     $2.2M
Objective: To build knowledge and capacity across the region in support of transboundary basin
dialogue and cooperation

Pillar 1 – Knowledge Related Activities
 Activity 1.1: Impacts of Climate Risks on Water, Hydropower and Dams (Closing in FY16)
 Activity 1.2: Snow and Glacier Contributions to River Flow (Closing in FY16)
 Activity 1.3: Climate Change in Water Resources Management (Deferred from FY15)
 Activity 1.4: Small Grants Program – Himalayan University Consortium; ICIMOD-executed (New in FY16)




                                                                   57
Appendices




                                                                                                            (US$)     Total      FY16

              Pillar 2 – Capacity Building Activities
               Activity 2.1: Water Quality Monitoring, Data Analysis and Information Services (Continuing)
               Activity 2.2: Capacity Building – Transboundary Water Governance; Bank-executed (Continuing)
               Activity 2.3: Capacity Building – Transboundary Water Governance; international Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN)-
               executed (New in FY16)
               Activity 2.4: Capacity Building in Basin Planning and IWRM (Deferred from FY15)

              Pillar 3 – Regional Flood Forecasting
               Activity 3.1: Improving Regional Flood Forecasting (Closing in FY16)

              Pillar 4 – Dialogue Processes
               Activity 4.1: Regional Dialogue (Continuing)

              TOTALS                                                                                                 $26.7M      $7.9M




             Program Management, Communications & Knowledge Management
             Two grants have been established to cover: (i) Program Management and (ii) Communications and
             Knowledge Management. The former grant is 7 percent of all contributions and is the management “fee”
             referred to in the Administrative Agreements; this fee is taken from each contribution payment.

             Activity 1 – Program Management (Total US$1.3M, FY16 US$0.2M)
             The program is mapped to the South Asia Regional Vice President’s (SARVP) office that has the ultimate
             responsibility for program delivery. Trust Fund administration is undertaken by the Development
             Effectiveness unit in SARVP. On a day-to-day basis the program is managed by a small Secretariat
             team in the Water Global Practice. The program management grant supports strategic oversight and
             coordination of the program across all Focus Areas and activities, financial management, annual
             progress reporting and donor liaison including the annual donor meeting. Donor liaison includes the
             governance processes as laid out in the administrative agreements, interactions (especially via an annual
             forum) with the partner organizations funded by DFAT Australia under their South Asia Sustainable
             Investment Program and the annual review process of the DFID South Asia Water Governance Program.

             Activity 2 – Communications and Knowledge Management (Total US$0.5M, FY16 US$0.3M)
             This activity supports implementation of the SAWI Communications and Engagement Strategy with a long-
             term goal to create an enabling environment for cooperation at the basin level. This includes advocacy,
             awareness building, dissemination and engagement with key stakeholders (government officials, NGOs,
             academia, civil society groups and the media). The activity works upstream to strengthen the positioning
             of SAWI’s mandate at Track II events, national and international workshops and conferences, and
             extends support to Focus Area activities towards the delivery of programmatic results. It is supporting
             a strategic review of options for the SAWI Knowledge Portal to provide a more user-friendly, open-
             access platform for delivery of a wide range of water-related regional or basin-scale data sets relevant
             to water resources management, as well as development of customized versions of the World Bank’s
             recently released “Spatial Agent” app for each river basin. The strategic review of the SAWI Knowledge
             Portal will be completed in FY16 and recommendations of the strategic review will be subsequently
             implemented. It is likely that the Knowledge Portal functionality will be implemented separately from the
             programmatic SAWI website. The activity is also funding a compilation (by Chatham House) of stories of
             water cooperation success in South Asia that will be completed in FY16.




                                                                         58
                                                                                                    South Asia Water Initiative




Indus Basin Focus Area
Objective: To improve water resources management and coordination among the riparian countries,
Afghanistan, China, India and Pakistan, to enhance water and energy security.

Focus Area Theory of Change
Given complex water challenges, high glacier dependency and growing per capita scarcity, the Indus is
considered the most vulnerable river basin in Asia. The uneasy relationship between riparian countries,
different levels of capacity and the presence of a fragile, post-conflict country in the basin pose additional
challenges to the promotion of regional cooperation in water resources management. Given the World
Bank’s role in the 1960 Indus Waters Treaty and the importance of engaging in a neutral way in the
basin, SAWI continues to maintain transparency about World Bank engagement in the Indus Basin. In
response to communications from key riparian stakeholders, the investment in this Focus Area has been
decreased and will focus on geographic spaces and issue areas not falling under the purview of the Indus
Waters Treaty.

Focus Area activities will focus on tractable efforts where client demand is clear, including: (i) bilateral
dialogue and facilitation of institutional development regarding joint HEP development in the Kabul/
Kunar Basin, (ii) identification of the needs for and provision of technical assistance at the national level
to enhance transboundary (including inter-provincial boundaries) water resources management capacity,
(iii) support to conjunctive surface-groundwater management with a focus on Punjab, and (iv) continued
support to the basin dialogue (commenced in 2013) focusing on development of a joint research activities
on climate change impact in the Indus Basin. Activity (ii) will focus primarily on Afghanistan and also
Pakistan to mitigate for cross-basin differences in country capacity.


Pillar 1 – Long-term Basin Development and Investment Planning
Activity 1.1 – Groundwater Management in the Punjab (Total US$0.6M, FY16: US$0.15M)
In Pakistan, water availability per capita has decreased from 1,299 m³ in 1996-97 to only 987m³ in
2010-11. The overall annual water availability in the Indus basin is about 175 BCM (billion cubic meters)
with respect to surface and groundwater. Notwithstanding the existence of a vast system for supply of
surface water, groundwater abstraction has increased from 10 BCM in 1965 to 70 BCM currently, with
more than one million tube-wells in operation. Excessive mining of groundwater has already led to
the lowering of the water table over vast parts of the country, groundwater pollution, land subsidence,
saltwater intrusion, and loss of wetlands and riparian habitats. Unconfined aquifers in upper and central
Punjab in Pakistan bordering neighboring Indian states are contiguous and continuous. Uninformed
groundwater exploitation across the border may aggravate the already bleak situation particularly when,
on either side of the border, there is no regulatory framework to manage the groundwater resource.

Building on the groundwater balance assessment carried out under the WCAP (P110099), this activity
will support activities to address the adverse consequences of groundwater development through:
(i) sensitization of policy makers and provincial water management agencies about the importance
of conjunctive surface-groundwater management; (ii) technical assistance and capacity building
with respect to artificial recharge; (iii) aquifer level salt balance analysis, pollution management and
environmental impact analysis on ecological resources like wetlands in the Basin; and (iv) development
of a comprehensive action plan to strengthen institutional and legal frameworks.




                                                        59
Appendices




             Pillar 2 – Investments and Capacity Building for Water and Energy Security
             Activity 2.1 – Integrated Management of the Kunar River Basin (Total US$0.5M, FY16 US$0.1M)
             The Kunar province in Afghanistan and the Kyber Pakhtun Khwa (KPK) province in Pakistan represent
             one of the most volatile conflict-affected areas in the region. Access to adequate and reliable energy is
             a major constraint to economic growth. The strategic location and potentially transformational nature
             of HEP projects offer unique opportunities to enhance energy security for both countries, and to foster
             regional peace and shared prosperity.

             This activity will improve knowledge of the Kunar Basin resources to both support Bank teams and senior
             management, as well as guiding the two governments, as to the feasibility and best approach to develop
             the Kunar Basin hydro power potential. Four background studies are being undertaken: (i) an integrated
             Kunar River Basin assessment, (ii) a review of existing pre-feasibility and feasibility studies, (iii) a political
             economy assessment of the international, national and local context, and (iv) an institutional options
             paper. These studies are now largely complete and will be finalized in FY16 prior to closure of the activity.

             Activity 2.2 – Institutional Options for HEP Development in the Kunar Basin (Total US$0.6M, FY16
             US$0.2M)
             Based on studies conducted under Activity 2.1 above SAWI will support facilitation of dialogue to achieve
             enhanced coordination between Pakistan and Afghanistan on the development of the hydropower
             potential in the Kabul/Kunar Basin. Specific project engagements, such as Kunar HEP development, the
             Naghlu Dam rehabilitation and enhancements to the Kabul water supply, will be used as entry points to
             facilitate riparian dialogue with a view to increase regional cooperation. The activity will also conduct
             capacity building workshops in FY16.


             Pillar 3 – Basin-level Dialogue
             Activity 3.1 – Indus Dialogue (Total US$0.5M, FY16 US$0.2M)
             This activity will support dialogue in the Indus Basin including the Indus Forum and a Pakistan national
             dialogue. The Indus Forum brings together senior government and non-government participants from
             the four Indus riparian countries. The activity will finance meetings and exposure visits of participants of
             the Indus Forum; it has linked up to other relevant Track II dialogue processes and research groups, such
             as the Atlantic Council Indo-Pak Dialog and the Upper Indus Basin Initiative and Hi-AWARE project both
             facilitated by ICIMOD, in order to build confidence and trust amongst riparian countries to create an
             enabling environment for basin-wide cooperation.

             The activity focuses on technical collaboration on issues previously identified by the Forum, including
             (i) establishment and facilitation of a Technical Working Group for joint work on assessing climate
             change impact on the basin’s cryosphere and hydrology, (ii) facilitation of PMD (Pakistan Meteorological
             Department) and China support to enhance capacity at the Glacier and Permanent Snow Survey
             Department of the Ministry of Energy and Water in Afghanistan, and (iii) exploration of opportunities to
             support PhD/Master students and mid-career professionals from riparian countries to train at universities
             in the basin. Linking to Activity 1.1, this activity will facilitate a Pakistan national dialogue process in
             order to implement the recommendations from the 2013 Pakistan Water Summit with key stakeholders
             to identify specific opportunities for water sector reform and investment.




                                                                   60
                                                                                                  South Asia Water Initiative




Ganges Basin Focus Area
Objective: To improve management and development of water resources in the Ganges River Basin in
order to support economic growth and to improve resilience to climate variability and change.


Focus Area Theory of Change
Countries in South Asia are unlikely to cooperate for effective basin management if water resources are
not well managed nationally. The strategy for the Ganges Focus Area is therefore to actively support
improved water resources management in each riparian country and to facilitate connections between
countries through technical dialogue and capacity building. As well as improving water management
nationally for economic and poverty reduction outcomes, these connected efforts are expected to also
build confidence in transboundary engagement and increase trust around knowledge and information
exchange. In India, working to improve bidirectional data sharing between the center and the states is
seen as a necessary precursor to broader public and international transparency.

In both India and Nepal, SAWI will support river basin planning. In Nepal, this will be carried out via
the accelerating development of HEP (with associated work on watershed management for sediment
control), and in India, this will initially be around the drive for river clean-up but will also encompass
environmental flows for a healthy river, cross-sectoral water allocation and inland navigation. Work
under the Ganges Focus Area will also support the design and implementation of the National Hydrology
Project in India that will promote improvements in basin modelling and basin planning and more open
data access and sharing.

Scoping work on flooding conducted in FY15 under the Regional Focus Area has led to new activities on
operationalizing flood forecasting in the Ganges Basin at the sub-basin-level; this work in the Baghmati
sub-basin will build technical competence, improve forecasting skill and seek to establish cross-border
cooperation in flood management between Bihar and Nepal. Again this work will guide larger scale and
longer-term efforts in flood forecasting planned under the National Hydrology Project.

For Bangladesh, as the lower riparian, the major issues remain flooding and access to dry season
flows. These issues will primarily be picked up through dialogue facilitated under the Brahmaputra Focus
Area, which will be a sub-regional dialogue rather than solely basin-focused. SAWI actively engages in
dialogue with key influencers in Bangladesh with a view to strengthening and focusing discussions with
the upper riparians around river basin planning, inland navigation and benefit sharing from HEP   . Total
investment in the Focus Area has increased in response to the high level of government interest in the
Basin including for sustainable hydropower development in Nepal and on river clean-up and waterway
navigation in India.

While the work under Pillar 1 will contribute significantly to the environmental aspects of water management
in India and Nepal, the work is being badged as “river basin planning” given the increasing interest in
all countries to adopting a basin approach to water management. The work originally envisaged under
Pillar 2 on joint flood forecasting has been recast as a sub-regional (rather than basin) activity, and is
now mapped to the Regional Focus Area. The activity below under Pillar 2 is relevant to the Ganges and
Brahmaputra basins but as it is wholly within India it has not been mapped to the Regional Focus Area;
this activity will link closely with the work on regional data and information systems under the program-
wide Communications and Knowledge Management activity.


Pillar 1 – Valuing the Environment and Ecosystem Services
Activity 1.1 – Strategic Basin Planning (Total US$4.0M, FY16 US$1.1M)
This activity will engage closely with the Central Water Commission, the National Institute of Hydrology,
the National Mission Clean Ganga and the Ganga Knowledge Centre, as well as relevant state




                                                       61
Appendices




             government agencies. The activity will have three sub-activities: (i) basin scale modelling, (ii) surface-
             groundwater interactions, and (iii) environmental flows. It will interface with current World Bank
             investments (particularly the National Ganga River Basin Project and the Uttar Pradesh Water Sector
             Restructuring Project) and planned investments (particularly the National Hydrology Project, and the
             Improving Navigation Infrastructure on National Waterway Project).

             The activity will develop a comprehensive basin model for the Ganga in India that enables objective
             assessment of the likely effectiveness of different options for improving river health and the impacts
             these options on the ability to meet consumptive water demands and support inland waterway
             navigation. The activity will use the World Bank’s close relationship with government around existing and
             proposed investments as the entry point for dialogue and technical support on strategic basin planning.
             The technical support will focus on river basin modelling, but will be supported by work on surface-
             groundwater interactions and environmental flows, which are both poorly understood dimensions of
             water management in the Ganga Basin. The former is critical for understanding the dynamics of low
             flows and for determining the conjunctive strategies for meeting irrigation demands. The latter is critical
             to complement work on river “clean-up” in support of river health outcomes.

             Following a competitive procurement process in the second half of FY15, a contract for this work has
             been signed with Deltares (Netherlands) and substantive work will commence early in FY16.

             Activity 1.2 – Sustainable Water Resources Development for HEP (BE) (Total US$1.7M, FY16 US$0.4M)
             This activity is linked to the Power Sector Reform and Sustainable Hydropower Development project.
             The client is the Water and Energy Commission Secretariat in the Ministry of Irrigation, Nepal. The
             activity will enhance the Government of Nepal’s capacity for facilitating improved water resources
             management and development by: (i) increasing awareness across the GoN and other stakeholders of
             river basin planning as a holistic approach to developing environmentally sustainable hydropower in a
             way that achieves a socially, economically, and environmentally balanced use of basin water resources;
             (ii) facilitating institutional and regulatory reform in the water resources sector to sustainably promote
             water resource development as a platform for growth; and (iii) building capacity for environmental and
             social safeguard management to facilitate technically, socially, and environmentally sustainable and
             equitable water resource and hydropower development. By strengthening capacity in the GoN and
             supporting river basin planning and improved water management, the activity will enable the GoN to
             engage in a more informed and more confident way with downstream riparian countries in the formal
             transboundary discussions and negotiations that are increasingly taking place. The activity will support
             river basin modelling and advocate for a consistent, compatible and more complete modelling platform
             for the entire basin.

             Implementation of this activity in FY15 did not commence as the matching recipient-executed grant is
             additional financing to an IDA credit, the approvals of which were significantly delayed. Once the IDA
             credit is approved, work will commence. Full implementation is expected to require the proposed two-
             year extension to the SAWI trust fund.

             Activity 1.3 – Sustainable Water Resources Development for HEP (RE) (Total US$2.8M, FY16 US$0.5M)
             This recipient-executed activity in Nepal is linked to the Power Sector reform and Sustainable Hydropower
             Development Project. The implementing agency is the Water and Energy Commission Secretariat (WECS)
             in the Ministry of Irrigation, Nepal. The activity will support WECS in the preparation of river basin plans
             for the Kosi, Gandaki, Karnaili and West Sapti basins in Nepal. The activity is currently being designed
             in discussion with WECS.

             As indicated above, this grant is supplementary to an IDA credit approval which was delayed in FY15.
             Following the earthquakes in Nepal in late April 2015, some resign of the activity was undertaken to




                                                                62
                                                                                                     South Asia Water Initiative




embrace longer-term resilience in the HEP sector, as well as short-term assessments of impact on HEP
facilities and construction.

Activity 1.4 – Managing Watersheds to Reduce Upstream Sediment for HEP (Total US$0.2M, FY16
US$0.2M)
Recognizing the need for upstream sediment management, the Kali Gandaki project includes a US$0.9M
sub-component (Catchment Area Treatment Plan) to manage sediment through investments in the
upper catchment which covers an area of 7,618 km2. Management of sediment, in turn, requires the
identification of vulnerable areas, and targeted erosion control activities at the basin level. The project is
currently funding a basin-wide study to identify the key erosion prone areas and activities that are likely to
enhance erosion and sedimentation in the future. This grant will complement the ongoing and planned
project activities by supporting the identification of a portfolio of investments that can help control erosion
in the catchment and minimize its flow into the facility. Specifically the grant will be used to support
project implementation by: (i) identifying and prioritizing investments in the upstream catchments to
reduce sediment inflow to the Kali Gandaki A Hydropower Plant; (ii) building capacity within Nepal
Electricity Authority and other relevant departments to apply tools and processes for improved watershed
management; and (iii) facilitating knowledge exchange and dissemination of upstream sediment
management approaches to other countries.


Pillar 2 – Moving from Data to Information Services
Activity 2.1 –Water Resources Management in Transboundary Basins (Total US$0.5M, FY16 US$0.2M)
The World Bank is preparing a third phase of the successful Hydrology Project in India – to be called the
National Hydrology Project. Prior projects were restricted to peninsular India, but the government has
now requested support in the states of Ganges and Brahmaputra basins which will be the focus for the
third phase, signaling the lessening of the sensitivity on engaging on international basins. The Hydrology
Project has a strong heritage of improving the capture, management and use of water data. The new
project will focus more on the use of water data in planning and management, including via modelling
in support of basin planning and basin water resource assessments, flood management and reservoir
operations. In FY15, SAWI support enabled access to international expertise in modelling, hydro-met
systems and IWRM. In FY16 support is expected to ensure strong linkages to the SAWI-supported strategic
basin planning work and other the analytical work on the Ganges, including through basin modelling
workshops and study tours. Increasingly, opportunities will be sought for participation by technical staff
from government agencies of other riparian countries and exposure to international best practice in data
management and basin modelling.


Activity 2.2 – Bihar Flood Management Information System (FMIS) Flood Forecasting (Total US$0.5M,
FY16 US$0.2M)
This is a new activity in FY16 and is an outcome of the scoping studies in flood forecasting undertaken in
FY15. It is a Bank-executed activity to support the recipient-executed activity 2.3 below to operationalize
flood forecasting in the Baghmati-Adhwara Basin in Bihar (see 2.3 below). Bilateral agreements between
India and Nepal to share hydro-met data provides an opportunity to pilot 7–10 day flood forecasting
services that inform both community preparedness and early flood response by the Bihar Government.

The activity support capacity building including: (i) visits of international experts to provide training in
basin scale operational flood forecasting methods and technologies and in effective community outreach;
and (ii) workshops with international and national experts on modelling-related topics including the
use of free-to-use (open source) modelling software suite of models. Experienced consultants will be
contracted to provide continuous technical support for: (i) procuring, managing and operationalizing
the flood modelling system; (ii) community outreach mechanisms; (iii) planning capacity building in food




                                                         63
Appendices




             forecasting services; and (iv) institutionalizing improved and sustained modelling skills. Through these
             activities engagement with Nepal as the upstream riparian will be facilitated with a view to strengthening
             the upstream-downstream collaboration in flood management across the border.


             Activity 2.3 – Strengthening FMIS Capacity in Bihar Basin (Total US$0.5M, FY16 US$0.2M)
             This is a recipient-executed activity in FY16 and is an outcome of the scoping studies in flood forecasting
             undertaken in FY15. The objective of the activity is to strengthen the Government of Bihar’s institutional
             capacity and tools/models in operational flood forecast and inundation modelling and to improve
             community outreach for flood risk management in the Bagmati-Ahwara basin (within the Ganges Basin).
             This will include support to: (i) institutionalize the meteorological framework for ensemble short- and
             medium-range precipitation forecasts and high frequency rainfall estimates for operational (day-to-day)
             model runs; (ii) extend the existing flood forecast model to cover the whole basin from Hayaghat to
             Dumri, confluence with Kosi River Basin; (iii) set up open source distributed flood forecasting models to
             compare and improve modelling capacities of FMIS, Bihar; and (iv) to develop effective community alerts
             and communications for improved flood risk management.

             Pillar 3 – Basin-Level Dialogue
             Activity 3.1 – Ganges Dialogue (Total US$0.5M, FY16 US$0.15M)
             This activity will support national and basin-wide dialogue linked to the country-level technical Ganges
             activities. There will be a strong emphasis on river basin planning and on cooperative opportunities in
             hydropower and inland navigation. Dialogue through the World Bank’s Regional Champions Group
             on river basin planning, will be initially led from Bangladesh and then engage with Nepal, in order
             to increase their confidence and ability to engage in dialogue with India in a more informed way.
             Opportunities will be actively sought to informally engage at technical and policy levels in all countries on
             these and other relevant issues. The nascent Ganges Basin Modelling Community of Practice will become
             more active in FY16 linking to the substantive work in support of basin planning in both India and Nepal.


             Brahmaputra Basin Focus Area
             Objective: To improve the shared understanding and management of the Brahmaputra River Basin as a
             means to strengthen resilience and support economic growth for the riparian countries.


             Focus Area Theory of Change
             Activities under the Brahmaputra Basin FA will be focused on addressing water-related challenges, such as
             flooding and river bank erosion, and assessing economic opportunities, including those from hydropower
             and navigation. Knowledge exchange activities, study tours and workshops and assessments conducted
             to support these issues will not only demonstrate the potential economic benefits from cooperative water
             management, but will provide a platform for riparian countries to come together and build the case for
             regional cooperation.

             Pillar 1 will develop a shared knowledge base for the entire basin to support investment planning and
             decision-making. This will include relevant assessments and modelling, decision support tools to assist
             policy makers in making informed, analysis-driven decisions and capacity building activities within
             relevant agencies to operationalize these tools and make strategic, informed decisions. The knowledge
             base will support basin-wide river management, investment planning at a national and/or basin level,
             adaptive management in deltaic regions, flood and sediment management and exploring cross-sector
             opportunities such as hydropower and navigation.




                                                                64
                                                                                                   South Asia Water Initiative




Pillar 2 will focus on developing resilience of populations and reducing their vulnerability to water and
climate-related risks. The Brahmaputra Basin is prone to natural disasters, including floods, erosion,
channel migration, and earthquakes. These natural disasters have impoverishing impacts, as well as
economic loss via infrastructure damage, loss of life and loss of fertile agricultural land. The pillar will
adopt an adaptive management framework and strengthen the riparian countries’ capacity to respond
and adapt to changes in the basin. Activities will include: (i) improvements in existing infrastructure and
instruments, including early warning systems, flood embankments and other hydraulic infrastructure;
(ii) improving the understanding of river morphology and erosion trends vis-a-vis development of a
basin-wide and/or nation-wide sediment accounting model; and (iii) capacity building, training and
knowledge exchange activities, particularly focused on flood and erosion management.

Pillar 3 will provide a platform for riparian countries to discuss challenges and also identify opportunities
for collaboration through study tours, workshops and conferences. The overarching aim is to improve
co-operation through increasing opportunities to engage and discuss common challenges.

Pillar 1 – Knowledge and Capacity Building for Basin Management and Investment Planning
Activity 1.1 – River Basin Modelling and Analysis, India (Total US$1.2M, FY16 US$0.2M)
The original intent for the Brahmaputra was for a single activity on modelling and analysis spanning all
riparians. This proved too difficult to implement given the sensitive politics of water in the region, and so
with the approval of management, the activity has been redesigned in two parts – one in India and one
in Bangladesh, with links between the two planned through dialogue and learning events.

The activity in India will undertake a strategic assessment of the Brahmaputra Basin within India, analyze
development issues at a basin level and identify possible investment scenarios. The activity will undertake
a strategic basin assessment in order to gain a better understanding of the dynamics of the river basin
from a system-wide perspective. The activity will develop a robust basin-wide knowledge base and model
suite for water resources assessment and strategic planning for the entire Brahmaputra Basin in India. The
model will consider surface and ground water interaction, climate change impacts on water availability
and use, flood and erosion issues as well as an assessment for other sectors like agriculture, hydropower
and navigation would also be addressed. The activity will also support a multi-stakeholder consultation
process to guide and share the work and capacity building in central and state agencies through training,
and ensuring wide access to the models and analyses and supporting documentation. Operationally, this
activity is likely to be linked to the programmatic window of activates.

Activity 1.2 – River Basin Modelling and Analysis, Bangladesh (Total US$0.8M, FY16 US$0.3M)
The activity on Bangladesh will build on the State of the Basin Assessment, commenced in FY14 to
identify potential interventions or capacity-building areas that support the SAWI program objectives,
and assist in further investment planning. Specific initiatives supported under this activity include:
(i) development of basin-wide information database, (ii) development of a decision support platform for
the Brahmaputra Basin in Bangladesh, (iii) workshops and knowledge exchange activities to enhance
technical and institutional capacity, and (iv) support to short, medium, and long-term investment
planning in the Ganges-Brahmaputra-Meghna (GBM) delta in Bangladesh. The work will explore a
range of issues including the climate change impacts; options analysis for investment planning; impacts
from development scenarios including hydropower development and interventions to improve irrigation
productivity; and finally, recommendations for improving basin-wide water management. The activity
will be a key part of a larger analytical study that aims to provide multi-sectoral solutions to delta
management in Bangladesh. The activity will help give effect to the MoU signed by the governments of
Bangladesh and the Netherlands, together with the World Bank, to advance Adaptive Delta Management
in Bangladesh in the context of basin-wide planning and management.




                                                        65
Appendices




             Activity 1.3 – Environmental and Social (E&S) Impact of Hydropower in Bhutan (Total US$0.2M, FY16: US$0.2M)
             This activity is in response to a request from the Royal Government of Bhutan, and aims to improve the
             environmental and social planning and management of hydropower in Bhutan. The activity will help to
             develop guidelines for basin planning and cumulative impact assessments. The activities under this project
             include a review of the current state of hydropower development through analysis and assessments,
             suggestions for improvements in the areas of E&S and its implementation and further recommendations
             for future hydropower development. The project will improve management of the Brahmaputra River
             Basin through more sustainable development of hydropower, especially from an environmental and
             social perspective, in the tributaries originating in Bhutan.


             Pillar 2 – Reducing Vulnerability to Floods and Erosion
             Activity 2.1 – River Management Improvement (Bangladesh) (Total US$0.35M, FY16 US$0.1M)
             The River Management Improvement Project (US$650M) will support on-ground investments and
             operations dealing with flood mitigation infrastructure to reduce the impacts of erosion and to channel
             migration in Bangladesh. The investment plans proposed under the program are expected to shape
             the future Brahmaputra Basin in Bangladesh. The SAWI activity will support broader consultation to
             inform the investment planning and to ensure international lessons learned as well as basin-wide aspects
             are taken into consideration. It will complement the separately financed project preparation work to
             enable a basin-scale perspective to guide the project design and to ensure transboundary impacts and
             opportunities are identified.


             Activity 2.2 – Hydro-met Modernization in the Brahmaputra Basin (Total US$0.25, FY16 US$0.15M)
             This activity is strengthening institutions, facilitating knowledge exchange and enhancing cooperation
             with respect to management of hydro-meteorological risks within South Asian countries. The activity is
             undertaking analytic work and technical assistance to strengthen the capacity of key institutions in the
             Brahmaputra River Basin countries to respond to cross-border water related hazards and climate risks.
             The work has developed a roadmap for South Asia countries to: (i) modernize hydro-meteorological
             monitoring, (ii) improve the accuracy and lead time for weather and flood forecasting, and (iii) enhance
             community based early warning systems. The activity will be completed in FY16.


             Pillar 3 – Basin-Level Dialogue
             Activity 3.1 – Brahmaputra Dialogue (Total US$0.5M, FY16 US$0.1M)
             This activity will increase regional co-operation by providing a platform to discuss shared water challenges
             and opportunities. Dialogue, study tours and knowledge exchange events around focused issues will be
             undertaken to promote interaction among the Brahmaputra riparian countries. The aim is to create a
             neutral platform to share challenges and opportunities within the basin, which will lead to increased
             co-operation. Under this pillar, key stakeholders (including donor agencies, government, private sector
             and civil society) in the basin will also be identified more thoroughly and will be engaged in the dialogue
             process.


             Sundarbans Landscape Focus Area
             Objective: To operationalize joint management of the Sundarbans Landscape for sustainable
             development and to deliver mutual benefits for the two countries: Bangladesh and India.


             Focus Area Theory of Change
             The key challenges of the Sundarbans (i.e., extreme poverty, frequent natural disasters and erosion of
             ecosystem services) would be better managed if Bangladesh and India developed and implemented a




                                                                66
                                                                                                      South Asia Water Initiative




joint conservation and development policy, or at least collaborated on plans and programs. To-date,
formal dialogue and collaboration between the two countries has been inadequate. While non-binding
bilateral agreements were signed in late 2011 outlining a framework for collaboration in international
waters, information-sharing, disaster management and addressing climate change-induced issues,
these are yet to be implemented. SAWI directly supports implementation of the agreements, and support
country-level actions based on an integrated basin perspective.

This will include developing a stronger analytical basis to help governments move towards integrated
planning and management. Bilateral dialogue, research and information exchange will support the
analytical work and will build technical capacity, enhancing cooperation. A landscape-level planning
and management framework and support for institutions are required for collaborative management.
Technical analyses will be complemented by: (i) advocacy work to generate public support for cooperation,
(ii) establishment of governance arrangements for joint planning, and (iii) substantive joint actions
(e.g., shared plans and policies) for conservation and sustainable development.

Given that broad agreement for collaboration exists, activities under the Sundarbans Focus Area will
be demand-driven. The initial suite of activities was informed by stakeholder consultation. The aim is
to establish a more formal mechanism for collaboration (so-called “Joint Platform”), which would guide
future activity choices; in addition, all joint studies and joint planning and investments will be guided by
multi-stakeholder dialogue processes.

Pillar 1 – Enhancing Bilateral Cooperation
Activity 1.1 – Landscape-scale Joint Environmental Planning (Total US$0.5M, FY16 US$0.2M)
All prior studies are based on only partial (single country) descriptions of the Sundarbans. This activity
will develop a geomorphic Sundarbans narrative that combines existing single-country narratives so
that stakeholders are able to appreciate the common challenges and common opportunities, without
focusing on the differences of political-administrative organization. Sequentially thereafter, the activity will
promote existing and new joint actions between Bangladesh and India. Enabling joint actions to continue
beyond the life of SAWI support will promote sustainability of the Sundarbans initiative. The activity will
undertake analytical work to identify, promote and judge the feasibility of existing and potential joint
actions by institutions in Bangladesh and India, and will develop joint strategies and work plans, as well
as providing initial incremental operating costs, for a few selected high-priority and feasible joint actions.
Further detailed analyses could be taken up if requested by the governments.

In FY16, work will include: (i) drafting of combined Sundarbans narrative, multi-stakeholder discussions
on the draft narrative, and agreement on the common features that will need to be incorporated to
deliver the final landscape narrative to be delivered in the next FY; (ii) identification of enhancements of
three to five of the potential joint actions, such as on the India-Bangladesh Inland Waterways Protocol
Routes (where the analyses will suggest mechanisms for how institutions can collaborate and build
better long-term cooperation apparatuses and instruments for implementation of the joint actions);
and (iii) support to the Delta Plan initiative in Bangladesh.

Activity 1.2 – Sundarbans Dialogue (Total US$1.0, FY16 US$0.35M)
This activity will enhance trust and working relationships between the two countries at the landscape
level in order to further the objectives of sustainable management of the Sundarbans based on country-
specific needs and landscape-level priorities. The aim is to create ownership among the non-government
and the government agencies alike and to facilitate the operationalization of the Bangladesh-India
“in-principle agreements” on the Sundarbans. Formation of the Joint Platform will take time, and will
require the support of thematic institutional networks, joint media campaigns, as well as increased
collaboration among experts, academia and media. This activity will therefore support dialogue events,




                                                         67
Appendices




             workshops, roundtables, and study tours to facilitate the exchange around ideas, viewpoints, knowledge
             and development plans.

             In FY16, the activity will support (i) preparation of a proposal for the establishment of a “Joint Platform”
             (joint working platform with formal participation of the respective governments) for guiding long-term
             planning and implementation of future collaborative work; (ii) multi-stakeholder dialogues, including
             at least two bilateral meetings, one international workshop, two workshops in Kolkata and Khulna, one
             dialogue event among print and electronic media of both countries, and at least ten local roundtables;
             (iii) preparation of a joint media collaboration plan; (iv) preparation of local adaptation and infrastructure
             plans for at least five small urban areas; and (v) a draft vision document for long-term cooperation
             and collaboration between Bangladesh and India. In these above sub-activities, the aim is to increase
             awareness among stakeholders and citizens, including aiming to influence individual and community
             behavior with respect to conservation of biodiversity and water resources. Existing web-based knowledge
             portals will be supported where appropriate. In preparation and implementation of each of the above,
             the two respective governments will be engaged, so that these activities could lead in the future to formal
             joint actions.

             Pillar 2 – Technical Cooperation to Support Joint Management
             Activity 2.1 – Sundarbans Hydro-met Design (Total US$0.4M; FY16 US$0.15M)
             This activity will help the two countries establish appropriate information (collection, collation and
             dissemination) systems in order to prepare and implement development and conservation plans for
             the Sundarbans including increased resilience. While several initiatives are required, the first stage will
             address landscape-level geomorphological and hydrological regimes, and will design a hydro-met
             system of climate profilers, tide gauges, wave rider buoys and water quality monitoring. It will develop
             a strategy for establishment and operation of hydro-met and local weather forecasting systems, and will
             analyze the interconnected estuarine system, specifically addressing the issues of bathymetry, salinity
             intrusion and conservation needs of the freshwater resources.

             In FY16, the work plan includes: (i) preparation of the draft plan for establishing harmonious coastal
             and near-shore hydro-met systems considering the geomorphological characteristics in the Sundarbans
             Landscape, stakeholder discussions to agree on the plan; (ii) providing inputs to the proposed India
             National Hydrology project and the proposed Bangladesh Hydro-met project; and (iii) initiating a study
             of progression of salinity intrusion from estuaries and rivers to groundwater and consequently to soil
             surface, the resultant economic cost, with an aim to recommend potential mitigation or management
             measures that could be adopted in the Sundarbans Landscape.

             Activity 2.2 – Targeted Environmental Studies (Total US$0.8M, FY16 US$0.3M)
             This activity will support initial confidence building tasks to build momentum for the Sundarbans Joint
             Platform. Various technical studies are envisaged, not as stand-alone studies, but closely linked to
             dialogue processes and capacity building. Initial studies will respond to demand from a wide group of
             stakeholders. The scope of similar activities in the later years will be determined as per demands from
             the Joint Platform and thematic institutional networks once these are operational. In FY16, the work plan
             will include: (i) delivery of three analytical reports on implications of climate change on the livelihoods of
             the poor and lists of targeted interventions to cope with the poverty traps climate change may create to
             assist formulation of livelihood improvement plans and projects; and (ii) preparation of two geo-coded
             databases, and three analytical reports on flora and fauna at risk in a changing climate to enhance
             the knowledge base for formulating forestry and biodiversity management plans, investments, and/or
             interventions.




                                                                 68
                                                                                                 South Asia Water Initiative




Regional Cross-Cutting Focus Area
Objective: To build knowledge and capacity across the region in support of transboundary basin
dialogue and cooperation.


Focus Area Theory of Change
The Regional Focus Area targets: (i) improving the quality and accessibility of regional water resources
data sets and building water resources knowledge, (ii) undertaking capacity building for shared water
resources management and cooperation, and (iii) supporting broad-based regional dialogue focused on
the SAWI basins to enhance cooperation and management of transboundary water resources.

While this Focus Area will pursue knowledge activities, important aspects of what was originally envisaged
under Pillar 1 (e.g., program website and mapping portal) are being implemented under a “Global
Programs” code, and have been described earlier in this implementation plan. Pillar 3 below was not in
the approved Focus Area strategy as the flood forecasting work was originally proposed for the Ganges
Basin. This has been recast as a sub-regional activity that would ideally support work in Bangladesh,
Bhutan, India and Nepal. Pillar 4 below is the original Pillar 3; the strategic intent is unchanged but the
approach to implementation has changed given formal advice from the Government of India advising
they will not engage in the Abu Dhabi Dialogue (ADD), and given the views of ADD members that
participation from the other countries was of little value if India officials will not participate.

Pillar 1 – Knowledge Related Activities
Activity 1.1 – Impacts of Climate Risks on Water, Hydropower and Dams (Total US$0.28M, FY16 US$0.18M)
This activity provides support to three sub-activities of a programmatic approach: (i) a study to develop
assessment tools to rapidly assess the impacts of climate change on sediment yield and how to manage
sediment in existing and proposed water resource infrastructure, including hydropower and water supply
projects with the objective of maximizing infrastructure sustainability has been completed and a decision
meeting is planned for September 2015; (ii) preparation of technical guidance notes to stakeholders and
making recommendation on how to ensure that proper sediment management techniques (including
development of RESCON2 model) are implemented in projects has been completed and a decision
meeting is planned for September 2015; and (iii) development of a regional sediment database and
mapping that can be used in the planning of reservoir sediment management for existing and future
projects. The activity is well advanced and will be completed in FY16.


Activity 1.2 – Snow/Glacier Contributions to Streamflow & Climate Change Impacts (Total US$0.15M,
FY16 US$0.1M)
This activity is the fourth sub-activity of the programmatic approach referred to under Activity 1.1 and
is developing quantitative estimates of the contributions of monsoon, snow, ice, and glaciers to the
river flows in selected river basins of South Asia and assessing how these change under climate change
scenarios. The work is largely complete and will be finalized and disseminated in FY16.


Activity 1.3 – Climate Change in Water Resources Management (Total US$0.6M, FY16 US$0.6M)
This activity was approved in FY15 but was not implemented. It has now been moved the Water Global
Practice to be implemented in two phases – this Bank-executed activity, is phase 1 and will be completed
in FY16. A follow-on recipient-executed phase 2 is anticipated for FY17.

The objective is to build knowledge, tools and capacity across the region to assist governments in adapting
to the emerging climate change challenges in the water sector. Envisaged support includes development
of effective policy frameworks and practical planning, development and management actions that




                                                       69
Appendices




             highlight and address the need for adaptation. In FY16, two parallel reviews will be conducted: (i) of
             the exiting water and climate policy, legal and planning frameworks in each SAWI country; and (ii) of
             the current knowledge and information on climate change issues, impacts and modelling work. This
             will include recent and ongoing climate change analytical work, initiatives and projects to develop a
             comprehensive understanding of climate change impacts and risks on water resources, their implications
             for current and future water resources planning, design and operations. The activity will also develop
             terms of reference for an anticipated 12-18 month phase 2 activity to develop an adaptation framework
             for water resources planning, development and management in South Asia. This would be prepared in
             partnership with agencies, governments, civil society, research institutions and the private sector.

             Activity 1.4 – Small Grants Program – Himalayan University Consortium (Total US$1.0M, FY16 US$0.3M)
             The objective of this activity is to expand institutional research collaboration, initiate new knowledge
             generation, and disseminate new knowledge on the different dimensions and complex dynamics of water
             resources in the Hindu Kush Himalaya (HKH). The grant objective will be achieved through establishing
             and implementing a research grants program to enable research institutions in the Himalayan University
             Consortium (HUC) membership (which comprises 27 universities from the HKH region as full members)
             to jointly undertake HKH water resources problem-based research projects. The program will aim to
             strengthen research collaboration and networking among the HUC membership and establish the HUC
             as a vibrant and active South-South forum of knowledge generation and sharing, mountain curricula
             development, and capacity building among regional members, who will be able to leverage HUC
             participation and resultant benefits to provide water and mountain-related policy and technical advice to
             their respective governments.


             Pillar 2 – Capacity Building Activities
             Activity 2.1 – Capacity Building: Water Quality Monitoring and Analysis (Total US$0.3M, FY16 US$0.2M)
             A major capacity building activity was approved in FY15. Implementation has occurred via a number of
             discrete activities with separate grants. This activity is working to create awareness and increase the use
             of modern technologies in water quality monitoring, and techniques for water quality data analysis, use
             and dissemination. The activity is supporting the use of water information systems by providing training
             on the use of modern tools for data analysis and visualization, development of knowledge resources
             to enable countries to consider real time water quality monitoring in the South Asian context, provision
             of technical assistance to government agencies for the design and implementation of real time water
             quality monitoring networks, and supporting study tours by government officials to facilitate regional
             knowledge sharing on real world application of modern technologies and tools for real time water
             quality monitoring, analysis and dissemination of information. Work in FY16 will build on the solid
             foundation laid in FY15, using the same consultants.


             Activity 2.2 – Capacity Building – Transboundary Water Governance (Total US$0.35 M, FY16 US$0.1M)
             The region sees a low level of transboundary cooperation at the basin level. Experience in other regions
             demonstrates that the lack of cooperation happens often not from political unwillingness, but rather from a
             lack of capacity, and therefore hesitance, to engage with potentially more skilled neighboring countries in
             the complex negotiations and coordination process on transboundary waters resources management. This
             activity will: (i) support activities responding to official SAWI client requests for topical, structured and ad-
             hoc trainings on various aspects of transboundary waters governance and hydro-diplomacy; (ii) prepare
             a structured curriculum for institutionalizing training in these subject areas; and (iii) facilitate and support
             water officials and technical staff from the SAWI countries to receive training at renowned institutions
             inside and outside the region. The sub-activity will support the participation costs of training participants
             and instructors. The structured and ad-hoc trainings may include seminars, workshops and study tours
             on transboundary governance and hydro-diplomacy topics such as: effective negotiation; identifying and




                                                                  70
                                                                                                    South Asia Water Initiative




communicating the benefits of cooperation; international water law; establishing transboundary waters
agreements; water governance in the face of climate change; stakeholder engagement; and hydro-
diplomacy. Study tours will expose officials, technical staff and students to international best practices
and innovative approaches to transboundary waters governance and hydro-diplomacy, which can be
adopted for effective implementation in the South Asia context.


Activity 2.3 – Capacity Building – Transboundary Water Governance (RE) (Total US$0.5M, FY16 US$0.2M)
This grant will support the design of short training modules and curriculum in water diplomacy and
basin governance – for uptake by participating universities and other institutions for long-term teaching
of the topics. Firstly, a project advisory group will be constituted, consisting of representatives from
India, Bangladesh, Pakistan, Nepal, Bhutan, IUCN, the World Bank and academic institutions, to oversee
curriculum development. The short training modules will then be authored and finalized for pilot testing.
Focus institutions will be identified in India and Bangladesh to run the modules. The modules will then
be piloted through the focus institutions and piloted at a regional workshop with participation from other
countries in the region. The modules will finally be fine-tuned based on inputs received during the national
and regional level workshops and through consultations with experts and institutions stationed in South
Asia. At the closing of the grant, the modules/curriculum will be ready for rollout and institutionalization
across the region (into government training agencies and academic programs in universities).


Activity 2.4 – Capacity Building – Basin Planning and IWRM (Total US$1.0M, FY15 US$0.5M)
In spite of increasing awareness in South Asia of the concepts of integrated water resources management
and the importance of a basin-scale approach to development of water resources both within and across
countries, there has to-date, been limited practical progress on implementation. A significant barrier
to implementation is a lack of professional and institutional capacity. This activity was separated from
other activities under Pillar 2 in FY16. It will complement the above activities by supporting study tours,
knowledge sharing and training sessions, developing multi-media hydrological training modules for wider
use in the region, and developing good practice notes and technical guidance materials for priority areas
of IWRM including: (i) groundwater management and modelling, (ii) hydrological information systems
and monitoring, (iii) environmental flow assessments, and (iv) flood forecasting and management.


Pillar 3 – Regional Flood Forecasting
Activity 3.1 – Improving Flood Forecasting in South Asia (Total US$0.50M, FY15 US$0.35M)
This activity, which commenced in FY15, is contributing to flood forecasting across the greater Ganges-
Brahmaputra system and undertaking significant analytical work on a basin-scale flood risk assessment
for the GRB. Both sub-activities are progressing well and are scheduled for completion in FY16.

The work is using advances in remote sensing technologies through Google Earth imagery showing the
location of the satellite radar altimeter. It is an innovative approach to overcome in situ river stage data
limitations and can provide estimates of river water heights during flood period to compute inundation
depths and extents, offering many advantages over the traditional gauge station stage height information
used in the country. This innovation is planned to operationalize satellite altimetry in the Ganges and
Brahmaputra basins to measure upstream river stage to forecast the onset of flood waves downstream
ahead of flood time.

The Flood Risk atlas will assist decision makers, policy planners, researchers and risk managers. It will
provide quantitative and scientific outputs to inform decision makers engaged in flood risk management
practices and policies, disaster risk reduction and risk transfer mechanism. It will portray the spatial
characteristics of flood risks in Ganges - the extent of the hazard, the exposure and its vulnerability to the




                                                        71
Appendices




             hazard, and the probable losses for various return period scenarios. Demonstration and dissemination
             of these activities is planned for FY16 for scaling up under the World Bank-financed National Hydrology
             project.


             Pillar 4 – Dialogue Processes
             Activity 4.1 – Regional Dialogue (Total US$0.5M, FY16 US$0.15M)
             Regional scale dialogue will be supported a diverse range of engagements in order to engage a
             broader set of stakeholders while maintaining engagement with past dialogue participants. Given strong
             government sensitivities, the Abu Dhabi Dialogue brand has been dropped. Regional dialogue events will
             be convened on common water management challenges, emphasizing the basin approach. SAWI will
             continue to work with the World Bank-facilitated Champions Group on regional integration to connect
             dialogue on water management and basin planning to related issues of climate change, energy security
             and inland navigation. Building on the successful Food-Energy-Water Nexus dialogue event of FY15, a
             regional event focused on nexus issues in groundwater management is being scoped for FY16.




                                                             72
                            Unaudited Trust Fund Financial Report


                                                                07/01/2014                  12/05/2012
               (Expressed in US Dollars)                            to                  (Date of Inception)
                                                                06/30/2015                to 06/30/2015

Receipts (Note 1)

     Cash Contributions                                                  7,747,668                   19,051,499

     Investment Income (Note 2)                                               48,794                      82,527

     Transfers within Hierarchy                                          2,859,711                    2,859,711

     Contributions via Transfers                                        (2,859,711)                  (2,859,711)

     Other Receipts                                                            4,389                          4,389

     Total Receipts                                                      7,800,852                   19,138,416

Disbursements (Note 3)

Project Disbursements

  Direct Costs Disbursed by WBG

     Staff costs (including benefits)                                    (677,558)                   (1,278,585)

     Consultant fees                                                    (1,201,634)                  (1,698,461)

     Travel expenses                                                     (416,024)                     (830,142)

     Airfare rebate                                                                0                          2,011

     Media workshop                                                      (174,279)                     (236,558)

     Contractual services                                                    (38,740)                   (53,468)

     Other direct costs                                                       (5,666)                     (7,208)

  Total Direct Costs Disbursed by WBG                                   (2,513,904)                  (4,102,412)

Total Project Disbursements                                             (2,513,904)                  (4,102,412)

Non-Project Disbursements                                                (219,998)                   (1,071,289)

     Administrative fees and expenses (Note 4)                           (219,998)                   (1,071,289)

Total Non-Project Disbursements

Total Disbursements                                                     (2,733,902)                  (5,173,702)

  Excess of receipts over disbursements / (Disbursements
                                                                         5,066,949                   13,964,714
  over-receipts)




                                                           76
                                                                                                                South Asia Water Initiative




Fund Balance

  Beginning of period                                                          8,897,764                                    0

  End of period                                                               13,964,714                          13,964,714

Fund balance consist of

  Shared in pool cash and investments                                                                             13,964,714

  Undisbursed Commitments as of X (Note 5)                                                                        13,057,198




     Status             Beneficiary                YPU/Div          TF Hierarchy                       TTL Name


     Active              South Asia                 SARVP           Trustee Account        Ms. Nicolette L Bowyer-Walker




Contribution Details by Donor

                                                                                                        12/05/2012
                                                                      07/01/2014
                                                                                                      (Date of Inception)
              Donor                      Currency                         to
                                                                                                              to
                                                                      06/30/2015
                                                                                                        06/30/2015
Department of Foreign Affairs
                                           AUD                                             0                       8,000,000
and Trade
Department of Foreign Affairs
                                           USD                                  3,725,568                          3,725,568
and Trade
Norway – Ministry of Foreign
                                           NOK                                             0                      18,000,000
Affairs
United Kingdom –
Department for International               GBP                                             0                      11,500,000
Development (DFID)


Contribution Paid-in Details by Donor


                                                                                                            12/05/2012
                                                                                  12/05/2012
                                                             07/01/2014                                   (Date of Inception)
                                                                                (Date of Inception)
               Donor                    Currency                 to                                               to
                                                                                        to
                                                             06/30/2015                                  06/30/2015 in USD
                                                                                  06/30/2015
                                                                                                              Equivalent
Department of Foreign Affairs
and Trade (formerly known as             AUD                      3,000,000              8,000,000                  7,233,999
AUSAID)
Department of Foreign Affairs
                                          USD                     3,725,568              3,725,568                  3,725,568
and Trade
Norway – Ministry of Foreign
                                         NOK                              0              6,000,000                    971,581
Affairs
United Kingdom – Department
for International Development             GBP                     1,000,000              4,500,000                  7,120,350
(DFID)




                                                             77
