             Proceedings of the
Regional Flood Early Warning System Workshop




             23-27 November 2015, Bangkok
CONTENTS

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS                                                                       iii

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                                                     iv

INTRODUCTION                                                                           1

OPENING SESSION                                                                        3

PRESENTATION SUMMARIES                                                                 4

1. SESSION 1: FLOOD FORECASTING AND WARNING SYSTEMS IN SAR                             4
   COUNTRIES
     1.1 Flood Forecasting and Warning Services in Bangladesh                          4
     1.2 Status of Flood Forecasting and Warning in Bhutan                             5
     1.3 Flood Forecasting and Warning System in India                                 7
     1.4 Flood EWS Activities in Nepal                                                 8

2. END-TO-END FLOOD FORECASTING AND WARNING SYSTEM                                    10
     2.1 End-to-End Flood Forecasting and Warning: Key Features and Requirements      10
     2.2 Numerical Weather Prediction for Flood Forecasting                           11
     2.3 Data Requirements for Hydrological Modeling                                  11
     2.4 Introduction to Hydrological Modeling                                        12
     2.5 Decision Support Systems                                                     14
     2.6 Dissemination and Communication Aspects of Flood Early Warning Systems       15
     2.7 Early Warning Dissemination: Bangladesh Experience                           16
     2.8 Preparedness and Response Systems                                            17
     2.9 Feedback System                                                              19
     2.10 Community Feedback on Flood Early Warning                                   21
     2.11 Capacity Building for End-to-End Long-Lead Flood Forecasting and            22
          Warning – Bangladesh Experience

3. FLOOD FORECASTING AND WARNING IN SAR: ONGOING EFFORTS                              24
     3.1 Flood Outlook System for the Himalayan Basins                                24
     3.2 SAWI Program on Regional Flood Forecasting                                   25
     3.3 Flood Forecasting and Warning Initiatives in Nepal and Myanmar               26

4. SPECIAL SESSION                                                                    28
     4.1 Surface Water Level Monitoring via Satellite Radar Altimetry                 28
     4.2 Preliminary Altimetric Observation of the Ganges and Brahmaputra Rivers      28
     4.3 WRF-Hydro: An operational large-scale real-time flood forecasting system     30
     4.4 Rating Curves: Potential and predictability                                  31
     4.5 Upstream Satellite-Derived Flow Signals for River Discharge Prediction       31
     4.6 Operational Flood Forecasting for Bangladesh using ECMWF Ensembles           32
     4.7 Rain Gauge Site Selection Tool                                               33
     4.8 Flood and Water Level Prediction: Japan                                      33
     4.9 Real-Time Flood Forecasting System for Bhakra Beas Management Board –        34
        India Case Study
     4.10 Quality Control of India River Level Gauge Data                             35
     4.11 Integrated Flood Risk Assessment: A case study of the Day River diversion   36
          area in the Red River Delta, Vietnam
     4.12 Present and Future Water Data in India                                      37



                                                i
EXPOSURE VISITS                                             38

EXPLORING POSSIBILITIES FOR A REGIONAL PROGRAM ON END-TO-   40
END FLOOD FORECASTING AND WARNING

CONCLUSION AND WAY FORWARD                                  43

ANNEXES
  1. Agenda                                                 44
  2. Participant List                                       49




                                 ii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This report provides a record of the Regional Flood Early Warning System Workshop, held from 23-
27 November 2015 in Bangkok, Thailand.

The workshop was funded by the South Asia Water Initiative (SAWI), a multi-donor trust fund
managed by the World Bank. Established in 2009, SAWI’s strategic program aims for sustainable,
fair and inclusive development and climate resilience through increased regional cooperation on
transboundary river management in the South Asian Region.

The workshop was organized by the Regional Integrated Multi-Hazard Early Warning System
(RIMES), an international and intergovernmental institution that is owned and managed by its
Member States for building capacities in the generation and application of user-relevant early warning
information. The workshop brought together National Hydrological Services of four of its Member
and Collaborating States – Bangladesh, India, Bhutan, and Nepal – countries that share the
Brahmaputra, Ganges, and Meghna river basins.

RIMES would like to thank Dr. William Young, Lead Water Resources Management Specialist,
World Bank, and SAWI Program Manager, for his technical guidance to and invaluable support for
this workshop. RIMES also acknowledges Dr. Satya Priya’s valuable inputs to the design and
conduct of the workshop.

RIMES also thanks the International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development (ICIMOD),
University Corporation for Atmospheric Research (UCAR), Japan International Cooperation Agency
(JICA), and Asian Institute of Technology (AIT) for facilitating technical sessions that updated
participants on ongoing initiatives and new and emerging technologies in flood forecasting and
warning.

RIMES is grateful for ESCAP’s commitment to carry forward the outcomes of this workshop through
a Panel on Transboundary Flood Management for South Asian Region, under its proposed
Intergovernmental Panel on Transboundary Flood Management, and implementation of the action
plan adopted in this workshop through ESCAP and RIMES regional cooperation mechanisms.




                                                 iii
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

South Asia is home to major transboundary river basin systems, such as the Ganges-Brahmaputra-
Meghna. The region is also home to 40% of the world’s poor, of which two-thirds live in the Ganges
and Brahmaputra basins. These river systems support livelihoods of millions of people. The Ganges
basin alone supports about 655 million people, of which 30% are very poor. Recurring floods in these
river basins have been a major development concern. With changing climate, floods are becoming
more frequent, more intense, and less predictable.

Despite occurrence of recurring floods, these river basins have very high population concentrations
due to livelihood opportunities that they offer. Relocation of communities away from flood zones,
thus, becomes an impractical option. Hence, flood forecasting and early warning, proven to be an
efficient and cost-effective alternate instrument for minimizing negative impacts and maximizing
potential benefits of flood, is essential.

Countries in the region have differential capacities in flood forecasting and warning. For a region
where flooding is transboundary in nature, development of an operational flood forecasting and
warning system would require a basin approach. The Regional Flood Early Warning System
Workshop, organized jointly by the World Bank (South Asia Office, New Delhi) and Regional
Integrated Multi-Hazard Early Warning System (RIMES) from 23-27 November 2015 in Bangkok,
brought together professionals and heads of flood warning institutions of Bangladesh, Bhutan, India,
and Nepal to explore possibilities for strengthening regional cooperation on transboundary flood
forecasting and early warning.

Participants to the 5-day workshop appreciated the cost-effectiveness and socio-economic value of
regional cooperation on transboundary flood forecasting and early warning, by adopting a basin
approach through sharing of monitoring, forecasting, and warning information. Participants
considered the potential value of undertaking basin-wide joint efforts to apply the best of weather/
flood forecast/ observation technologies to enhance forecast/warning lead times to up to 10 days, as
demonstrated in Bangladesh. Participants envisioned that transboundary flood forecasting and early
warning collaboration could be an entry point in building trust among participating countries. Such
collaboration could be gradually enlarged to cover broader flood management issues.

Despite inherent advantages, participants flagged challenges in putting in place a joint monitoring,
forecasting, and warning program due to differing perceptions of risk: upstream countries (Nepal and
Bhutan) considered flash floods as more important than riverine floods, while downstream countries
(India and Bangladesh) considered riverine floods as more important than flash floods. Differing
technical and institutional capacities and data sharing policies/collaboration frameworks (though some
bilateral technical arrangements exist) were listed as obstacles for putting in place a transboundary
flood early warning system.

To overcome these challenges, participants recommended making use of available regional
mechanisms by adopting three distinct, but integrated, approaches:

      o Integration of flash flood (as most of flash flood subsystems contribute to basin-scale
        floods) and riverine flood concerns at the basin level for promoting investment in
        observation/monitoring and for forecasting purposes
      o Building of flood early warning capacities to use emerging new-generation flood forecasting
        technologies and incorporate these into flood risk information user systems
      o Use of existing regional mechanisms for capacity building and regional sharing of
        information/knowledge through institutionalized biannual meetings of senior and middle
        level professionals

In the above context, it is important to highlight that the United Nations Economic and Social
Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP), a multi-sectoral intergovernmental platform in the
                                                  iv
region, has been mandated in May 2015 by its Member Countries, including those from the South
Asian region, through Resolution 71/12, to strengthen regional cooperation for flood forecasting in
transboundary river basins. ESCAP promotes intergovernmental, multi-stakeholder cooperation, such
as the Mekong River Commission, ESCAP-WMO Panel of Tropical Cyclones, and Typhoon
Committee, which bring together stakeholders that share risks across common river and ocean basins.

ESCAP’s multi-donor Trust Fund supported the establishment of RIMES, which provides technical
support for building national capacities for enhanced flood warning systems, and for pilot testing
new-generation forecast technologies for community-level application in the South Asian region.
RIMES also provides continued backup support to countries to ensure that: a) flood forecast
technologies are integrated into national systems and sustained, and b) biannual Monsoon Forums,
which bring together early warning information provider and user institutions in a dialogue and
provide continuous feedback on forecast technologies and risk communication practices, are
institutionalized.

Mandated by the Resolution, ESCAP committed to carry forward this World Bank-supported
initiative by establishing a Panel on Transboundary Flood Management for South Asian Region, with
RIMES serving as technical secretariat.         This is in line with ESCAP’s proposal for an
Intergovernmental Panel on Transboundary Flood Management that includes key stakeholders –
hydrologists, meteorologists, and disaster management authorities – from riparian countries of
common river basins. The action plan, as adopted in the workshop, will be implemented through
ESCAP and RIMES regional cooperation mechanisms.




                                                v
INTRODUCTION

Background

The South and Southeast Asian regions are home to big river systems, such as the Ganges-
Brahmaputra-Meghna, Indus, Ayeyarwady, Mekong, etc. These river systems provide livelihoods to
millions of people in the region. During summer monsoon season, these rivers and their tributaries
frequently overtop their banks and create havoc due to flooding. Floods cause loss of lives,
livelihoods, and infrastructure; damage the environment, and hinder the development process. With
changing climate, floods are becoming more frequent, more intense, and less predictable.

Flood forecasting and early warning has been proven to be efficient and cost effective instrument for
minimizing negative impacts of flood and maximizing its potential benefits. To respond to user
demands, efforts have been considerable in transforming conventional real-time meteorological and
hydrological observation-based flood warning systems into weather forecast-based flood forecasting
and warning systems to enhance flood warning lead time, for saving lives and preserving livelihood
assets.

In the South Asian region (SAR), countries have differential capacities in flood forecasting and
warning. Many have basic infrastructure on hydrological and meteorological monitoring, based on
manual observation and conventional data transmission by telephone, VHF radio, and ordinary mail.
Customized numerical weather prediction for hydrological forecasting is still lacking. Hence, weather
forecasts are not integrated into hydrological models. Customized hydrologic and hydraulic models
are not yet available. Warnings are issued based on real-time monitoring, which provide few hours of
lead time only. Mechanisms to disseminate warning messages at the community level for taking
proper preparedness and immediate response measures are either lacking or weak. In most of the
countries in the region, flood warning system is not fully operational.

Development of an operational flood forecasting and warning system in the region requires a basin
approach, since flooding phenomenon in the region is trans-boundary in nature. For example, the
Ganges and Brahmaputra basins are contiguous, and encompass Nepal, Bhutan, India, and
Bangladesh. For an initiative that involves a number of countries, it is important to bring these
countries on board to facilitate such undertaking.

Objectives

The Regional Flood Early Warning System Workshop, organized from 23-27 November 2015 in
Bangkok, Thailand, is such initiative that brought professionals and heads of flood warning
institutions in SAR countries together to strengthen regional cooperation on trans-boundary flood
forecasting and early warning. Specifically, the workshop:

      a) Took stock of existing flood forecasting and warning efforts in SAR countries;
      b) Featured technologies and experiences from other countries/ regions;
      c) Introduced operational personnel to new modeling tools;
      d) Introduced the elements and requirements of an operational basin-based long-lead flood
         forecasting and warning system; and
      e) Explored possibilities of evolving a program for end-to-end basin-based long-lead flood
         forecasting and warning system in the South Asian Region.




                                                 1
The workshop had two parts:

      a) Training workshop for senior/mid-level professionals, which involved lectures, interactive
         discussions, participant presentations, group exercise and presentation, and exposure visits
         to national meteorological and hydrological institutions in Thailand. Resource persons
         came from University Corporation for Atmospheric Research (UCAR), AIT, International
         Centre for Integrated Mountain Development (ICIMOD), Bangladesh, and the Regional
         Integrated Multi-Hazard Early Warning System (RIMES).
      b) Workshop involving heads and senior/mid-level professionals of the national hydrological
         institutions/ national meteorological and hydrological services (NMHSs) for consideration
         of a regional program on end-to-end basin-based long-lead flood forecasting and warning
         system in the South Asian Region.

The workshop was held over five days, with the following program:

      Day 1:   Workshop introduction and contextualization; existing flood forecasting and warning
               systems in SAR countries; introduction of end-to-end flood forecasting and warning
               system, learning sessions on real-time observation and monitoring, numerical weather
               prediction, data requirement for Hydrological modelling
      Day 2:   Introduction of basin-based long-lead flood forecasting and warning; ongoing
               regional efforts; proposed regional program for SAR
      Day 3:   Special learning sessions on sources of hydrologic predictability and useful datasets,
               followed by warning preparation, dissemination and communication, preparedness
               and response, and feedback system; orientation on exposure visits
      Day 4:   Exposure visits to Thai Meteorological Department (TMD) and Royal Irrigation
               Department (RID); debriefing
      Day 5:   Learning sessions on flood preparedness and response, and feedback system, followed
               by developing an action plan for end-to-end basin based long lead flood forecasting
               and warning system in SAR.

Annex 1 provides the detailed workshop program, while Annex 2 provides the participant list.




                                                 2
OPENING SESSION

Welcome Remarks. A.R. Subbiah, RIMES, welcomed all workshop participants.

He noted the increasing incidence of transboundary hazards, particularly in the South Asian region,
and emphasized the need for regional cooperation to reduce loss of lives and livelihoods.
Improvements in numerical weather prediction (NWP) techniques and integration of NWP outputs
into flood forecasting offer opportunities for enhancing flood forecast lead times. Thus, the workshop
shall explore a regional mechanism for integrating emerging/new technologies for improved flood
forecasting, particularly for transboundary rivers. Towards this end, Mr. Subbiah wished all
participants fruitful discussions.

Opening Remarks. Satya Priya, World Bank, provided the context of the workshop.

The Ganges-Brahmaputra-Meghna basin is an important region as it is one of the most flood-prone
basins in the world, affecting more than 18 million in the Ganges alone. The basin has the largest
number of the world’s poor. Climate change impacts further add to existing vulnerabilities.
Countries in the region have differing flood forecasting capacities. Data availability is a common
challenge. It is important to understand the full nuances of flood forecasting, from regional to
national, to local levels. The workshop, hence, shall take stock of available capacity, determine
existing gaps, and identify suitable measures to address these gaps. The workshop is also a good
platform to share and learn from each other’s experiences.

Remarks. Sanjay Srivastava, ESCAP, shared relevant ESCAP initiatives, particularly the promotion
of regional cooperation on transboundary river basins in the Asia-Pacific region.

The recent session of the ESCAP Commission gave ESCAP the mandate to work with Member States
on flood forecasting, from data exchange to integration of advances in science and sharing of best
practices. ESCAP promotes inter-governmental, multi-stakeholder cooperation, such as the Mekong
River Commission, ESCAP-WMO Panel of Tropical Cyclones, and Typhoon Committee, which bring
together stakeholders that face common risk. ESCAP’s multi-donor Trust Fund has supported
Monsoon Forums, NMHS capacity building, and pilot projects that ensure that risk information
reaches communities at risk.




                      Left: workshop opening session; Right: workshop participants




                                                   3
PRESENTATION SUMMARIES

1. SESSION 1: FLOOD FORECASTING AND WARNING SYSTEMS IN SAR COUNTRIES

Country representatives presented an overview of existing flood forecasting and warning system in
respective country, the salient features of which are summarized below.

1.1 Flood Forecasting and Warning Services in Bangladesh

Md. Abdul Latif Miah and Md. Amirul Hussain, Bangladesh Water Development Board (BWDB),
Bangladesh, presented the country’s flood risk context and the evolution of, advances made in, and
priorities for further development of the country’s flood forecasting and warning system.

Bangladesh is the most flood vulnerable country in the region, with almost one-third of the country
flooded every year, resulting to annual economic losses of about 3% to 5% of the country’s GDP.
Severe floods occurred in 1998, 1988, and 2007. The country’s location, topography, and high
population density make it vulnerable to floods and other hydro-meteorological hazards. Flood
forecasting and warning complement the country’s extensive structural flood management measures.

Bangladesh has an operational flood warning system during the monsoon season. The country’s
hydrological and meteorological observation system is still basically conventional manual type.
BWDB maintains a network of 343 water level gauges, of which 37 are automated telemetric stations.
Manual stations are equipped with mobile phone, which enables immediate transfer of data through
SMS to the head office. Satellite images are also applied to monitor water level conditions upstream.

BWDB’s Flood Forecasting and Warning Centre (FFWC) issues 5-day deterministic flood forecast
for 52 locations, and 10-day probabilistic flood forecast for 38 locations. Satellite altimetry-based
flood forecasting technology has also been developed, providing lead times of up to 8 days for 13
locations. Flash flood forecasts, based on rainfall intensity-duration thresholds, are issued for 2
locations.

The 10-day flood forecast system is based on medium-range rainfall forecast from the European
Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF) ensemble prediction system, satellite
precipitation data from the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s Climate
Prediction Center Morphing Technique (NOAA/CMORPH) and U.S. National Aeronautics and Space
Administration’s Global Precipitation Climatology Project (NASA/GPCP), rain gauge data from the
World Meteorological Organization’s Global Telecommunication System (WMO/GTS), and local
meteorological and hydrological data. River discharges are predicted at upstream boundary locations,
using data-based and distributed hydrological models. Forecast errors are minimized using simple
regression of model outputs against measured discharge. Discharge forecasts at boundary locations
are used in Mike 11 hydraulic model, to generate water level forecasts at 38 locations downstream of
the Brahmaputra, Ganges, and Meghna rivers (Figure 1.1).

Flood advisories are issued to the public by voice and text messages, phone, social media (Facebook),
FFWC website, and display boards installed at selected locations; by email to institutional users; and
by fax and hard copies to policymakers and top officials.

Disaster Management Committees and user communities in pilot locations have been trained to
respond to warning messages that are based on probabilistic forecasts. Actions are taken
corresponding to the level of flood threat. These include: stocking of seeds, delaying of planting,
early harvesting, increasing height of fish pond dykes, enclosing fish ponds with nets, raising
livelihood assets such as handlooms, increasing elevation of storage areas for goods, moving of




                                                  4
livestock to safe locations, temporary sealing of tube wells, stocking of emergency supplies (food,
fuel, medicine), and securing bamboo for building temporary bridge to connect houses to high land.



                             www.ffwc.gov.bd                                                        Flood Forecasting and
                                              Flood Forecast points                                   Warning Services
                                                                                       River%          Sta<on%         River%       Sta<on%
                                                                                       %


                                                                                                       Mohadevpur%     Turag%       Mirpur%
                                                                                       Atrai%
                                                                                                                       %
                                                                                                       Atrai%                       Dhaka(South)%
                                                                                                                       Buriganga%
                                                                                       Lifle%Jamuna%   Noagaon%                     Dhaka(West)%
                                                                                       %
                                                                                                       Chakrahimpur%   Balu%        Demra%
                                                                                       Karatoya%
                    Singra
                                                                                                       Bogra%          Lakhya%      Narayangonj%

                                                                                       Teesta%         Kaunia%         %            Rajshahi%
                                                                                                                       Ganges%
                                                                                       Brahmaputra%    Chilmari%                    Harding%Bridge%

                                                                                       %               Bahadurabad%                 Talbaria%
                                                                                       %               Kazipur%        %            Goalondo%
                                                                                       Jamuna%                         Padma%
                                              Sureswae                                                 Serajgonj%                   Bhagyakul%
                                                                                                       Porabari%                    Mawa%
          River%               Sta<on%                   River%       Sta<on%
                                                                                                       Aricha%         %            Gorai%Rl%Bridge%
          Jamuna%              Sariakandi%               Dharala%     Kurigram%                                        Gorai%
                                                                                       Old%            Jamalpur%                    Kamarkhali%
          Manu%%               Moulvibazar%              Lakhya%      Lakhpur%         Brahmaputra%
                                                                                                       Mymensingh%     %            Sylhet%
          Kushiysra%           Sherpur%                  Meghna%%     Narsingdi%
                                                                                       Bangshi%        Nayerhat%       Surma%
          Baulai%              Khaliajuri%               Mohanonda%   C.Nwabgonj%                                                   Sunamgonj%
                                                                                       %

          Old%Surma%           Derai%                    Ghagot%      Gaibandha%                       Jagir%          Kushyara%    Sheola%
                                                                                       Dhaleswari%
          Kalni%               Markuli%                  Atrai%       Cankhair%                        Kalagacia%      %            Bhairab%Bazar%
          Gur%                 Singra%                   Hurasagar%   Baghabari%       Kaliganga%      Taraghat%       Meghna%
                                                                                                                                    Baidder%Bazar%
                                                                                                                       %
          Dhaleswari%          Elasin%Ghat%              Padma%       Sureswar%        Tongi%Khal%     Tongi%                       Meghna%Bridge%




                                                     Figure 1.1 Flood forecast points, Bangladesh


Priorities for further improvement of the country’s flood forecasting and early warning system
include:

      o   Expansion of areal coverage of existing flood forecasting and warning system
      o   Monthly and seasonal water level outlooks
      o   Hydrological drought prediction system
      o   Application of satellite technology in flood forecasting
      o   Regional cooperation for transboundary river data sharing
      o   Basin-wide flood forecasting

1.2 Status of Flood Forecasting and Warning in Bhutan

Karma Tsering and Karma Dupchu, Department of Hydro Met Services (DHMS), Bhutan, provided
an overview of the country’s flood risk context, and presented the existing flood forecasting and
warning system, particularly for glacial lake outburst floods (GLOFs), as well as priorities for its
further development.

Bhutan is exposed to flash flood, GLOF, and landslide dam outburst flood (LDOF), with settlements
(about 70%), major infrastructure, and important cultural sites situated along river valleys. Recent
occurrences were in 2009, 2004, 2000 for flashflood; 1998 for GLOF; and 2004 for LDOF.


                                                                                   5
DHMS maintains 26 hydrological stations, 92 meteorological stations of which 20 are Class-A, and
15 flood warning stations. Some hydrological and meteorological stations were recently upgraded
with GPRS- and Iridium satellite-based telemetry system. DHMC also operates Iridium satellite-
based GLOF warning system in 3 basins (Figure 1.2). It was able to forecast and provide advance
warning in the 2015 GLOF event.

DHMS runs WRF model for numerical weather prediction, generating forecasts 4 times a day. HBV
              GLOF&EWS&Block&Diagram&
and IFAS hydrological models for flood forecasting were tested, but not yet made operational. A
Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) is in place for flood forecast and warning dissemination at
national, local, and community levels. The Department of Disaster Management further helps in
information dissemination.




                            Figure 1.2 GLOF early warning system, Bhutan


DHMS priorities for further development of the country’s flood early warning system include:

      o Improved density of hydro-meteorological observing network, with real-time telemetry
        system
      o Access to global data for assimilation into NWP models
      o Reliable high bandwidth Internet connectivity
      o High-speed computing system
      o Training and capacity building
      o Strengthening of community-based early warning systems




                                                 6
1.3 Flood Forecasting and Warning System in India

Rajesh Kumar, Central Water Commission (CWC), India, presented the country’s flood risk context,
flood management practices, status of flood forecasting and warning, and priorities for flood
forecasting and warning system’s further development.

Floods and droughts are recurrent disasters in India, which have led to approximately INR 1800
crores (about USD 18 billion) of losses annually. CWC’s national flood forecasting and warning
network comprises of 176 flood forecasting sites, which include 28 inflow forecasting sites and 148
water level forecasting sites. Through its 13 regional field offices, CWC issues forecasts by email,
SMS, and through the CWC website to various user agencies, which include civil/engineering
agencies of State/Central Governments, such as Irrigation, Revenue, Railways, public undertakings,
Dam/ Barrage Authorities, and District Magistrates/ Sub Divisional Officers, apart from Defense
Authorities involved in flood loss mitigation work.

Forecast formulation requires effective means of real-time data communication network from
forecasting stations and base stations. Wireless communication system, installed in almost 550
stations, is the backbone of the communication system in support of flood forecasting activities. So
far, 445 stations have been modernized with automatic data collection and transmission systems.
Work is in progress to increase the total number of telemetered stations at the end of the XII Plan
(2017) to 1,061.

Flood forecasting is mainly based on upstream water level observations. Mathematical models for
Jhelum, Alaknanda, Bhagirathi, Ganga, Brahmaputra, Yamuna, Chambal, Baitarani, Vamsadhara,
Subarnarekha, Mahanadi, Tapi, Godavari and Krishna rivers have been developed. Flood forecasting
comprises of water level forecasting and inflow forecasting. Water level forecasts help user agencies
to decide mitigating measures, such as evacuation of people, and shifting people and their movable
properties to safer locations. Inflow forecast is used by various dam authorities in optimum operation
of reservoirs, for safe passage of flood downstream, as well as to ensure adequate storage in reservoirs
for meeting demand during non-monsoon period. India Meteorological Department (IMD) generates
3-day quantitative precipitation forecast (QPF) for several river basins. QPF-based flood forecasting
              Category of Floods and colour code
system is developed and operational for Jhelum basin. Also, GLOF inventory has been prepared.




                                               Unprecedented-Red
                                                                            Highest Flood Level
                                                                            (HFL)
                   0.5 m




                                                   High-Orange
                                                                            HFL-0.5 m



                                                Moderate - Yellow


                                                                           Danger Level
                   1.0 m




                                                   Low - Yellow

                                                                           Warning Level

                                                                                              20


                       Figure 1.3 Current water level thresholds for flood warning, India


                                                       7
Priorities toward further development of the country’s flood forecasting and warning system include:

      o 2D inundation modelling for major flood-prone basins
      o Updating of water level thresholds based on location, time, and season
      o Real-time flood warning system
      o Flood plain zoning
      o GLOF, LDOF, and cloud burst flood
      o Inventory of all glacial lakes and water bodies
      o Move from deterministic to probabilistic forecast
      o International cooperation for access to upstream data
      o Engagement with users, noting users’ main focus on water level trend and flood onset,
        extent, and duration
      o Improved coordination with user agencies

1.4 Flood EWS Activities in Nepal

Gautam Rajkarnikar and Rajendra Sharma, Department of Hydrology and Meteorology (DHM),
Nepal, presented the evolution, status, and priorities for further development of the country’s flood
forecasting and warning system.

Continuous heavy rains, flash floods, GLOF, and landslides are major hazards in Nepal. DHM started
modernizing its meteorological and hydrological observation system in 2008. Currently, its
observation network consists of 75 rainfall and 32 flow gauging stations, with GPRS/CDMA
communication system for real-time data transmission. This real-time observation network was
primarily developed for flood warning in the Terai plain. The network is sparse in hilly and
mountainous areas.

RIMES assisted DHM in developing capacity on Numerical Weather Prediction using Weather
Research & Forecast (WRF) model. DHM, however, has not yet made WRF fully operational. At
present, Nepal does not run any hydrologic, or hydraulic model for flood forecasting. Flood
forecasting system development is in progress for three basins, namely Narayani, Babai and Karnali,
with support from RIMES.

Flood warning is issued to downstream communities when water level at the upstream station exceeds
a predetermined threshold (Figure 1.4). Flood forecast and warning information are disseminated
through DHM website, mobile phones, and siren; satellite communication is used during extreme
events. Mobile application is currently being developed for 24-hour flood warning. There are also
community-based dissemination and response mechanisms, developed in collaboration with local
governments, community-based organizations, and non-government organizations.

Community-level disaster management committees are formed in each disaster prone village, which
belong to a network of District Disaster Relief Committee, local media, the Red Cross, local police,
military units, and DHM flood monitoring and forecasting station. Disaster management committees
are equipped and trained for warning dissemination, preparedness, and immediate response.




                                                  8
                             Figure 1.4 Web-based dissemination system, Nepal


Priorities for further development of Nepal’s flood forecasting and warning system include:

      o Identification of flood zones and development of flood inundation maps
      o Re-evaluation of danger and warning levels for most rivers
      o DHM training and capacity building


                                         SESSION SUMMARY

   Ø All countries have varying capacities for flood forecasting and warning; there is great scope for
      improving existing capacities
   Ø Countries are ready to share transboundary observation data and flood forecast information for
      reducing human and economic losses due to floods; sharing would require a regional mechanism
   Ø Flash flood and landslide are major challenges for Bhutan and Nepal, while riverine flood is a major
      challenge for Bangladesh and India
   Ø Development of a regional program to address flood risks in the region would require consideration
      of both flash and riverine floods
   Ø Satellite-based observation systems would be very useful for the Ganges and Brahmaputra basins, as
      large parts of these basins are inaccessible
   Ø Capacity building, in terms of technology and staff training, is a need common to all the countries




                                                     9
2. END-TO-END FLOOD FORECASTING AND WARNING SYSTEM

2.1 End-to-End Flood Forecasting and Warning System: Key Features and Requirements

Dilip K. Gautam, RIMES, presented the key features of an operational flood forecasting and early
warning system that is end-to-end, from observation and monitoring to user engagement for
preparedness, warning response, and feedback.

Flood forecasting and early warning is an efficient and cost effective method for minimizing the
negative impacts of floods. Its purpose is to advise institutions and the general public on impending
flooding, for taking mitigating actions. Flood warning should provide information on:

      o     Time of flood onset
      o     Magnitude of flood (water levels, discharges at key locations)
      o     Location and extent of flooding
      o     Duration of flooding
      o     Likely impacts

Flood early warning, to be effective, should provide adequate lead time for institutions and
communities at risk to undertake preparatory and mitigating actions. The chain that starts with
monitoring of extreme weather events, leading up to community level response can be functionally
disintegrated into steps, wherein developmental interventions can contribute to preparedness and
reduction in disaster risks at the community level. It is end-to-end when it involves a chain of
activities that connects the technical and societal aspects of warning, from understanding and mapping
of the hazard and monitoring and forecasting/predicting impending/ emerging harmful events, to
processing and disseminating understandable warnings to authorities and the population and
undertaking appropriate and timely actions in response to the warnings by involvement and
participation of all stakeholders. Stakeholder feedback is a key feature, allowing post-event
assessment for learning lessons, identifying good practices, and providing recommendations for
improving the early warning system. These components of an end-to-end flood early warning system
are illustrated in Figure 2.1.


                   Risk	  Knowledge                                                                              Forecasting
                                                                       Monitoring	  
                   •   HVR	  assessment                                                                          • Rainfall	  forecasting
                   •   Thresholds	  assessment                        • Rainfall	  monitoring                   • Flood	  
                   •   Target	  area                                  • Water	  level	                           level/discharge	  
                   •   Evacuation	  route                               monitoring                                 forecasting
                   •   Shelter
                                                                                                      Nowcasting                          Longer
                                                                                                                                          lead time

     Response	  Capability                                                                                      Warning
     • First	  aid	  kits,	  food,	  water,	  
       utensils
                                                                               People                            • Warning	  messages
                                                                                                                 • Bulletin
     • Blankets,	  boats,	  ropes                                              !                               • Advisory
     • Shelter
     • Alternate	  livelihood




                                                      Dissemination	  and	  Communication
                                                        •   Website	  of	  warning	  center	  (Graphs,	  Bulletin)
                                                        •   Newspaper
                                                        •   Radio/TV
                                                        •   Flags/Sirens/Phone


                                                 Figure 2.1 End-to-end flood early warning system


                                                                                 10
An operational end-to-end flood forecasting and warning system has the following basic elements:

       a) Risk assessment system. This involves assessment of historical flood depth, extent, and
          duration; evaluation of local threshold values; and risk mapping.
       b) Real-time monitoring system, which includes sensors, and data logging and
          communication
       c) Forecasting system, which includes:
              o Numerical Weather Prediction (NWP) system
              o Data preprocessing system
              o Hydrological modeling system
              o Hydraulic modeling system
              o Error correction system
       d) Warning system, which involves forecast interpretation, potential impact assessment, and
          advisory generation
       e) Dissemination and communication system
       f) Preparedness and response system
       g) Feedback system

2.2 Numerical Weather Prediction for Flood Forecasting

Itesh Dash, RIMES, provided an overview of the NWP process and products, and considerations for
using NWP products in hydrological modeling.

Precipitation and temperature forecasts are essential inputs to hydrological modeling to provide
discharge information with lead times of days to months. These are generated using NWP methods.
Computer models are used to predict the future state of the atmosphere. Calculations are made on
synoptic scale, but influences on weather are local. Further, equations used to estimate relevant
physical processes are non-linear. Hence, uncertainty or bias (error) exists in NWP products.

NWP products could have time scales of hours to years. RIMES’ WRF model is configured covering
the four countries, and is run at 6-hourly interval, with lead time of 84 hours. Products are provided
to the countries daily. Products from RIMES’ 10-day, monthly, and seasonal NWP models are
provided to select countries only.

Following are key considerations in using NWP products in hydrological modeling:

      o Observation data pre-processing and quality control, before application in NWP models, to
        manage errors and fill missing data
      o Forecast verification to determine and improve forecast skill
      o Bias correction to manage errors that are inherent in the NWP model

2.3 Data Requirements for Hydrological Modeling

Anshul Agarwal, RIMES, provided an overview of basic data requirements for developing a
hydrological model for a basin, as follows, and the ensuing data preparation process.

      o Spatial data
           − Digital Elevation Model (DEM)
           − Land use
           − Soil types
           − Other physiographic properties
           − Station locations
           − Reservoir, bridge locations
      o Meteorological data



                                                 11
          − Precipitation
          − Temperature
          − Evapotranspiration
      o Hydrological and hydraulic data,
          − Discharge
          − Water level
          − Rating curve
          − Channel and reservoir/ diversion hydraulic data

Data availability is an important consideration in selecting the model that is appropriate for a
particular basin. For trans-boundary river basins, it is often difficult to get data from neighboring
countries. In such situations, global datasets, available from various organizations, may be used.

Data preparation for use in modeling involves:

      o   Delineation of catchment and river network
      o   Acquisition of catchment characteristics data (e.g. area, slope, etc.)
      o   Construction of Thiessen polygon and obtaining Thiessen weights
      o   Delineation of elevation bands for snowmelt modeling
      o   Preparation of basin model file
      o   Preparation of meteorological model file

2.4 Introduction to Hydrological Modeling

Dilip Kumar Gautam, RIMES, introduced participants to hydrological modeling using the Hydrologic
Modeling System developed by the Hydrological Engineering Center (HEC-HMS) of the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers.

Hydrological modelling is the process of mathematically representing the response of a catchment
system to hydrologic events during the time period under consideration. Hydrological models are the
basis for flood forecasting systems. Hydrological modelling is a very effective tool in generating
runoff forecast, based on weather forecast. Hydrologic models use climatic variables, such as
precipitation and evapotranspiration, and catchment topography and land use characteristics to
simulate runoff.

Hydrological models can be classified as:

      o Deterministic or stochastic,
      o Empirical, conceptual, or physically-based
      o Lumped, semi-distributed, or distributed

Model selection, in most cases, depends on data availability. A complex distributed model should not
be used when available data do not support it. Model selection also depends on the characteristics of
the basin.

Model development is an iterative process, which consists of data acquisition and preprocessing,
selection of model, and calibration and validation (Figure 2.2).




                                                    12
                                                Data acquisition
                                                and preprocessing



                                                Selection of model



                                                    Calibration



                                                    Validation




                                      No
                                                  Is model
                                                  adequate ?
                                                                     Yes

                                                Apply model to
                                                Engineering
                                                problem


                                 Figure 2.2 Model development process


HEC-HMS is a freely available model, designed to simulate both single event and continuous rainfall-
runoff process. It simulates precipitation-runoff and routing processes, both natural and controlled.
HEC-HMS uses a separate model to represent each component of the runoff process (Figure 2.3),
which include:

      o   Runoff volume
      o   Direct runoff (overland flow and interflow)
      o   Baseflow
      o   Channel flow

HEC-HMS also includes:

      o An automatic calibration package that can estimate certain model parameters and initial
        conditions, given observations of hydrometeorological conditions
      o Links to a database management system that permits data storage and retrieval, and
        connectivity with other analysis tools that are available from HEC and other sources.




                                                  13
                        Figure 2.3 HEC-HMS representation of watershed runoff


2.5 Decision Support Systems

Bhogendra Mishra, RIMES, presented the importance of decision support system (DSS) for potential
impact assessment and generation and dissemination of flood advisories, and featured RIMES
ongoing DSS development work for Myanmar.

Recipients respond better to warning messages that include the hazard’s potential impacts.
Assessment of potential impacts of a predicted flood, and subsequent generation and dissemination of
advisories could be automated in a decision support system that makes use of Geographic Information
System (GIS) tools and techniques for integrating spatial data with hazard information (Figure 2.4).




                                                 14
     Conceptual Framework for Flood
          Forecasting and DSS
  Phase I                                            Near real-time-                                       Rainfall forecasting
                                                                                                            – ECMWF/WRF
  Weather forecasting                                telemetry data



                                         FEWS                                Rainfall analysis



  Phase II                                                                                                     GIS database
                                                                                  Point
  Automate the Hydrological and                                                forecasting
                                                                                                             model parameters
                                                                                                              external data
  Hydraulic models                            Flow hydrographs and
                                              water level time series
                                                at critical locations
                                                                                 Surface
                                                                               forecasting
                                                                                                            Mapping
                                                 Analysis of model results

                                                                                                 Animated forecasted rainfall and
                                                                                                       Surface Flood level



                                                    Consequences
 Phase III                                         Status reporting/         Overlay – Google map
                                                       Mapping
 Information Dissemination for
 the decision making team


                                             Decision making                     Public

                        Figure 2.4 Flood forecasting and decision support system


RIMES DSS development efforts for flood warning uses Delft-FEWS, an open source data handling
platform that connects observation data and weather forecast inputs with hydrological and hydraulic
flood routing models. It has:

   o   Modules for such multi-source spatial data handling, including data validation, interpolation,
       aggregation and error correction in forecasts
   o   A mathematical model for predicting decision outcomes
   o   A graphical user interface for displaying spatial and tabular reports to assist in decision-
       making and information dissemination

The DSS is developed using case-based reasoning, hence is unable to quantify constraints, such as
social and political.

2.6 Dissemination and Communication Aspects of Flood Early Warning Systems

G. Srinivasan, RIMES, presented considerations for dissemination and communication of forecast and
warning information.

Dissemination is the delivery of forecast and warning information, while communication involves the
receipt and understanding of forecast and warning information. Communication, thus, depends on the
presentation and dissemination of information and recipients’ education/ awareness and understanding
of risks that they face. The latter requires knowledge of recipients’ backgrounds, experiences,
perceptions, and priorities.




                                                    15
Three key considerations in warning dissemination are:

    a) Communication channels. Warning dissemination should use multiple communication
       channels to ensure delivery of warnings to threatened communities. Communication systems
       need to be tested on a routine basis, involving key recipients. As much as possible,
       dissemination processes need to be automated to improve efficiency and decrease the time
       required to issue warnings. It is necessary to establish protocols for acquiring information in a
       timely manner and for seamless transfer of information and data between agencies. This
       would ensure efficiency and effectiveness of the warning system.

    b) Warning frequency. Decision for warning updates shall be based on the nature, intensity,
       and duration of the threat; available mode of communication; and needs and expectations of
       the community.

    c) Follow-up. A process for follow-up/ confirmation should be in place to ensure that warnings
       are received and understood by various recipients. In the event that warning was required but
       not issued, or warning was issued well after hazard impact, a careful explanation of this
       failure needs to be given to the public. This shall aid public understanding of the limitations
       of the warning system, and should lead to recommendations to address gaps.

On communication, an individual’s perception of risk is enhanced when:

      o   Warnings are as accurate as the science allows;
      o   Warning messages have local relevance and meaning
      o   Warning messages before and during a particular event are issued and updated frequently;
      o   Warnings are delivered by multiple credible sources;
      o   Warning messages are consistent;
      o   The basis for the warning is clear; and
      o   Suggested response actions that are clear and simple to follow are included.

2.7 Early Warning Dissemination: Bangladesh Experience

Raihanul Haque, RIMES, Bangladesh, featured the flood warning dissemination methods in use in
Bangladesh.

Bangladesh’s FFWC uses the following methods for disseminating flood forecast and warning
information:

      o Email to about 1,000 focal points in stakeholder institutions at national, district, and union
        levels
      o SMS to Disaster Management Committees in RIMES pilot unions and to 106 FFWC water
        level gauge readers
      o Voice message broadcast to 1,300 focal persons in RIMES pilot unions. This method
        overcomes the barriers of language and illiteracy. Broadcast frequency depends on the level
        of flood threat: twice a day when water level has crossed the danger level and is in rising
        trend; once a day when water level is in rising trend but still below the danger level, or water
        level is above danger level but has a falling trend.
      o FFWC website (www.ffwc.gov.bd), Facebook page (www.facebook.com/ffwcbwdb), and
        interactive voice response (IVR) system (at a cost) to the general public

The 10-day forecast information includes Union name, river name, date of issue, current water level
in meter, forecast water levels in the next 10 days in rise (+) or fall (-) in water level in centimeter,
and river gauging station name (Figure 2.5). Interpretation of 10-day water level forecast requires
users’ training.



                                                   16
ut& 1000&
 na/onal&
 ders&
e& major&
warnings&
 detailed&
d&rainfall&
 ent)&



                                     Figure 2.5 Email dissemination of 10-day water level outlook, Bangladesh


              Lessons learned from the Bangladesh experience include:

                      o Dissemination of forecasts and warnings to focal points is more effective than broadcast
                        methods
                      o Training and capacity building of focal points to interpret and act on the warning (e.g.
                        further dissemination, engage others to undertake preparedness actions), particularly below
                        district level, are required
                      o Use of mobile services has tremendous potential, but requires time for updating database of
                        phone numbers
                      o Union Digital Center Entrepreneurs could be one of key early warning information
                        providers at community level

              2.8 Preparedness and Response Systems

              Raihanul Haque, RIMES, Bangladesh, stressed the importance of warning lead time and consistency,
              and capacity development of both providers and users of forecast and warning information, with
              examples on RIMES work in Bangladesh, for appropriate and timely user response to warnings.

              To enable a warning recipient to respond timely and appropriately to warnings, he/she should be able
              to1,2:

                      o   Receive the warning in time for response;
                      o   Understand the information presented;
                      o   Believe the information;
                      o   Personalize the risk; and
                      o   Make correct decisions


              1
               Mileti, D. & Sorenson, J 1990, Communication of emergency public warnings – a social science perspective and state-of-the-art
              2
               Mileti, D 1999, Disasters by design – a reassessment of natural hazards in the United States, National Academy of Sciences, Joseph Henry
              Press, Washington.



                                                                                 17
Lead time. Advances in numerical weather prediction have cascaded into flood forecasting and
warning, providing products at different lead times, from days to months. Flash flood and short-range
flood forecasts are useful in saving lives; medium-range forecast products with lead times of up to 10
to 15 days are useful for preserving livelihood assets. Monthly and seasonal flow outlooks are useful
in sectoral planning. Increasing forecast lead times, however, increases forecast uncertainty (Figure
2.6). Hence, there is need to build capacity of users in utilizing longer lead forecasts in planning and
decision-making.
                                            Challenge Associated with Lead Time
           Forecast Uncertainty




                                     Least Desirable                   Least Reliable


                                                       Optimum
                                                       Reliability


                                     Most Reliable                    Most Desirable




                                  Minutes   Hours Days Weeks           Months     Seasons

                                                  Forecast Lead time

                                       Figure 2.6 Forecast lead time and uncertainty
     There should be a trade-off between the benefit of an increased lead
     time and the simultaneous decrease of warning reliability. The
Understanding
     increase    in leadand
                warnings   timepersonalizing
                                   may providerisks. valuable     time on
                                                      Public education   forhazard characteristics of
                                                                             the completion        and
potential impacts are essential in understanding the warning and personalizing the risk. Direct
     preventive measures, whereas the decrease of warning reliability will
personal experience of a hazard is a powerful factor in personalizing risks. Where a community does
         such economic
     cause
not have                    loss in
              previous experience,    case of of
                                    particularly aa false  alert.
                                                     hazard’s intensity and magnitude of impacts, the
warning could refer to a historical impact elsewhere. For example, the flood warning could mention
inundation levels in a past flood and relate this to the forecasted flood level.

Capacity to respond. People must be aware on appropriate response actions and have the physical
and intellectual resources to willingly act on the advisory. Public education and awareness is not the
responsibility of disaster management organizations alone, but of the NHS/NMHS as well. Regular
NHS/NMHS interaction with the public is thus important. This also allows the NHS/NMHS to
understand early warning needs, and for the public to learn of limitations in early warning. This
dialogue process shall result to recommendations and actions for improving the end-to-end early
warning system.

Public education and awareness may be undertaken:

      o   Before the flood season
      o   Through until the end of the season
      o   During a flood event
      o   Immediately following an event as this presents the greatest opportunity for people to
          personalize risk




                                                            18
In Bangladesh, RIMES works with FFWC in:

      o Raising public awareness on FFWC responsibilities, functions, facilities, operations, and
        services
      o Improving public awareness, understanding, and use of products available from FFWC
      o Increasing public understanding of the nature of floods and their associated risks
      o Raising disaster awareness and preparedness
      o Involving the public in observation and monitoring (e.g. rainfall and river level
        measurements) and in providing feedback

Importance of partnerships. Partnerships with various institutions, organizations, and individuals are
important in warning communication and response, public education and awareness, and in improving
warning information. These include government agencies at various levels, the media, community/
amateur radio groups, emergency responders, emergency relief agencies (e.g. Red Cross), NGOs,
academic and research institutions, social scientists, hydrological/ meteorological societies, and
businesses.

2.9 Feedback System

Ruby Rose Policarpio, RIMES, highlighted the importance of feedback in people-centered flood early
warning system, with example on the Monsoon Forum as national and sub-national level feedback
mechanism.

A people-centered early warning system requires a robust feedback mechanism that is embedded in
each step of the end-to-end warning system (Figure 2.7).




  Figure 2.7 Feedback mechanism (indicated by red oval) embedded in the end-to-end early warning system




                                                   19
User feedback mechanism:

         o Emphasizes the importance of user inputs, for further developing the early warning system
               − Supports the development/tailoring of information and services
               − Provides opportunities for continued research for product development, to remain
                 aligned with goals, develop new strategies, and develop/improve products and
                 services
         o Measures how information has been understood and applied by users
         o Supports enhanced decision-making by stakeholders (generators, providers, and
           intermediary and end users)
         o Offers insights on how users value forecast and warning information
         o Keeps forecast and warning information providers relevant to users
         o Provides opportunities for creating/enhancing NMHS-user partnerships

A feedback mechanism, to be effective, should:

         o   Be regular
         o   Be robust and embedded in the end-to-end early warning chain
         o   Have multi-sectoral participation
         o   Be sustained
         o   Be connected to a mechanism that enables dynamic response to/ actions on user
             recommendations

RIMES, working with institutional systems in its Member and Collaborating States, has evolved
vigorous feedback mechanisms that enables articulation of user experiences, lessons learned, and
recommendations for improving the early warning system. These feedback mechanisms are
implemented and sustained at various levels, national, sub-national, and local levels.

Monsoon Forum. The Monsoon Forum3 is a regular dialogue between providers and users4 of
forecast and warning information, anchored on relevant climate seasons in RIMES Member and
Collaborating States. Conducted at least twice a year in the countries, before and after the relevant
seasons, the Monsoon Forum is a cyclical process (Figure 2.8) of:

         o NMHS generation and issue of user-demanded forecast
         o Analysis of potential impact scenarios based on multi-hazard and multi-timescale
           information
         o Identification of management options vis-à-vis possible seasonal and sub-seasonal
           conditions
         o Implementation of feasible options, for optimizing resources/ managing risks in various
           sectors
         o Monitoring progress of the season and making adjustments, as necessary
         o Sharing experiences, management decisions, good practices, lessons learned, and other
           feedback and recommendations5 for EWS enhancement

RIMES assists NMHSs in responding to user demands, in the area of product/ system development.
Collaboratively, RIMES and NMHS undertake research and development, share outputs on
experimental basis, receive feedback and perform validation, improve product/ system, handover
product/ system, and build user capacity through training.




3
  Coined based on the main climate driver (the monsoon) in countries in South and Southeast Asia
4
  Information user sectors include agriculture and food security, water resources, livelihoods, public health, infrastructure and transportation,
environment, information and communication, power, and disaster management
5
  Community feedback are articulated during the Forum by sub-national/ national user institutions



                                                                      20
                       decision-making
                   •   Priority actions for addressing gaps in forecast generation and                              o Research institu
                       application                                                                                  o Media




                                                      NMHS generates forecast
                                                                                                        The Seasonal Forum is a cycli
                                                                                                        of generating user-demanded f
                                                                                                        products, analyzing potential
                          Users monitor progress of                                                     based on the probabilistic fore
                           the season and report                                NMHS convenes the
                          actions taken, during the                                 Forum               identifying options to manage
                                   Forum                                                                impacts, implementing feasibl
                                                                                                        to optimize resource managem
                                                                                                        manage risks, monitoring prog
                                                                                                        season and making necessary
                                                                                                        adjustments, sharing applicati
                                   Users report back to home                                            experiences, and providing fee
                                   agencies and finalize and          Forecast users analyze
                                      implement impact
                                                                      potential impacts and             improving forecast products fo
                                                                      management options
                                      management plan                                                   application

                                                                                                    2
                                     Figure 2.8 The Monsoon Forum process


2.10       Community Feedback on Flood Early Warning

Raihanul Haque Khan, RIMES, Bangladesh, featured RIMES experience in Bangladesh on methods
used for collecting community feedback, types of information collected, and challenges and
constraints met.

In Bangladesh, FFWC and RIMES, in collaboration with NGO partners and trained volunteers,
undertake periodic evaluation of community receipt and understanding of and responses to flood
forecasts and warnings. Data collection methods include semi-structured interview, focus group
discussions, key informant interview, local level dialogues, and representation in the national
Monsoon Forum. Information collected include:

       o Community characteristics: Community profile, hazard, flood risk, past experience,
         preparedness, resources for warning response
       o Warning characteristics: Source/s, channel/s, content, frequency, access
       o Forecast performance: Forecast lead time, perceived accuracy
       o Community response: Actions taken, factors that trigger early action, flood impacts, early
         warning benefits

Challenges and constraints met include:

       o    Intensive resource (human, time) requirement
       o    Data verification
       o    Data analysis – time consuming and no immediate recommendations
       o    Communities hardly get the EWS overview in their locality

Learning from these evaluations has led to the following changes:

       o Introduction of voice message broadcast to widen reach, particularly to the illiterate segment
         of communities
       o Email dissemination in Bangla to Union Digital Centers
       o SMS dissemination in Bangla to key disaster managers
       o Generation and dissemination of flood outlook for farmers, based on medium-range forecast
       o Localized flood forecasts


                                                               21
      o Frequency and length of flood forecast messages and timing of dissemination according to
        user expectations
      o Popularization of IVR system
      o Promotion of Union Digital Center as key interpreter of flood forecasts at community level

    FFWC and RIMES have developed the Interactive Risk Information Gateway, a mobile phone-
    based application for facilitating user access to warning/risk information and feedback.

2.11 Capacity Building for End-to-End Long-Lead Flood Forecasting and Warning –
     Bangladesh Experience

Raihanul Hauqe, RIMES, Bangladesh, featured the development process of FFWC’s flood forecasting
system and Interactive Risk Information Gateway.

FFWC’s flood forecasting system evolved from 2000, with funding support from USAID. RIMES
provided back-up support during USAID funding cycle breaks in 2009-2010, and from 2014.
Development of the 10-day, 20-25 day, and seasonal models for Ganges and Brahmaputra basins were
undertaken from 2000-2005. Pilot testing, in partnership with CARE, was conducted in 5 Unions
from 2006-2009. From 2011-2014, geographical area covered by the model was expanded to cover
Meghna basin, flash flood guidance system was developed, the seasonal flow outlook model was
further developed, technologies (models, equipment, skills/training) were transferred to FFWC, and
pilot testing was expanded to 15 Unions. Pilot testing, in partnership with CARE and DDM, included
user training, wider dissemination system, and systematized feedback system.

Development of the Interactive Risk Information Gateway was initiated in 2014, with support from
Netherlands and Cordaid, and in partnership with Concern Universal, Practical Action, Manob Mukti
Songstha (local partner), and Deltares (research). FFWC’s 5-day forecast was downscaled in 5
Unions, using gauge-to-gauge correlation, in addition to the dissemination of 7-day forecast from the
10-day forecast system. Potential flood impact system was developed, generating maps of potential
inundation in GIS environment. Staff gauges were installed in rivers and in the flood plain for local
level monitoring and to support forecast verification, respectively. A dashboard was developed to
pull data, display hazard products, and calculate and visualize flood risk. Training was provided on
dashboard use and on forecast interpretation and warning dissemination. Community feedback in
2014 showed that 80% of users understand the warning, 78% highly trust the warning, 64% perceived
the forecasts to be accurate, and 80% were willing to pay for access to forecast information.
Forecasts and warnings proved economically beneficial to the fisheries, livestock, and health sectors.

Challenges faced include:

      o Retaining of trained FFWC personnel
      o Downloading of large volume of data required for the models, with the limited internet
        capacity
      o Frequent change in warning recipients’ mobile phone numbers
      o Communicating forecast uncertainty

Following are recommended to address gaps that still remain:

      o   Increase in number of FFWC professionals
      o   Updating of the basin discharge modeling system
      o   Increase in number of discharge measurement stations, to extend model boundaries
      o   Frequent calibration of models to keep up with changes in river dynamics
      o   Spatial flood forecasting, 2D modeling, and inundation mapping
      o   Low-cost survey methodologies for DEM generation in high-risk areas
      o   Enhancement of FFWC internet capacity



                                                 22
o Research to incorporate basin average rainfall, bias correction of rainfall forecast, and other
  transboundary basin-relevant factors
o Risk communication
o Training and re-training on forecast interpretation and translation
o Wider and deeper stakeholder involvement in forecast application




                                    SESSION SUMMARY

Ø An end-to-end flood forecasting and warning system involves a chain of activities that connects
   the technical and societal aspects of warning, from understanding, mapping, monitoring, and
   forecasting the hazard to generating and disseminating warnings, communicating associated
   risks, taking appropriate and timely response, and providing user feedback.
Ø Integration of multi-timescale NWP products into hydrological modeling could provide flood
   outlooks and forecasts that could be used in a seamless manner for planning and decision-
   making. Observation data quality control, bias correction, and forecast verification are
   necessary to improve forecast quality.
Ø Data availability and basin characteristics are key factors in selecting an appropriate
   hydrological model
Ø A decision support system could automate the assessment of a hazard’s potential impacts,
   based on the forecast, and the generation and dissemination of relevant advisories.
Ø Dissemination is the delivery of forecast and warning information; communication involves the
   receipt and understanding of forecast and warning information.
Ø Dissemination of forecasts and warnings to focal points who are trained to interpret, translate,
   and communicate these into early preparatory actions is more effective than broadcast methods.
Ø Timely and appropriate response to warnings requires the warning recipient to receive the
   warning in time, understand the warning, believe the warning, personalize the risk, and make
   correct decisions.
Ø User feedback is essential to determine usability of forecasts and warnings and identify actions
   for improving the end-to-end flood forecasting and warning system
Ø User demands, articulated in regular Monsoon Forums, drive NMHS product and service
   development and innovation
Ø Development of an end-to-end flood forecasting and warning system that is user-relevant is
   resource intensive, in terms of time, funding, and people. Stakeholder partnerships provide
   supplementary/ complementary resources, facilitate user engagement, and contribute to
   sustainability.




                                                23
3. FLOOD FORECASTING AND WARNING IN SAR: ONGOING EFFORTS

3.1 Flood Outlook System for the Himalayan Basins

Shahriar Wahid, International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development (ICIMOD6), Nepal,
presented ICIMOD’s flood information for and related programs in the South Asian Region.

Flooding is an annual occurrence in the Himalayan Basins. Many catchments in the region are
transboundary. Glacier and snow melt contribute to flooding, while GLOF can cause flash flood.
Also, river courses and forms are changing constantly due to erosion and sedimentation. Flood early
warning system is, thus, essential for flood management.

ICIMOD has been cooperating with NMHSs in Nepal, Bhutan, Pakistan and China, and disaster
management authorities in Bihar, India to develop flood outlook systems for the Ganges-Brahmaputra
and Koshi basins, to support national flood forecasting efforts. The pilot flood outlook system, which
was tested and showed promising results during the 2014 monsoon, is an integrated hydrological and
hydrodynamic model of the basins (Figure 3.1). The outputs of this real-time forecasting system
(www.icimod.org/floodoutlook) include a flood stance for the next three days in terms of flows and

    Flood info system
water levels at key locations in the river system, for use by member countries in their own forecasting
                                                                                             30 and
activities. Currently the system is upgraded to include more tributaries, major water structures,
more forecast locations to improve the predictive capacity of the system in selected basins.
                                                                                                                     THREE DECADES




                                                  Na2onal%Flood%Warning%Services%

        Real32me%hydro3
                                           Data%processing%                  Other%data%
       meteorological%data%
       acquisi2on%3%Nepal%


                                           Na2onal%Hydro3                                                     Other%data%
          Preliminarily%                                                   Flood)Forecast)                    acquisi2on%
                                            met%database%
         processed%data%
                                                                                                            NASA%Weath.%
                                                                                                           Forecast,%MODIS%
            Raw%data%                                                                                        snow%cover%%
                                                      Regional%Centre,%ICIMOD%

                                                                                                            Satellite%based%
                                            Flood)outlook)including)inundaEon)module)                         river%cross%
           Field%sensor%
                                                                                                             sec2on,%ﬂow%

                                           Regional%real32me%
                                                                          Hydrology)and)                   Soil,%Land%cover,%
                                            hydro3met%data%
                                                                       hydrodynamic)model)                 river%schema2cs%
                                                portal%




                                       Figure 3.1 ICIMOD flood information system


Also, ICIMOD has a community-based flood early warning system, which consists of upstream water
level monitoring, transmission of observation data to downstream communities by wireless radio,
warning generation based on established water level thresholds, and warning dissemination by siren



6
 ICIMOD is a regional knowledge development and learning center that serves its eight regional member countries of the Hindu Kush
Himalayas – Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, China, India, Myanmar, Nepal, and Pakistan



                                                                 24
                     CB - FEWS
alarm (Figure 3.2). The system could be enhanced by establishing real-time water level monitoring,
and warning dissemination by SMS alerts.




                             Figure 3.2 ICIMOD’s community-based flood early warning system


3.2 SAWI Program on Regional Flood Forecasting

Satya Priya, World Bank, India, presented World Bank’s South Asia Water Initiative (SAWI), aimed
at improving transboundary dialogue, enhancing the knowledge base on major Himalayan river
systems and water resources, strengthening water institutions, and supporting investments for
sustainable, fair, and inclusive development7.

Established in 2009, this strategic program supports Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, China, India,
Nepal, and Pakistan for improved and shared understanding, management, and development of the


7
    https://www.southasiawaterinitiative.org



                                                          25
Ganges-Brahmaputra River Basin, to support the countries’ economic growth and resilience to
climate variability and change. Features of the program include:

           o Flood risk assessment for the Ganges Basin, covering Nepal, India, and Bangladesh, to
             guide flood forecasting priorities. This includes:
                − Data collection and visualization of historical flood events in terms of extent of
                   inundation
                − Data analysis to determine population affected and economic losses for 2- and 50-
                   year return periods
           o Regional flood forecasting, covering the Ganges and Brahmaputra basins, using ensemble
             weather forecasts and satellite altimetry to fill data gaps
                − 1-10 day ensemble river discharge forecasting, using satellite-based ensemble
                   precipitation forecasts
                − Water level forecasts in rivers, using satellite-based altimetry

Key expected results include:

       o    Improved user responses due to longer lead time available
       o    Prioritized schema of flood forecasting at sub-basin level through ongoing diplomacy
       o    Move from central to state to sub-basin scale operational flood forecasting

3.3 Flood Forecasting and Warning Initiatives in Nepal and Myanmar

Anshul Agarwal, RIMES, presented RIMES work on improving flood forecasting and warning in
Nepal and Myanmar.

RIMES initiatives in Nepal and Myanmar focus on:

           o Enhancing meteorological and hydrological monitoring capacities for generation of long-
             lead locations-specific flood forecasts
           o Customization of flood forecast models for select river basins (Karnali, Babai, and Narayani
             in Nepal; Ayeyarwady, Sittoung, and Chindwin in Myanmar)
                − Uses 3-day WRF and 15-day ECMWF8 rainfall forecasts
                − Uses HEC-HMS hydrological model and HEC-RAS hydrodynamic model
                − Model integration in Delft-FEWS
           o Development of decision support system for impact forecasting and advisory generation and
             dissemination
           o Technology transfer and training
                − Training on secondment to RIMES on rainfall forecast verification and bias
                    correction, hydrological modeling, and DSS development
                − Model transfer




8
    European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecast



                                                        26
                                   SESSION SUMMARY

Ongoing related efforts on flood forecasting and warning in the region include:

Ø 3-day outlook of river flows and water levels at key locations in the Ganges-Brahmaputra and
   Koshi basins (ICIMOD)
Ø Development of flood risk atlas for the Ganges basin, an interactive online tool for
   visualization of risks to floods of different return periods (SAWI, World Bank)
Ø 1-10 day ensemble river discharge forecasting, using satellite-based ensemble precipitation
   forecasts, covering the Ganges and Brahmaputra basins (SAWI, World Bank)
Ø Water level forecasts in rivers, using satellite-based altimetry (SAWI, World Bank)
Ø Customized flood forecast models for selected river basins in Nepal (Karnali, Babai, and
   Narayani) and Myanmar (Ayeyarwady, Sittoung, and Chindwin), using 3-day WRF and 15-
   day ECMWF rainfall forecasts, HEC-HMS/RAS hydrological/hydrodynamic models, and
   Delft-FEWS (RIMES)
Ø Decision support system development for impact forecasting and advisory generation and
   dissemination for above-mentioned river basins in Nepal and Myanmar (RIMES)

Main challenges in the region include:
Ø Data availability, particularly hydro-meteorological data, cross section along river channels,
   high resolution DEM,
Ø Acquisition of quality data on snow and glacier melt

The above highlights the need for regional cooperation and program for sharing of transboundary
river data. Other relevant issues discussed include:

Ø Increase in density of observation networks in the region to improve forecast quality. For
   transbounary rivers, regional cooperation is necessary.
Ø Use of mobile signal frequency drop as indicator of precipitable clouds
Ø Monitoring of risks from extreme weather events, such as the 2013 Uttarakhand floods, which
   was precipitated by heavy rainfall, along with very soft snow that was about to melt
Ø Communication of forecast uncertainty. Recent floods in Tamil Nadu (November 2015) had
   advanced warning, but required precautions were not taken.
Ø Building policymakers’ and planers’ confidence in forecasts and warnings




                                                    27
4. SPECIAL SESSION

4.1 Surface Water Level Monitoring via Satellite Radar Altimetry

Charon Birkett, Earth System Science Interdisciplinary Center (ESSIC), University of Maryland,
USA, presented the technology on surface water level monitoring using satellite radar altimetry, and
its advantages and limitations.

Satellite radar altimeters are able to record variations in surface water level for the largest lakes,
reservoirs, river channels, and wetland regions around the world. They do so with temporal
resolutions that vary between 10 and 35days, with delivery of datasets as fast as within 24hrs after
satellite overpass. Spatial resolution depends on temporal resolution: the lesser the temporal
repeatability of the satellite mission, Satellite     Data
                                        the greater the       Sets
                                                        density of observation tracks (Figure 4.1). These
multi-agency instruments have been operating now for almost 25yrs, and the techniques are well
refined.




  NASA/CNES         Jason-2/OSTM
   Figure 4.1 Left: NASA/CNES           mid-2008
                                  Jason-2/OSTM              ISRO/CNES
                                                 Ku-Band altimetry           SARAL
                                                                    from mid-2008  to present day at 10-day
 resolution
  to present    290m along-track sampling; Right: ISRO/CNES
            andday                                              SARAL
                                                            early  2013 Ka-Band  altimetry
                                                                                       dayfrom early 2013 to
                                                                          to present
                       present day at 35-day resolution and 175m along-track sampling
  Ku-band altimetry                                         Ka-Band altimetry
  10-day resolution                                         35-day resolution
  290m along-track
Satellite               sampling
          radar altimeters  are best used on large water    175m    along-track
                                                                bodies.   They do sampling
                                                                                     not distinguish surface
roughness.    Measurements   may
  Fast Delivery (24hrs delay),     be erroneous  when   ice is present. Although  they
                                                            Fast Delivery (24hrs delay),        compete
                                                                                        cannot Near       with
                                                                                                       Real
accuracy   of ground-based  gauge
  Near Real Time (2day delay), and  data, they can  supplement   regional  networks  by providing
                                                            Time (2day delay), and Standard         additional
data at new locations, and in remote regions where gauge deployment may be prohibitive. They can
  Standard
also  continue(1month   delay)
                to monitor        data
                             rising  or available.
                                        falling waters on (1month)
                                                             inundated data   available.
                                                                        floodplains   during river overbank
flooding periods.

4.2 Preliminary Altimetric Observation of the Ganges and Brahmaputra Rivers

Tom Hopson, Bob Brakenridge, and Charon Birkett, University Corporation for Atmospheric
Research (UCAR)/ University of Colorado Boulder/ University of Maryland collaboration, USA,
presented the potential use of altimetric observations in the World Bank-funded project “Development
of flood forecasting for the Ganges and the Brahmaputra Basins using satellite-based precipitation,
ensemble weather forecasts, and remotely sensed river widths and height”.

Water-level measurements from NASA/CNES Jason-2/OSTM at various locations along the Ganges
and Brahmaputra River, as well as select reservoirs in India, were shown (Figures 4.2 and 4.3 as
examples).




                                                     28
NASA/CNES Jason-2/OSTM (Standard GDR-D 10day)




       Example Results: Site 92
A/CNES Jason-2/OSTM (Standard GDR-D 10day)
             Figure 4.2 NASA/CNES Jason-2/OSTM altimetry measurements in Uttar Pradesh, Ganges Basin (1,700m
n)                  along-track crossing, 200-700m main channel width, 2008-2015), observing 4m variability

 rossing

erving




           Figure 4.3 NASA/CNES Jason-2/OSTM altimetry measurements in Tibetan Plateau, Brahmaputra Basin (750m
                 along-track crossing, 2 channels at about 100m width, 2008-2015), observing 1m to 2m variability




ity.
                                                            29
Participants were introduced to G-REALM, a NASA/USDA-funded lake monitoring project, as an
example of an operational system that reveals the current and long-term status of lakes and reservoirs.
On-line since 2003, G-REALM assists stakeholders and end users to assess both drought and rising
levels/flood conditions. In the future this system could be modified to deliver products for designated
river channel locations, with attention on the use of satellite datasets that are delivered to scientists
within 24hrs after satellite overpass. Surface water level products for the Ganges River (and others)
could then be created within 48hrs, and so be of particular use for real-time flood forecasting
programs.

4.3 WRF-Hydro: An operational, large-scale real-time flood forecasting system

David Yates, Tom Hopson, Dave Gochis, and Wei Yu, UCAR, USA, introduced the WRF-Hydro, a
multi-scale, multi-physics modeling tool for real-time flood forecasting.

WRF-Hydro is a community based and supported coupling framework, designed to provide:

                     a) Extendable multi-scale & multi-physics modeling for conservative, continuous, coupled and
                        uncoupled assimilation & prediction of water cycle components: precipitation, soil moisture,
                        snowpack, groundwater, streamflow, inundation, glacier, etc.
                     b) ‘Accurate’ and ‘reliable’ streamflow prediction across scales (from 0-order headwater
                        catchments to continental river basins, and minutes to seasons)
                     c) Open Source system, that runs in a parallel, distributed LINUX computing environment

Figure 4.4 shows the WRF-Hydro model chain. The system is able to provide large-scale water
prediction of up to 30 days. WRF-Hydro application in a watershed in the United States was
 WRF$Hydro+System:+Model+Chain+
presented, and its applicability for Ganges-Brahmaputra basins was discussed.

   1.+WRF$Hydro+Forcing+Engine++(1+km+grid)+                     4.&Catchment&Aggrega=on&




                        2.+NoahMP+LSM+
                           +(1+km+grid)+
   2*way,coupling,




                                                                                    5.+Channel+&+Reservoir+
                                                                                       Rou1ng+Modules+
                                           3.+Terrain+Rou1ng+Module+
                                                  +(250+m+grid)+




                                                 Figure 4.4 WRF-Hydro model chain




                                                                  30
4.4 Rating Curves: Potential and Predictability

Daniel Broman and Tom Hopson, National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR), USA,
presented the potential application of rating curves, developed from linking downstream river
discharge with upstream river stage, in flood forecasting.

The methodology presented is unlike the conventional technique, wherein rating curves are prepared
                R               C                –G                    E
by relating discharge and stage at the same location. By combining information at several upstream
                    ATING URVES                         ANGES XAMPLE
locations, this methodology could provide a more skillful flood forecast. The methodology has been
tested in the Ganges (Figure 4.5), with 6 days lag; skill was significantly good. It was also tested at
few sites in the Brahmaputra, with 5 days lag.




      Ballia                               6 day lag                            0.846 skill

                           Figure 4.5 Ganges stage and discharge measurements




4.5 Upstream Satellite-Derived Flow Signals for River Discharge Prediction

Tom Hopson, F.A. Hirpa, T. de Groeve, G.R. Brakenridge, M. Gebremichael, and P.J. Restrepo,
NCAR, University of Connecticut, Joint Research Council, University of Colorado, and Office of
Hydropower Research and Development, respectively, presented the use of satellite-based passive
microwave radiometer for river stage and flow monitoring, for application in river discharge
prediction.

Advanced Microwave Scanning Radiometer – Earth Observing System (AMSR-E) and NASA
Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission (TRMM) data are used to monitor river stage and flow,
particularly in limited-gauged basins. Accuracy may not be comparable with altimetry products, but
has more temporal coverage. Applications include flood wave velocity estimation, discharge
estimation (nowcasting, refer to Figure 4.6), and filling in of missing data. Combined with other
methodologies, this method can serve as a useful tool for flood forecasting in large river basins.




                                                  31
       Discharge)es;ma;on)“Nowcas;ng”)
                          Ganges)2003)                                                                                            Brahmaputra)2007)




                           Figure 4.6 Discharge estimation using satellite-derived flow measurements


4.6 Operational Flood Forecasting for Bangladesh using ECMWF Ensembles

Tom Hopson, Peter Webster, A.R. Subbiah, and R. Selvaraju, NCAR, Georgia Tech, RIMES, and
Asian Disaster Preparedness Center, respectively, presented the development process of
Bangladesh’s medium-range flood forecasting system.

Bangladesh’s medium-range flood forecasting system was developed using up to 10 days ECMWF
ensemble probabilistic rainfall forecast, extending the then existing lead time of 2-3 days to 12-13
days. The system (Figure 4.7) provides flood level exceedance at the Ganges and Brahmaputra entry
points, which are then incorporated into Bangladesh’s routing model.
                                   E                                     O                            Q                            P
                                   Forecast Trigger:                     Updated TRMM-
                                                                          F
                                                                                                      Updated outlet               Updated distributed
                                   ECMWF forecast files                  CMORPH-CPC                   discharge estimates          model parameters
                                                                         precipitation estimates
                            B                                                                          D
                                   Statistically correct
                                   downscaled forecasts                                                     Distributed Model Hindcast/Forecast
                                                                                                                   Discharge Generation
                                                                                                                     Update soil moisture
                                                                                                                     states and in-stream flows
                            L           Lumped Model Hindcast/Forecast                                      Generate forecasts     Generate hindcasts
                                            Discharge Generation
                                                    Calibrate model                                                Calibrate AR error model

                                       Generate forecasts               Generate hindcasts                  Generate forecasts     Generate hindcasts


                                                    M        Multi-Model Hindcast/Forecast Discharge Generation
                                                                                    Calibrate multi-model

                                                                        Generate forecasts         Generate hindcasts


                                                         F                    Discharge Forecast PDF Generation
                                                                                    Generate model error PDF

                                                                                Convolute multi-model forecast
                                                                                PDF with model error PDF



                                                                                C   Above-critical-level
                                                                                    forecast probabilities
                                                                          NCAR/RAL - National Security Applications Program
                                                                                    transferred to Bangladesh
          Meeting with John Pace   28-29 May 2008   NCAR, Boulder, CO                                                                                    15




                  Figure 4.7 Bangladesh’s medium-range flood forecasting system: process diagram



                                                                                                     32
Forecast skill is quite good, and captured the 2004 and 2007 Brahmaputra floods well. A good
forecast skill was possible because of availability of good data inputs (weather forecast and satellite
rainfall), border observation data assimilation, and large catchment size such that weather forecast
skill “integrates” over large spatial and temporal scales.

4.7 Rain Gauge Site Selection Tool

Daniel Broman and Tom Hopson, NCAR, introduced a tool for siting rainfall gauges, using analysis of
rainfall event size in a region.

The methodology involves: a) dividing a region into grids; b) plotting daily rainfall (from satellite
observation) on the grid; c) identifying potential gauge locations, considering spatial rainfall pattern in
the grid; d) dividing the region among gauge locations; e) applying rainfall at gauge location to the
entire region; f) calculating the difference between gridded and gauge rainfall. Re-siting/ increasing
the number of sites (steps c to f) may be done until the difference is minimized.

Siting assumptions include: 0.1o resolution is adequate to capture events of interest, spatial patterns
are well captured by the satellite rainfall products used, past conditions are representative of future
conditions, and existing gauge networks can be included to limit search for sites. Other
considerations are: population, road, and weighting to divide the region by gauage.

4.8 Flood and Water Level Prediction: Japan

Kazumitsu Muraoka, JICA, presented an overview of Japan’s early warning and response systems for
floods.

Japan’s major rivers are short and have steep gradient; thus, floods are short-distance runner type.
Japan Meteorological Agency (JMA) is the government agency mandated to generate and provide
weather advisories and warnings. Flood information, advisories, and warnings, however, are the
responsibility by JMA and the Ministry of Land, Infrastructure and Transport (MLIT).

Japan’s rainfall observation system consists of over 3,000 rain gauges that send information every
minute; C-band radars, covering a minimum area of 1km x 1km, sending information every 5
minutes; and X-band radars in urban areas, covering a minimum area of 250m x 250m and sending
information every minute. Water level monitoring uses radar sensors with wireless and optical fiber
cable telemetry. Precipitation and water level data are provided in the MLIT website and updated
every 10 minutes. The website also provides information on dam releases.

Flood warnings are issued based on location-specific thresholds and using 4 levels of warning (Figure
4.8) that correspond to specific response actions. Dissemination is by phone and through MLIT
website. During floods, warnings are issued through television, cell phones, Internet, voice
broadcasts, etc. Constant CCTV monitoring is also practiced at all river reaches. Response teams are
assigned for each basin to manage emergencies.

Preparedness activities include scenario-based flood hazard mapping; evacuation modeling, planning,
and drills; establishment of flood markers and evacuation signage; and training of emergency
responders.




                                                    33
                                Kurihashi(water(level(display(tower(
                                                 High embankment
                                                High embankment of Kurihashi gauging station near the Tone River 130.5k
                                                (Embankment design water level +freeboard)


                                                 Embankment design water level
           LEVEL                                Standard water level for river embankment design and the highest water level that
           LEVEL                                the embankment can bear
                                                 Flood-danger water level
                                                Water level with risks of serious disasters due to flooding etc.

                                                 Evacuation Recommended water level
           LEVEL                                Referential water level for resident evacuation. It gives an indication for an
                                                evacuation decision made by a municipal governor.

                                                 Flood-caution water level
           LEVEL                                Exceeding this level may result in disasters such as embankment collapse, scouring
                                                and leakage.
                                                Related flood response teams are mobilized to guard their river.

 The height of the red light,                    Water level for FRT (flood response team) standby
 depicting a water level of
 rivers (Kurihashi point)
                                                Water level suggesting flood response teams for preparation. Related flood
                                                response teams are on stand-by and start to prepare for defense measures.


                                                                                                     The height of the red light,
                                    Figure 4.8 Water level display tower, Kurihashi                  depicting a water level of
                                                                                                     rivers (Kurihashi point)

                                                                                                                                    41
4.9 Real-Time Flood Forecasting System for Bhakra Beas Management Board – India Case
    Study

Anish Kumar, World Bank, presented the outcomes of the World Bank-funded project that developed
real-time decision support and flood forecasting systems for the Bhakra Beas Management Board,
India.

The Bhakra Beas Management Board is custodian for Satluj and Beas rivers, dams, barrages and main
canals. The rivers provide irrigation supply to Punjab, Haryana, and Rajasthan, drinking water to
Delhi and Chandigarh, and generate 3000 MW of hydropower. Their economic importance required a
reservoir inflow forecasting system, as well as a flood forecasting and early warning system.

Development of an operational DSS (Figure 4.9) was a challenge due to data availability, as 2/3 of the
catchment lies in China; catchment is snow-laden and India has limited expertise and experience in
this area; and the catchment has multiple stakeholders, encompassing several States and user sectors
with conflicting interests.

Real-time data acquisition system (DAS) consists of 16 precipitation stations, 52 automatic water
level recorders, 12 full climate stations, 9 snow water equivalent measurement, and 6 snow depth
sensors, in addition to IMD data and use of various satellite products (TRMM precipitation data,
MODIS snow cover imageries) to overcome data availability from the China side of the catchment.
Each water level station is equipped with software for real-time discharge calculation. Telemetry data
is imported from the DAS server hourly.

Models used include rainfall-runoff, snow melt and accumulation, hydrodynamic (for flow routing),
reservoir, flood, and downstream allocation models. User interfaces visualize model outputs. Real-
time data are shared to the public via website. Forecasts are disseminated through website, email, and
SMS alerts.




                                                             34
                                  Information$Flow$Process$


                                                                                    Results$
  Data$Acquisition$        Data$Storage$and$
                                                         Modelling$Tools$      Visualization$and$
      System$               Management$
                                                                                Dissemination$

    RT$$Telemetry$Data$                                   Weighted$Rainfall$     Real$time$Interfaces$
                             System$Architecture$
        IMD$Data$                                          Rainfall$Runoﬀ$          Workstations$

     RIMES$Forecast$                                         Snow$Melt$           Remote$Locations$
                                 Data$Flow$
       Modis$Snow$
                                                           Hydrodynamic$         Website$–$Dashboard$
        Imageries$

    SRTM$Precipitation$                                     Flood$Models$           Email$Reports$
                             Backup$and$Security$
   Manual$Observation$
                                                          Allocation$Model$          SMS$Alerts$
          Data$
                                                                                                      9$


                             Figure 4.9 Real-time DSS development process


The system improved reservoir management; downstream flooding were avoided during the 2013
monsoon, with optimized water releases using the DSS. Project results are impressive and
significantly good for such a difficult terrain.

4.10 Quality Control of India River Level Gauge Data

Tom Hopson and Joe Grim, NCAR, presented a methodology for river level gauge data quality
control.

Steps involved are:

    a) Extract as much valid data as possible from raw gauge level data; if data value is useless,
       mark data as “missing”
    b) Identify multiple reports for same location at the same time; if values are all identical, only
       keep one report, else quality control rules shall be followed
    c) Identify data points with no nearby data points for comparison
    d) Identify exceptionally high/ low values
    e) Identify data points that suggest very rapid time rate of change on either side.

Similar quality control is also possible for precipitation data, but it will be very challenging as
precipitation observations have many zero values and outliers.




                                                    35
          4.11 Integrated Flood Risk Assessment: A case study of the Day River diversion area in the
               Red River Delta, Vietnam

          Mukand S. Babel, Asian Institute of Technology (AIT), presented an integrated approach to flood risk
          assessment for flood detention areas in the Day River Flood Diversion Area (DRFDA), in Red River
          Delta, Vietnam.

          The Day River Flood Diversion Area protects Hanoi and the lower delta during extreme floods,
          upstream dam breaks, or gate control failures. Figure 4.10 shows the conceptual framework used in
          the flood risk assessment for the DRFDA.

          Historical flood and sea levels were analysed, and future flood frequencies and sea level rise were
          projected. Results from historical data analysis were used in adjusting design flood peaks. Integrated
          flood risk parameters (hazard: depth, duration, and velocity; vulnerability: economic, social, and
          environment; risk: hazard and vulnerability) were then developed, involving the use of weightage for
          each contributing factor. Flood risk indices were then calculated, based on hazard, vulnerability, and
          risk classification.

          Results of the study shall aid authorities in designing better strategies for flood preparedness and
          mitigation in the study area, and help local residents in actively reducing flood risks by themselves.




Overall
Approach &
Methodology




               Figure 4.10 Conceptual framework for flood risk assessment in the Day River Flood Diversion Area,
                                                  Red River Delta, Vietnam


                                                              36
4.12 Present and Future Water Data in India

Ram Jeet Verma, Central Water Commission, India, presented

In India, several central and state agencies maintain water datasets. CWC maintains river flow, water
quality, sediment, reservoir, and flood data. The National Water Policy of 2002 and 2012 and the
National Water Mission for Climate Change require that all hydrological data, except those classified
on national security, shall be in the public domain. In this regard, the Water Resources Information
System (WRIS) was developed from 2009-2015 to provide a “single window” solution on all water
resources and related data in a standardized GIS format in national framework for water resource
assessment, monitoring, planning, development, and management, and provide foundation for
advanced modeling purposes.

WRIS has 5 major groups of datasets: watershed atlas, administrative data, water resources projects,
thematic areas, and environmental data. It has 30 spatial layers with more than 108 sub-layers of 5- to
50-year data at 1:50,000 scale. Report generation is basin-wise.

The web-based system (www.india-wris.nrsc.gov.in) has tools to assist users in system navigation,
dataset display, and system sharing, including analytical tools.




                                           SESSION SUMMARY

      The special learning session updated participants on:

      Ø Use of satellite radar altimetry for water level monitoring, particularly for large water bodies in
         areas where gauge deployment is prohibitive, or in network-thin areas
      Ø Preliminary use of altimetric observations in the Ganges and Brahmaputra basins
      Ø Use of Advanced Microwave Scanning Radiometer – Earth Observing System (AMSR-E) in
         monitoring river stage and flow, particularly in limited-gauged basins. Although accuracy is
         lesser than altimetry products, the method has more temporal coverage
      Ø River level gauge data quality control
      Ø Rating curves that are developed by linking downstream river discharge with upstream river
         stage. Parameters in the equation are site-specific. Rating curves could be developed for each
         tributary, but the exercise is resource intensive. The technique is helpful in rivers with no
         downstream measurement station.
      Ø WRF-Hydro, a large-scale open real-time flood forecasting system that combines predictions
         of water cycle components and streamflow
      Ø Use of up to 10-day ensemble weather forecasts to extend lead time in flood forecast products
      Ø Tool to assist in selecting sites for rain gauge installation
      Ø Flood early warning and preparedness in Japan
      Ø Real-time decision support and flood forecasting system for the Satluj and Beas catchments in
         India
      Ø Integrated flood risk assessment that uses weightage for analysis of flood contributing factors
         for determining flood risk index
      Ø Availability of water resources datasets from India through the web-based Water Resources
         Information System (WRIS)

      Highlights of the discussion include:
      Ø Use of Jason-2 data in flood forecasting in Bangladesh in 2014-2015 gave good forecast of
         flood trend, but not prediction of flood peak timing
      Ø ALTICA and Jason-2 products could complement each other




                                                       37
EXPOSURE VISITS

Exposure visits to the Thai Meteorological Department (TMD) and Royal Irrigation Department
(RID) were organized to enable participants to learn about these institutions’ activities relating to
flood forecasting and warning.

Thai Meteorological Department

TMD, under the Ministry of Information and Communication Technology, is the government agency
in Thailand that is mandated to monitor and provide weather and climate information. The visit to
TMD exposed participants to:

      o TMD administrative and operational structure
      o Vast network of observation and monitoring stations that include 13 upper air observation
        stations, 23 radars, 75 surface stations, 91 automatic weather stations, 31 agromet stations,
        16 hydromet stations, more than 1,100 telemetered rain gages, and 2 satellites for data
        communication
      o Variety of NWP models: global (100 km resolution, 19 vertical levels, 15 minute time step,
        168 hour forecast), South East Asia model (50 km resolution, 19 vertical levels, 15 minute
        time step, 72 hour forecast), Thailand model (17 km resolution, 31 vertical levels and 5
        minutes time step, 36 hour forecast), and Bangkok model (under development phase, 5 km
        resolution, 31 vertical levels with 2 minute time step).
      o Various forecast products and lead times. Forecasts are issued every day and disseminated
        to the central government, which alerts the provinces and further disseminate to concerned
        authorities.

Royal Irrigation Department

RID, under the Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives, is the government agency in Thailand
mandated for water resource development and management, and prevention, mitigation, and
management of water-related hazards. Workshop participants were welcomed by Kanchadin
Srapratoom, Director of Foreign Projects Management and International Affairs Division.

The visit to RID exposed participants to:

      o RID’s history, mandate, and priorities. Among RID’s focus areas is public participation in
        prevention and mitigation of water-related hazards. The concept of integrated water
        resource management (IWRM) is well established and followed in RID.
      o RID’s water level monitoring system. More than 200 stations located in 25 basins
        constantly monitor water levels, with data provided to headquarters every 15 minutes. A
        database stores observation data.
      o Techniques used in water level measurement, telemetry, and forecasting
      o 7-day flood forecasting system, using a rainfall-runoff inundation model from JICA, made
        through regional and provincial offices
      o Warnings are issued to the public when flood risk is determined




                                                 38
Figure 5.1 Visits to TMD (top photos) and RID (bottom photos)




                             39
EXPLORING POSSIBILITIES FOR A REGIONAL PROGRAM ON END-TO-END
FLOOD FORECASTING AND WARNING


Lolita Bildan, RIMES, facilitated the preparation of a program framework to address capacity gaps
and needs on flood forecasting and warning, articulated during the workshop.

Capacity gaps and needs identified during the country presentations were collated, and verified by
presenting these to participants on the second day of the workshop. Integrating inputs and feedback
from the technical sessions, a draft program framework was prepared and presented to workshop
participants on the last day of the workshop, for discussion, further inputs, and adoption. The final
framework is provided hereunder.

     Regional Program on End-to-End Flood Forecasting and Warning in South Asian Region

 Program Development Objective: Reduction in loss of lives and economic losses from flash floods and riverine floods in
 the Ganges-Brahmaputra-Meghna basin

 Intermediate Result 1:                       Intermediate Result 2:                    Intermediate Result 3:
 Improved user responses in Nepal,            Improved user responses in India and      Improved regional coordination,
 Bhutan, India, and Bangladesh to flash       Bangladesh to riverine flood warnings     and information and data sharing
 flood warnings                                                                         between National Hydrological
                                                                                        Services (NHSs) of Nepal, Bhutan,
                                                                                        India, and Bangladesh
 Activities:

 1.1 Landscaping of institutions involved     2.1. Landscaping of institutions          3.1 Establishment of portal for
     in the generation and application of          involved in the generation and           trans-boundary data and
     flash flood forecasts and warnings            application of riverine flood            forecast products
      − Collect data on relevant                   forecasts and warnings
          institutional mandates, policies,         − Collect data on relevant          3.2 Regional NMS-NHS forum
          plans, programs, activities, and             institutional mandates,              − Share forecast products,
          capacities                                   policies, plans, programs,              experiences and strengths;
      − Take stock of current use of                   activities, and capacities              discuss application issues;
          flash flood forecast and warning          − Take stock of current use of             and identify areas for
          information                                  riverine flood forecast and             further development.
      − Analyze user institutions’                     warning information                  − Technical sessions for
          present planning and decision-            − Analyze user institutions’               NHS operational personnel
          making processes to determine                present planning and decision-          with aim of improving
          potential use of flash flood                 making processes to                     forecast and warning
          forecast and warning                         determine potential use of              system to meet user needs.
          information                                  riverine flood forecast and             This requires participation
      − Identify user requirements for                 warning information                     of and expert inputs from
          flash flood forecast and warning          − Identify user requirements for           academic and research
          information, including preferred             riverine flood forecast and             institutions.
          dissemination systems, etc., and             warning information,
          explore user participation in                including user-relevant          3.3 Collaborative research on areas
          rainfall monitoring                          thresholds, preferred                prioritized from user need
      − Note flash flood information                   dissemination systems, etc.,         assessments.
          products and services available              and explore user participation
          from NHSs and other sources                  in water level monitoring
      − Ascertain how user institutions             − Note riverine flood
          access these products and                    information products and
          services, and assess gaps                    services available from NHSs
      − Evaluate user capacity to make                 and other sources
          use of these products and                 − Ascertain how user
          services in planning and                     institutions access these
          decision-making                              products and services, and
      − Analyze NHS capacity,                          assess gaps
          including capacity gaps, to meet          − Evaluate user capacity to
          user requirements                            make use of these products
      − Map relevant ongoing related                   and services in planning and
          programs and activities by                   decision-making



                                                             40
        external actors                           − Analyze NHS capacity,
                                                    including capacity gaps, to
Note: This activity could be undertaken             meet user requirements
at proposal preparation stage, for                − Map relevant ongoing related
outcomes to guide final program design.             programs and activities by
                                                    external actors
Program may include the following
activities:                                  Note: This activity could be
                                             undertaken at proposal preparation
1.2 Development of flash flood               stage, for outcomes to guide final
    forecasting and early warning            program design.
    system (Nepal, Bhutan, India)
     − Capacity building on WRF for          Program may include the following
        generating hourly forecasts          activities:
         • Modernization of computing
            facilities, including internet   2.2. Development of riverine flood
         • Data assimilation for                  forecasting and early warning
            improving forecast accuracy           system, with lead times that meet
         • Use of remotely sensed                 user requirements (India and
            products for difficult-to-            Bangladesh)
            reach areas                            − Revise water level thresholds
         • WRF calibration, testing,                   • Collect historical
            and model run for                             inundation data
            experimental operation                     • Establish thresholds,
                                                          integrating user
     − Identification of rainfall                         requirements
       thresholds
        • Collection of historical                − Develop basin-based riverine
           rainfall and impact data                 flood forecast model
        • Analysis of rainfall intensity             • Model design and
           and duration that led to flash               development, integrating
           floods                                       NWP outputs and user
        • Establishment of thresholds                   needs
                                                     • Model testing, calibration,
     − Development of flash flood                       validation, refinement,
       forecast model                                   and experimental
        • Model design and                              operation
           development, integrating
           WRF outputs and thresholds             − Development of decision
        • Model testing, calibration,               support system for impact
           validation, refinement, and              forecasting and advisory
           experimental operation                   generation and dissemination
                                                     • Data collection
     − Development of decision support               • DSS design and
       system for impact forecasting                    development, integrating
       and advisory generation and                      flash flood forecast, DEM,
       dissemination                                    exposure and vulnerability
        • Data collection                               data, and user
        • DSS design and                                requirements
           development, integrating                  • DSS testing, refinement,
           flash flood forecast, DEM,                   and experimental
           exposure and vulnerability                   operation
           data, and user requirements
        • DSS testing, refinement, and            − Enhancement of
           experimental operation                   dissemination infrastructure
                                                  − NHS training and technology
     − Enhancement of dissemination                 transfer
       infrastructure
     − NHS training and technology           2.3. Engagement with users for risk
       transfer                                   awareness and communication to
                                                  guide planning and decision-
1.3 Engagement with users for risk                making
    awareness and communication to                 − National flood risk
    guide response decisions                          management forum, linked to
     − National flood risk management                 Monsoon/ Seasonal Forums
        forum, linked to Monsoon/                  − Local level NHS-user



                                                            41
       Seasonal Forums                              dialogues
     − Local level NHS-user dialogues             − Capacity building of users on
     − Capacity building of users on                riverine flood forecast
       flash flood forecast application             application
     − Capacity building on                       − Capacity building in
       community-based rainfall                     community-based water level
       monitoring                                   monitoring
     − Evaluation of national and local           − Evaluation of national and
       level user responses to flash                local level user responses to
       flood warnings                               flood warnings

1.4 Establishment of telemetered             2.4. Integration of riverine flood
    observing and monitoring systems in           forecasting and decision support
    support of flash flood warning                systems into NHS operations
     − Site identification and selection
     − Equipment acquisition
     − Station installation, testing,
        calibration
     − Integration into national network
     − Capacity building on system
        operation and maintenance

1.5 Integration of flash flood forecasting
    and decision support systems into
    NHS operations

Implementation considerations

 o Institutions include NHS, disaster        o Institutions include NHS, disaster      o Data portal to provide data
   management, agriculture,                    management, agriculture, water            service
   infrastructure                              resources, infrastructure               o Make use of Unidata free
 o Identification and selection of pilot     o Identification and selection of pilot     software and training from
   sites for forecast system                   sites for forecast system                 UCAR
   development and local level user            development and local level user        o Offers by Nepal, Bhutan, and
   engagement                                  engagement                                India to share upstream water
 o Build on ongoing initiatives toward       o Availability of historical inundation     level, glacial lakes, and forecast
   optimum network density                     data                                      (Bhutan) data
   requirement                               o Thresholds at different spatial and     o Offers by Nepal and Bhutan to
 o Selection of appropriate equipment          temporal scales (as threshold could       share experience on data
 o DEM requirement for impact                  differ with season)                       management
   forecasting                               o Common approach and                     o Regional NHS forum shall be a
                                               methodology sought for basin-based        regional cooperation mechanism
                                               flood forecasting and warning             in the like of WMO/ESCAP
                                             o Offer by Bangladesh to share its          Panel on Tropical Cyclone,
                                               experience in developing longer-          promoting integrated approach
                                               lead flood forecasts                      and application of new/ emerging
                                             o DEM requirement for impact                technologies
                                               forecasting                             o Offer by India to use capacity
                                                                                         available from National Water
                                                                                         Academy

Implementation arrangement:
 o Regional technical working group, consisting of NMS, NHS, DRM, and other key user sector (e.g. agriculture, water
    resources)




                                                            42
CONCLUSION AND WAY FORWARD


Participants adopted the regional program to forward collaboration on transboundary flood
forecasting and early warning in the region. Implementation shall adopt the following distinct, but
integrated approaches:

      o Integration of flash flood and riverine flood concerns at the basin level, noting that most
        flash flood subsystems contribute to basin-scale floods
      o Building of flood early warning capacities, using emerging new-generation flood forecasting
        technologies and incorporating these into flood risk information user systems
      o Use of existing regional mechanisms for capacity building and regional sharing of
        information/knowledge

Sanjay Srivastava, ESCAP, shared that ESCAP has been mandated in May 2015 by its Member
Countries, including those from the South Asian region, through Resolution 71/12, to strengthen
regional cooperation for flood forecasting in transboundary river basins. In this regard, ESCAP shall
carry forward this World Bank-supported initiative by establishing a Panel on Transboundary Flood
Management for South Asian Region, with RIMES serving as technical secretariat. ESCAP proposes
to include an intergovernmental Panel on Transboundary Flood Management that includes key
stakeholders, namely hydrologists, meteorologists, and disaster management authorities from riparian
countries of common river basins.

The regional program, as adopted in the workshop, shall be implemented through ESCAP and RIMES
regional cooperation mechanism.




                                                 43
                                        ANNEX 1

              REGIONAL FLOOD EARLY WARNING SYSTEM WORKSHOP
                          23-27 November 2015, Bangkok

                                        AGENDA
                                    ver. 23 November 2015

23 November 2015   Monday
09.00-09.30        Opening Session
                      o Welcome remarks
                              A.R. Subbiah, Director, RIMES
                      o Opening remarks
                              Dr. Satya Priya, World Bank
                      o Remarks
                              Dr. Sanjay Srivastava, ESCAP
                      o Introduction of participants and resource persons
                      o Workshop rationale, objectives and structure
                              Lolita Bildan, Chief of Program Management, RIMES

09.30-11.00        1. Flood Forecasting and Warning Systems in SAR Countries
                       o Bangladesh
                               Flood Forecasting and Warning Centre, Bangladesh Water
                               Development Board
                       o Bhutan
                               Department of Hydro Met Services

11.10-11.30        Group Photo and Tea Break

11.30-13.00        Flood Forecasting and Warning Systems in SAR Countries (continued)
                       o India
                               Central Water Commission
                       o Nepal
                               Department of Hydrology and Meteorology

13.00-14.00        Lunch Break

14.00-14.30        Features of an End-to-End Flood Forecasting and Warning System
                          Dr. Dilip Kumar Gautam, Team Leader –Hydrology, RIMES

14.30-15.00        Observation, Monitoring and Forecasting
                      o Numerical Weather Prediction for Flood Forecasting
                              Itesh Dash, Team Leader –Systems Research and Development,
                              RIMES

15.00-15.15        Tea Break

15.15-17.15        Data Requirements for Hydrological Modeling
                      o Exercise: Preparation of Digital Elevation Models using ArcGIS
                              Dr. Anshul Agarwal, Hydrologist, RIMES
                              Dr. Dilip Kumar Gautam, Team Leader –Hydrology, RIMES

17.15-17.30        Wrap-Up and End of Day 1
                       Dr. Dilip Kumar Gautam, Team Leader-Hydrology, RIMES



                                             44
24 November 2015   Tuesday
09.00-09.45        Flood Forecasting and Warning in SAR: Ongoing Efforts
                       o Flood forecasting for the Ganges Basin
                              ICIMOD

09.45-10.30            o   The South Asia Water Initiative
                               World Bank

10.30-11.00        Tea Break

11.00-11.30            o   Flood forecasting and warning initiatives in Nepal and Myanmar
                               Dr. Anshul Agarwal, Hydrologist, RIMES

11.30-12.00        Hydrological Modeling
                      o Introduction
                              Dr. Dilip Kumar Gautam, Team Leader –Hydrology, RIMES

12.00-12.30        Discussion

12.30-13.30        Lunch Break

13.30-15.30        Exploring possibilities for a regional program on end-to-end flood
                   forecasting and warning
                        o Summary of capacity needs from country presentations
                                Lolita Bildan, Chief of Program Management, RIMES

                       o   Discussion
                              • Identification of capacity building needs that could be
                                  addressed through a regional program
                              • Implementation considerations

15.30-16.00        Tea Break and End of Day 2




25 November 2015   Wednesday
09.00-10.30        Special Session: Sources of Hydrologic Predictability and Useful Datasets
                      Charon Birkett
                      Thomas Hopson
                      UCAR

10.30-10.45        Tea Break

10.45-12.15        Special Session: Sources of Hydrologic Predictability and Useful Datasets
                   (continued)
                      Charon Birkett
                      Thomas Hopson
                      UCAR

12.15-13.00        Special Session: India Case Study: Real time reservoir operations and flood
                   forecasting system for Bhakra Beas Management Board
                       Dr. Anish Kumar, Consultant, World Bank


                                             45
13.00-14.00        Lunch Break

14.00-14.30        Special Session: Flood and Water Prediction – Japan
                      Kazumitsu Muraoka, JICA Expert, Bangladesh

14.30-15.15        Warning Preparation
                       o Decision Support Systems
                             Dr. Bhogendra Mishra, Application Development Specialist,
                             RIMES
                             Itesh Dash, Team Leader –Systems Research and Development

15.15-15.30        Tea Break

15.30-16.15        Warning Preparation
                        o Exposure, vulnerability, and risk assessment
                                AIT
                        o Exercise: Determination of local threshold levels
                                AIT
16.15-16.30        Orientation on Exposure Visits, Wrap-Up and End of Day 3
                        Dr. Anshul Agarwal, Hydrologist, RIMES




26 November 2015   Thursday
09.00-12.00        4. Exposure Visits
                        Dr. Anshul Agarwal, Hydrologist, RIMES
                        Dusadee Moya, Human Resource and Administration Officer, RIMES
                             o Royal Irrigation Department

12.00-13.30        Lunch Break

13.30-15.00        4. Exposure Visits – continued
                        Dr. Anshul Agarwal, Hydrologist, RIMES
                        Dusadee Moya, Human Resource and Administration Officer, RIMES
                             o Thailand Meteorological Department

15.00-15.15        Debriefing, Wrap-Up and End of Day 4
                       Dr. Anshul Agarwal, Hydrologist, RIMES

15.15              Bangkok visit




                                            46
27 November 2015   Friday
09.00-09.45        Dissemination and Communication
                         Dr. Govindarajalu Srinivasan, Chief Scientist, Climate Applications,
                         RIMES
                         Raihanul Haque Khan, Hydrological Modeler, RIMES
                            o ICT technologies
                            o Local dissemination systems
                            o Communicating risks

09.45-10.30        Preparedness and Response Systems
                        Raihanul Haque Khan, Hydrological Modeler, RIMES
                        Ruby Rose Policarpio, Institutional Development Specialist, RIMES
                            o Importance of lead time and capacity building
                            o Table-top exercise

10.30-11.00        Tea Break

11.00-11.45        Feedback System
                        Ruby Rose Policarpio, Institutional Development Specialist, RIMES
                        Raihanul Haque Khan, Hydrological Modeler, RIMES
                            o Community feedback
                            o Monsoon Forum

11.45-12.30        2.8 Capacity Building for End-to-End Long-Lead Flood Forecasting and
                      Warning – Bangladesh Experience
                        o Program Features
                                Raihanul Haque Khan, Hydrological Modeler, RIMES
                        o Operationalization
                                FFWC
                        o Local level feedback
                                Raihanul Haque Khan, Hydrological Modeler, RIMES
                        o Gaps and challenges
                                FFWC
                                Raihanul Haque Khan, Hydrological Modeler, RIMES

12.30-13.30        Lunch Break

13.30-14.00        5. End-to-End Basin-Based Long-Lead Flood Forecasting and Warning System
                     in the South Asian Region
                       o Rationale, requirements, and proposed framework
                                Lolita Bildan, Chief of Program Management, RIMES
                       o Regional program proposal
                                SAR Country Representative

14.00-15.00        6. Action Planning and Way Forward
                          World Bank
                          A.R. Subbiah, Director, RIMES

15.00-15.15        Tea Break




                                            47
15.15-16.00   Closing Session
                 o Vote of Thanks
                          A.R. Subbiah, Director, RIMES
                 o Remarks
                          SAR Country Participant
                 o Closing Remarks
                          World Bank




                                      48
                                             ANNEX 2
                                         PARTICIPANT LIST


 No.                    Name                                             Address
Bangladesh
   1. Md. Abdul Latif Miah                    Bangladesh Water Development Board
         Additional Director General (C.C.)   WAPDA Bhaban (2nd Floor)
         Eastern Region, BWDB, Dhaka          Motijheel Commercial Area
                                              Dhaka, Bangladesh
                                              Tel: +8802 955 2194, +8802 956 4665, Fax: +8802 9564763
                                              Email: dg.bwdb@gov.bd

    2.   Md. Amirul Hossain                   Bangladesh Water Development Board
         Executive Engineer                   Flood Forecasting and Warning Centre
         Flood Forecasting and Warning        WAPDA Bhaban (2nd Floor), Motijheel Commercial Area
         Centre, BWDB, Dhaka                  Dhaka, Bangladesh
                                              Tel: +8802 955 2194, +8802 956 4665, Fax: +8802 9564763
                                              Email: amirulbd63@yahoo.com

Bhutan
   3.    Mr. Karma Tsering                    Department of Hydro Met Services
         Director                             Royal Government of Bhutan
                                              Thimphu, Bhutan
                                              Tel: +975 2328280 Fax: +975 232 4834
                                              Email: directordhms@moea.gov.bt

    4.   Mr. Karma Dupchu                     Department of Hydro Met Services
         Chief, Hydrology Division            Royal Government of Bhutan
                                              Thimphu, Bhutan
                                              Tel: +975 2328280 Fax: +975 232 4834
                                              Email: directordhms@moea.gov.bt

India
    5.   Mr. Jai Prakash Bansal               Department of U.P. Irrigation & Water Resource
         Chief Engineer (I & P)               Ministry of Irrigation & Water Resource
         Flood Office of E in C               Government of Uttar Pradesh, India
                                              Sadar-Cantt Road, Lucknow, India
                                              Tel: +91-7839215488 Fax: +91_0522_2623513
                                              Email: ceinpflood@gmail.com

    6.   Mr. Bhupendera Sharma                Department of U.P. Irrigation & Water Resource
         Chief Engineer                       Ministry of Irrigation & Water Resource
                                              Government of Uttar Pradesh, India
                                              Gandak, Gorakhpur
                                              Tel: +91-09450134050/ 09839425495 Fax: +91-0522-2623513
                                              Email: bupendera_shrma@yahoo.com; cegandakidupgr-
                                              up@nic.in

    7.   Mr. Indu Bhushan Kumar               Water Resources Department (WRD)
         Chief Engineer                       Ministry of Water Resources
         Planning and Monitoring              Government of Bihar
                                              Sinchai Bhawan, Patna, Bihar 800015 India
                                              Mobile: 9473197006 Tel: +916122217258 Fax: +916122217649
                                              Email: pmc1wrdbihar@gmail.com

    8.    Mr. Nikhil Kumar                    Water Resources Department (WRD)
         Assistant Director                   Ministry of Water Resources
         Flood Management Improvement         Government of Bihar



                                                  49
No.                     Name                                          Address
       Support Centre                      WRD, 2nd Floor, Jal Sansadhan Bhawan,
                                           Anisabad, Patna, Bihar 800002 India
                                           Mobile: 9955606478 Tel: +916122254802 Fax: +916122256999
                                           Email: enikhilkumar@gmail.com

  9.   Mr. Kunal                           Water Resources Department (WRD)
       Assistant Director                  Ministry of Water Resources
       Flood Management Improvement        Government of Bihar
       Support Centre                      WRD, 2nd Floor, Jal Sansadhan Bhawan,
                                           Anisabad, Patna, Bihar 800002 India
                                           Mobile: 9199675821 Tel: +916122254802 Fax: +916122256999
                                           Email: mku nal.real@gmail.com

  10. Mr. Ashok Gupta                      National Hydrology Project
      Director                             Ministry of Water Resources,
                                           River Development& Ganga Rejuvenation
                                           Government of India
                                           Shram Shakti Bhavan, Rafi Marg, Sansad Marg Area,
                                           New Delhi -110001
                                           Tel: +9124363417 Mob:+919810882366 Fax: +91 24363417
                                           Email: ashok.gupta63@nic.in

  11. Mr. Mahendra Singh Varma             Department of Flood Management (FM) Wing.
                                           Ministry of Water Resources,
                                           River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation
                                           Government of India
                                           Room No. 802, Block No. 11, 8th Floor, Block No.11, C.G.O.
                                           Complex, Lodi Road, New Delhi - 110003
                                           Tel: +91 11 24362160 Fax: +91 11 24362780
                                           Email:sjcer1-mowr@nic.in, singh2099@yahoo.com

  12. Mr. Rajesh Kumar                     Central Water Commission
      Director, FM-I                       Room No. 901(S), Sewa Bhawan, R.K Puram,
                                           New Delhi, India-110066
                                           Tel: +9126100457 Mob:+919650550015 Fax: +9126100457
                                           Email: rajeshcwc@gmail.com, fcdnorth@nic.in

  13. Mr. Ram Jeet Verma                   Central Water Commission
      Director, P&D                        West Block-II, Ground Floor, Wing-7, R.K Puram,
                                           New Delhi, India-110066
                                           Tel: +9126102186 Mob:+917827227275 Fax: +9126102186
                                           Email: ramjeetvermacwc@gmail.com
                                           ramjeetverma-cwc@nic.in, pnddte-cwc@nic.in

  14. Mr. Bhaskar Das                      Water Resources Department, Assam
      AEE                                  Mob:09435041754
                                           Email: ramjeetvermacwc@gmail.com
                                           ramjeetverma-cwc@nic.in, pnddte-cwc@nic.in


  15. Mr. Raj Kapoor                       DVC Study Cell
      Executive Engineer                   Irrigation & Waterways Directorate
      Irrigation & Waterways Department,   Government of West Bengal
      West Bengal                          7th Floor, Jalsampad Bhavan, Salt Lake, Kolkata – 700091
                                           Tel.: 033-23376816/23346098 Mobile: 9433141749
                                           Fax: 23346098
                                           Email: rama312002@gmail.com; no-egov@wbiwb.gov.in




                                               50
 No.                 Name                                                Address
Nepal
   16. Mr. Gautam Rajkarnikar                 Department of Hydrology and Meteorology
                                              Ministry of Environment, Science and Technology
                                              Box No. 406, Babar Mahal
                                              Kathmandu, Nepal
                                              Tel: +977 1 424 8976, 426 2411, 425 6193 Fax: +977 1425 4890
                                              Email:
   17. Mr. Rajendra Sharma                    Department of Hydrology and Meteorology
       Chief, Floor Forecasting Section       Ministry of Environment, Science and Technology
                                              Box No. 406, Babar Mahal
                                              Kathmandu, Nepal
                                              Tel: +977 1 424 8976, 426 2411, 425 6193 Fax: +977 1425 4890
                                              Email: rajendra_706@yahoo.com
Regional/ International Organizations
    18. Md. Shahiar Wahid, Coordinator        International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development
         Koshi Basin Programme                (ICIMOD)
                                              G.P.O. Box 3226, Khumaltar
                                              Kathmandu, Nepal
                                              Tel: +977 1 5003222 (ext. 265); +977 9851130851
                                              EM: swahid@icimod.org, swahid@gmail.com
                                              Skype: shahriar_wahid

   19. Dr. Thomas Hopson                      Research Applications Laboratory
                                              Foothills Lab 2
                                              National Center for Atmospheric Research
                                              P.O. Box 3000
                                              Boulder, Colorado 80307-3000
                                              Tel: 303-497-2706 Fax: 303-497-8401
                                              Email: hopson@ucar.edu
                                              Web: https://staff.ucar.edu/users/hopson

   20. Daniel Broman                          Research Applications Laboratory
                                              Foothills Lab 2
                                              National Center for Atmospheric Research
                                              P.O. Box 3000
                                              Boulder, Colorado 80307-3000

   21. Prof. Mukand Singh Babel               Asian Institute of Technology (AIT)
       Professor and Coordinator              P. O. Box 4 Klong Luang, Pathumthani 12120 Thailand
       Water Engineering and Management       Tel: (66-2)-524 5790     Fax: (66-2)-524 6425
       Director, CoE for Sustainable          E-mail: msbabel@ait.asia
       Development in the Context of          Home Page: http://www.ait.asia
       Climate Change (SDCC)

   22. Dr. Kazumitsu Muraoka                  Bangladesh Water Development Board (BWDB)
       Integrated Water Resource              WAPDA Building 6th Floor, Motijheel C/A, Dhaka-1000
       Management, Advisor to BWDB            Mobile: +880-1713-043172 Fax: +880-2-8826432
                                              E-mail: kazumitsu.muraoka@gmail.com

   23. Dr. Sanjay Srivastava                  United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and
       Chief, Disaster Risk Reduction         the Pacific (ESCAP)
                                              Bangkok, Thailand
                                              Email: srivastavas@un.org

   24. Mr. Alf Ivar Blikberg                  United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and
       Programme Officer                      the Pacific (ESCAP)
       Trust Fund for Tsunami, Disaster and   Bangkok, Thailand
       Climate Preparedness                   Tel.: +66 (0)2 288 2700 Fax: +66 (0)2 288 3012
                                              Email: blikberg@un.org


                                                  51
 No.                 Name                                                 Address
World Bank
   25. Mr. Deepak Singh                       Email: dsingh2@worldbank.org

   26. Ms. Anju Gaur                          Email: agaur@worldbank.org

   27. Dr. Satya Priya                        Email: spriya1@worldbank.org

   28. Mr. Chabungbam Rajagopal Singh         Email: csingh5@worldbank.org / rschabungbam@gmail.com

   29. Mr. Anish Kumar                        Email: bansalanish77@gmail.com

   30. Mr. Jai Mansukhani                     Email: jmansukhani@worldbank.org

RIMES                                         Regional Integrated Multi-hazard Early Warning System for
                                              Africa and Asia (RIMES)
                                              1st Floor, Outreach Building, Asian Institute of Technology (AIT)
                                              Campus, 58 Moo 9, Paholyothin Road, Klong Nung
                                              (PO Box 4), Klong Luang, Pathumthani 12120 Thailand
                                              Tel: +662 516 5900 to 01 Fax: +662 516 5902

   31. Mr. Arjunapermal Subbiah               Email: subbiah@rimes.int
       Director

   32. Dr. Dilip Kumar Gautam                 Email: dilip.gautam@rimes.int
       Team Leader, Hydrology

   33. Dr. Anshul Agarwal                     Email: anshul@rimes.int
       Hydrologist

   34. Raihanul Haque Khan                    Mob: +8801681951853, +8801715050906
       Hydrological Modeler                   E-mail: raihanul@rimes.int, raihan.buet.07@gmail.com
                                              Skype: raihanul.haque.khan

   35. Dr. Govindarajalu Srinivasan           Email: srini@rimes.int
       Chief Climate Scientist

   36. Itesh Dash                             Email: itesh@rimes.int
       Team Leader
       Systems Research and Development

   37. Ruby Rose Policarpio                   Email: ruby@rimes.int
       Institutional Development Specialist

   38. Lolita Bildan                          Email: lolita@rimes.int
       Chief, Program Management

   39. Dusadee Moya                           Email: dusadee@rimes.int
       Human Resource and Administration
       Officer




                                                  52
Sou th As ia Wa ter Ini ti ative
The World Bank
Public Information Center, Hindustan Times Building
18-20 Kasturba Gandhi Marg, New Delhi 110 001
(e) sawiteam@worldbank.org
(w) www.southasiawaterinitiative.org




                                                      53
