SAWI BLOGS
 by Kunzang, Senior Legal Officer
 National Environment Commission
 kunzang@nec.gov.bt




                                    T
                                            he weeklong Water Diplomacy Workshop that I
                                            attended earlier this year was an enriching learning
                                            experience. It combined the science of water with
                                    the negotiation instruction methodologies developed
                                    by the Program on Negotiation at Harvard Law School.
                                    The workshop was a good mix of interactive lectures,
                                    problem solving method instructions, and role-play
                                    simulations that provided us participants the opportunity
                                    to learn new strategies, ideas and methods, as well as to
                                    share our experiences, especially through role-plays.
                                       During the first three days of the workshop at the
                                    Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), workshop
                                    instructors Prof. Lawrence and Prof. Islam admirably
                                    fulfilled the aims of the workshop. While Prof. Islam
                                    succinctly gave us relevant information on the science
                                    of water, Prof. Lawrence linked it to the negotiation
                                    instruction methodologies.
                                       The subject of water diplomacy framework, which
                                    constituted a major part of the workshop, focused
                                    on three primary issues: acknowledging the key
                                    assumptions about water and water networks;
                                    characterizing the water networks properly through a
                                    theoretical understanding; and managing the water
                                    networks properly in practice.


                                    The author presenting a debriefing on behalf of the group.




 Water Diplomacy
 Workshop
MIT and Harvard Law School,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA
June 22-26, 2015
 What I Learned
                                                                    I discovered that the concept of water
                                                                    diplomacy framework is complex in
                                                                    theory and application. The workshop
                                                                    also brought home to me the difference
                                                                    between the water diplomacy framework
                                                                    and Integrated Water Resources
                                                                    Management (IWRM) as well as the need
                                                                    for a science and policy interface in water
                                                                    resources management. To bring relevant
                                                                    stakeholders on board and aid informed
                                                                    decision making processes, joint fact-
                                                                    finding is critical to the water diplomacy
                                                                    framework. I found the role-plays extremely
                                                                    informative and thought-provoking. They
                                                                    taught me that there is a need for strong
                                                                    cooperation between national and local
                                                                    governments; that least-priority areas can
                                                                    be used prudently to achieve prioritized
                                                                    positions; negotiations that emphasize
                                                                    value-creation can still be successful and
                                                                    create a win-win situation and must include
                                                                    mediation for informal problem solving.

                                                                    Participants engaged in role play duing the
                                                                    workshop.


 “Knowledge of negotiation strategies will come handy during bilateral
 water meetings/discussions, regional forums and international
 negotiations. The dispute settlement mechanisms can be used to
 address current water issues at the local government levels.”


How Will I Use These Lessons?
l	   My experiences from the workshop will help me provide informed legal advice to the Environment
     Services Division, Climate Change Division and Water Resources Management Division.
l	   My knowledge of negotiation strategies will come handy during bilateral water meetings/discussions,
     regional forums and international negotiations. The dispute settlement mechanisms can be used to
     address current water issues at the local government levels.
l	   The workshop materials – including my experiences from the workshop – can be shared with my
     colleagues to acquaint them with the water diplomacy framework.
l	   I plan to conduct training on the water diplomacy framework, not only within office but also for the
     relevant implementing agencies.
l	   The Legal Services of the National Environment Commission Secretariat carries out sensitization and
     outreach programs on environmental laws at local, regional and national levels; we can include the
     water diplomacy framework components in these programs.
