Water Resour Manage
DOI 10.1007/s11269-014-0537-y




Water Resources Management in the Ganges Basin:
A Comparison of Three Strategies for Conjunctive Use
of Groundwater and Surface Water

Mahfuzur R. Khan & Clifford I. Voss & Winston Yu &
Holly A. Michael



Received: 3 April 2013 / Accepted: 26 January 2014
# Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht (outside the USA) 2014



Abstract The most difficult water resources management challenge in the Ganges Basin is the
imbalance between water demand and seasonal availability. More than 80 % of the annual
flow in the Ganges River occurs during the 4-month monsoon, resulting in widespread
flooding. During the rest of the year, irrigation, navigation, and ecosystems suffer because
of water scarcity. Storage of monsoonal flow for utilization during the dry season is one
approach to mitigating these problems. Three conjunctive use management strategies involv-
ing subsurface water storage are evaluated in this study: Ganges Water Machine (GWM),
Pumping Along Canals (PAC), and Distributed Pumping and Recharge (DPR). Numerical
models are used to determine the efficacy of these strategies. Results for the Indian State of
Uttar Pradesh (UP) indicate that these strategies create seasonal subsurface storage from 6 to
37 % of the yearly average monsoonal flow in the Ganges exiting UP over the considered
range of conditions. This has clear implications for flood reduction, and each strategy has the
potential to provide irrigation water and to reduce soil waterlogging. However, GWM and
PAC require significant public investment in infrastructure and management, as well as major
shifts in existing water use practices; these also involve spatially-concentrated pumping, which


Electronic supplementary material The online version of this article (doi:10.1007/s11269-014-0537-y)
contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
M. R. Khan : H. A. Michael (*)
Department of Geological Sciences, University of Delaware, 255 Academy Street, Newark, DE 19716, USA
e-mail: hmichael@udel.edu
M. R. Khan
e-mail: mahfuz@udel.edu

C. I. Voss
United States Geological Survey, 345 Middlefield Road, MS 496, Menlo Park, CA 94025, USA
e-mail: cvoss@usgs.gov

W. Yu
The World Bank, 1818H Street, NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA
e-mail: wyu@worldbank.org

H. A. Michael
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of Delaware, Newark, DE, USA
                                                                                  M.R. Khan et al.


may induce land subsidence. DPR also requires investment and management, but the distrib-
uted pumping is less costly and can be more easily implemented via adaptation of existing
water use practices in the basin.

Keywords Ganges Basin . Seasonality . Artificial recharge . Flood reduction . Conjunctive use


1 Introduction

Synchronization of seasonal water availability with demands is a water resources management
challenge in many agricultural river basins (e.g. Camnasio and Becciu 2011; Pavelic et al.
2012). Excess wet season river flow causes flooding, while low flows are often inadequate for
dry season water supply. This results in conflicts between upstream and downstream users in
transboundary rivers (e.g. Uitto and Duda 2002; UNDP 2006). Under a changing climate,
seasonal extremes (Kundzewicz et al. 2010) and supply–demand imbalance (Immerzeel et al.
2010) are likely to increase. One approach to managing water resources in such basins is
upstream storage of excess wet-season river flow for use during dry season. This requires
conjunctive-use management strategies (Coe 1990). Effective conjunctive use of surface water
and groundwater results in a total annual system yield that exceeds the sum of the yields of the
separate components (Bredehoeft and Young 1983).
    Traditionally, dams and reservoirs are used for surface water storage, but these are
costly, are prone to evaporative loss, and have adverse environmental effects (e.g.
Baxter 1977; Gupta 1992). In contrast, aquifers can act as efficient water reservoirs
with minimum evaporative loss and no surface area for inundation (Bouwer 2000).
Artificial recharge technologies are often effective means of using subsurface reser-
voirs for water storage (see Bouwer 2002 for a review).
    This study reexamines the idea of pumping-induced subsurface storage of monsoonal river
flow along the Ganges River and its tributaries, originally proposed by Revelle and
Lakshminarayana (1975) as the ‘Ganges Water Machine’ (GWM). Two additional conjunctive
use strategies are also explored. The potential effectiveness of each strategy and the primary
factors affecting their functioning are assessed with numerical modeling. The impli-
cations for irrigation water supply, flood management, reduction of waterlogging, and
maintenance of downstream dry season flow are considered with a focus on the State
of Uttar Pradesh (UP), India (Fig. 1), the largest water user in the upper basin. This
work provides insights into the feasibility of these strategies and indicates directions
for future investigations.
    In the original GWM study, Revelle and Lakshminarayana (1975) estimated that at least 60
billion m3 of monsoonal river flow can be stored in the subsurface during dry season along
3,000 km of river reaches in the upper Ganges Basin. However, this estimate assumes
homogeneous isotropic aquifers with purely horizontal flow. In this study, models are two-
dimensional cross sectional with vertical anisotropy (ratio of horizontal to vertical hydraulic
conductivity, Kh/Kv) that reflects the hydrogeologic stratification of aquifer fabrics allow
consideration of vertical flow and head differences, important factors that control the storage
dynamics.

1.1 Water Resources Management Issues in the Ganges Basin

The Ganges River basin (Fig. 1) has highly seasonal river flow. Due to the influence of the
Asian southwest monsoon, over 80 % of total annual rainfall, varying from <1 m in the west to
Water Resources Management in the Ganges Basin




                                                                               India
                                                                                                  –
                       Uttarakhand



                                                                     Tibet
                                                       Nepal
                            Uttar Pradesh

                                   U G P
                                                                 Bihar
                       India              Gang                              Farakka
                                               e   s
                                                                                    Bangladesh

                                                                              L G P
                                                                         West Bengal
     Basin Boundary
                                                                                 Sundarbans
     International Boundary
     State Boundary
                                                                             Bay of Bengal
     Rivers                                             Elevation [m]
                               0         100           500       3,000        8,000       8,800
 0   100 200        400 km


Fig. 1 Map showing extent of the Ganges basin in India, Nepal, Tibet and Bangladesh. UGP upper ganges plain
and LGP lower ganges plain. Elevation data source: Jarvis et al. (2008)



>2 m in the east, occurs between June and September (O’Hare 1997). Thus, extensive
monsoonal flooding in the Ganges plain occurs annually (Mishra 1997). However, the entire
basin suffers from water scarcity during the rest of the year, leading to conflicts between
upstream and downstream users (Bandyopadhyay 1995).
    Natural seasonality is intensified by anthropogenic influences. Upstream diversion of
Ganges flow for irrigation occurs in UP and Bihar (Figs. 1 and 2a). Additional diversions
occur at Farakka Dam (Fig. 1) to maintain navigability of Kolkata Port in India. These
diversions make it difficult to meet downstream dry-season Ganges flow requirements,
particularly important for maintaining the delicate salinity balance in the coastal zone (Mirza
1998) crucial for sustaining the unique ecosystems of the world’s largest mangrove forest, the
Sundarbans (Fig. 1) (Gopal and Chauhan 2006).
    Conjunctive use of groundwater and surface water already occurs in many UP
canal irrigation areas, but not to full potential, largely due to lack of management
(Garduño and Foster 2010). In these areas, unmanaged water use and the greater cost
of groundwater compared to surface water creates interlinked management issues.
Surface water is used preferentially in canal head areas where it is readily available,
forcing farmers in canal tail areas to pump groundwater when surface water becomes
scarce (World Bank 2010). The result is a reduction in crop yield due to rising water
tables and soil waterlogging in canal head areas (Singh et al. 2012), whereas in canal
tail areas, groundwater use is unsustainable and water tables decline over time
(Gandhi and Bhamoriya 2011) resulting in increasing pumping costs.
                                                                                                M.R. Khan et al.


(a)                                                       (b)
Current                                                   GWM
Irrigation
System




(c)                                                       (d)
PAC                                                       DPR




Fig. 2 Schematics of a current irrigation system in UP b GWM c PAC and d DPR. The section views show the
dry season water table with some wells, and the map views show the rivers (wide lines), canals (narrow lines) and
wells (yellow dots). Rivers and canals in blue carry water throughout the year; others are dry during dry season
and carry water during the monsoon only

2 Methods

Employing numerical models to simulate strategies for seasonal subsurface water storage, a
generic sensitivity analysis determined the factors that most affect the storage and water table
dynamics. Plausible values and variations of underlying parameters were determined primarily
from published literature (Section A-2, online resources). Then, with guidance of the sensi-
tivity analyses, strategies were constructed and groundwater pumping, storage, and water-table
dynamics were simulated to evaluate their efficacy.

2.1 Management Strategies

All three strategies considered involve dry season groundwater pumping to induce recharge
from rivers and/or canals. However, the strategies differ in pumping configuration, as
discussed below.

2.1.1 Ganges Water Machine (GWM)

In this strategy, intensive dry season pumping in narrow bands along rivers lowers the water
table (Fig. 2b). Infiltrating river water raises the water table during the following monsoon
season. This induced storage is pumped out during the following dry season, creating a cycle
of storage and release that eventually reaches dynamic equilibrium. Distributary canals (lined
to avoid water loss during transport) carry pumped water to irrigation fields. For this scheme to
Water Resources Management in the Ganges Basin


operate effectively, rivers must be ephemeral - dry during the dry season (Chaturvedi and
Srivastava 1979).

2.1.2 Pumping Along Canals (PAC)

This strategy resembles GWM except that intensive dry season pumping is located along
major ephemeral diversion canals, rather than along rivers (Fig. 2c). Here, diversion canals
carrying river flow during the monsoon season are unlined to allow infiltration. Like GWM, all
other distribution canals are lined to avoid water loss.

2.1.3 Distributed Pumping and Recharge (DPR)

This strategy involves dry season groundwater pumping at point of use via small-capacity
irrigation pumps and canal irrigation in monsoon season (Fig. 2d). Dry season groundwater
pumping lowers the water table rather uniformly throughout the basin, whereas during
monsoon, river flow routed through canals provides groundwater recharge, which is then
pumped out in the next dry season.

2.2 Model Setup

Groundwater flow was simulated using the USGS-MODFLOW code (Harbaugh et al. 2000).
Aquifer cross-sections extending from the center of infiltrating rivers or canals to half the
distances between two adjacent rivers or canals were modeled in 2-D (Fig. 3). Vertical
boundaries were no-flow symmetry boundaries. The bottom boundary was also no-flow, either
at the aquifer base (for sensitivity analysis, GWM and PAC) or water table (DPR). Although


                  (a)
                               River/canal                             Recharge from rainfall
                                                                          and irrigation

                                  Pumping
                   300 m




                                                                         No-flow boundaries

                                                       Aquifer width
                                (half of the distance between two adjacent rivers/canals)


                  (b)
                                Canal                                  Recharge from rainfall,
                                              Silty/clayey              irrigation, and canals
                                          surface sediments
                   10 m




                                          Top 5 m of the aquifer

                                                                         No-flow boundaries



Fig. 3 Cross-sectional model setup for a sensitivity analysis, GWM, and PAC strategies, and b DPR strategy
                                                                                                   M.R. Khan et al.


the water table is not a true no-flow boundary, for DPR it is assumed that groundwater
recharge reaches the water table and raises it uniformly. With the assumption of no lateral
gradient and negligible compressive storage, the water table can be represented as a no-flow
boundary. Areal recharge from rainfall and irrigation return flow was assigned to the model top
using MODFLOW’s recharge package. Potential recharge from rainfall and irrigation was
estimated using the criteria in Government of India (1997) (Section A2, online resources). The
MODFLOW drain condition was used to limit water-table rise above land surface, thus
limiting actual recharge where the water table is high. Rivers and canals were modeled with
MODFLOW rivers, a head-dependent flux boundary condition. Parameter values used in each
strategy are listed in Table 1.

2.2.1 Sensitivity Analysis

The one-dimensional GWM model set-up of Revelle and Lakshminarayana (1975) was
simulated in the 2D framework of this study, allowing vertical flow to occur. This was
regarded as the base reference case for sensitivity analysis. Hydraulic conductivity, vertical
anisotropy, riverbed conductance, specific yield, groundwater recharge from rainfall and
irrigation, aquifer width, river width, and river type (perennial vs. ephemeral) were varied
and the annual groundwater storage volume and simulated pre-monsoon head compared.

2.2.2 Ganges Water Machine GWM

Seasonal groundwater storage for GWM was simulated for eight different type areas identified
in UP (Section A-3, online resources), categorized based on the spatial distribution of the
parameters identified as important by sensitivity analysis. Riverbed conductance was calcu-
lated considering the Kv-river and thickness of riverbed sediments as 2.5 m/d and 15 m,

Table 1 Model parameters used for the sensitivity analysis, GWM, PAC, and DPR strategies

Parameters                    Sensitivity analysis   GWM             PAC                   DPR
                              (Base case)

Horizontal hydraulic          15.2                   15.2            15.2                  0.015–15.2
  conductivity [m/d]
Vertical hydraulic            15.2                   0.15            0.15                  0.015–1.52
  conductivity [m/d]
Specific yield                0.25                   0.16            0.16                  0.16
River/canal leakage rate      0.61                   Simulated       Simulated             Simulated
  [m/d/m2 river bed]
Leakage period [days]         120                    120             120                   120
Groundwater pumping           45                     72–200          22–30                 NA
  rate [m3/d]a
Pumping period [days]         240                    240             240                   NA
Pumping depth                 50–150                 100–200         50–100                NA
  interval [m]
Wellfield width [km]          4                      4               1                     NA
River or canal                300/5                  300/5–900/5     100/1       Field     Secondary      Primary
  width/depth [m]                                                                0.5/0.3   2/0.5          10/2
Aquifer width [km]            8                      15–30           2.5 and 5   0.1       1              5
a
    Pumping rate is per unit length of river or canal on each side
Water Resources Management in the Ganges Basin


respectively (Chaturvedi and Srivastava 1979). The river was modeled as ephemeral with 5 m
constant water depth during monsoon season. The aquifer was considered vertically aniso-
tropic due to layering of low and high permeability sediments common in fluvial deposits of
the region (Michael and Voss 2009a). The coefficient of anisotropy (Kh/Kv) was estimated by
simulating flow through a hypothetical heterogeneous aquifer system constructed based on
published lithological data (Section A-2, online resources).
   One set of simulations was performed for each type-area parameter combination
(Table ESM-1, online resources). The range of potential annual storage volume for each type
area was evaluated by considering three design pre-monsoon heads (30 m, 50 m, or 80 m, at
dynamic steady state at the lateral and vertical well-field center). The 30 m pre-monsoon head
was chosen following Revelle and Lakshminarayana (1975); the other two were chosen to
assess potential for greater storage. For each type area, pumping rates necessary to obtain the
design heads were determined by trial and error. Basin-wide pumping and storage volumes
were calculated by multiplying simulation results per unit river length by actual river length
and by a factor of two to account for both sides of each river.

2.2.3 Pumping Along Canals (PAC)

The model setup of PAC resembles GWM (Fig. 3a), but with 100 m wide and 1 m deep
infiltration canal. Canal-bed conductance was calculated considering Kv-canal and thickness of
canal-bed sediments as 0.86 m/d and 5 m, respectively, because the 5 m thick silty surficial
layer present in much of the basin (e.g. Ala Eldin et al. 2000; Umar et al. 2001) is not likely to
be incised by the shallow canal channels. The range of potential annual storage volume was
determined for two different canal spacings, 10 km and 5 km. Pumping rate was determined by
trial and error to achieve the maximum possible pumping rate that reaches a dynamic steady
state. The width and spacing of recharging canals are the design parameters for PAC; these
were kept constant throughout UP. Therefore, unlike GWM, separate models are not necessary
for different type areas.

2.2.4 Distributed Pumping and Recharge (DPR)

For DPR, infiltration from three types of surface canals were simulated. Canal spacing, width
and depth of each canal type were estimated based on GIS data on Jaunpur Branch canals in
UP (Raut 2009) overlain on Google Earth (Table 1). It was assumed that the total monsoonal
groundwater recharge would be pumped out during the subsequent dry season, resulting in the
same pre-monsoon water table elevation each year. Thus, only infiltration was simulated, not
groundwater pumping (Fig. 3b).
    DPR models consisted of two geologic layers: surface sediments and aquifer. Two cases for
the top, 5 m thick layer were considered: silty (K =0.15 m/d) and clayey (K =0.015 m/d). The
aquifer layer had Kh of 15.2 m/d and Kv of 1.52 m/d (anisotropy 10:1). A lower anisotropy
ratio than in GWM and PAC was used because the top low-K layer was explicitly represented
and the vertical aquifer extent was much less. Canals were specified as constant head
boundaries.
    Storage was estimated sequentially in three different models with different-size channels
explicitly represented. First, simulated storage from field channels was determined by multi-
plying simulated storage volume per unit length of field channels by their total length in that
area. This value was used as groundwater recharge for simulation of secondary distribution
canals. Finally, the sum of the storage per unit area of field channels and secondary distributary
canals was used as groundwater recharge for primary canal simulations.
                                                                                  M.R. Khan et al.


2.3 Groundwater Pumping Cost Estimation

Pumping cost was estimated by converting lift energy into diesel fuel volume. Lift energy,
calculated after Abadia et al. (2008) is:

                           Gross powerðkW Þ ¼ QρgH =3600000ε;

where Q is pumping rate (m3/h), ρ is density of water (kg/m3), g is gravitational constant
(m/s2), ε is pump system efficiency (%), and H is pumping lift (m) (here defined as vertical
distance from the water table to ground surface). Power is then converted to diesel fuel energy
requirement considering 0.25 l of fuel equivalent to 1 kW-hour (Robinson 2002) and assuming
a 55 % pumping system efficiency (Abadia et al. 2008).

2.4 Study Limitations

To tractably calculate efficacy of management strategies, assumptions are required to simplify
complexities in the systems. A key assumption is that basin-wide average values of aquifer
parameters are applicable for analysis. However, the Ganges aquifer fabric consists of highly
heterogeneous fluvial sediments with substantial local variation in hydrogeologic parameter
values that will impact local efficacy. The most critical parameters to characterize are aquifer
Kh and Kv and riverbed and surficial sediment conductances. These parameters control time-
development and extent of drawdown during pumping and aquifer storage volume. Further,
stratification of low and high permeability layers is represented in the model using vertical
anisotropy. Although this accounts for small-scale layering, the actual distribution of low-K
sediments below rivers will affect vertical connectivity and thereby infiltration and storage.
Another important limitation is lack of access to groundwater level monitoring data for model
calibration. Such data would be essential for calibration of site-specific models. Another factor
not directly considered here is development of an unsaturated zone below recharging rivers
and canals. Unsaturated conditions reduce K between the river bottom and water table,
resulting in reduced groundwater infiltration compared to fully saturated conditions. The time
response of water table to infiltration can also be affected by heterogeneity in the unsaturated
zone (Flint and Ellett 2004). The greatest effect might be for GWM, for which the thickest
unsaturated zone would occur.


3 Results

3.1 Results of Sensitivity Analysis

Results of all sensitivity simulations are summarized in Table ESM-2 in online resources. In the
base-case simulation, hydraulic heads reach dynamic steady state after a few decades of pumping,
with seasonal head fluctuations decreasing with distance from the river (Figure ESM-3, online
resources). In the base case, maximum simulated pre-monsoon water table depth is about 34 m at
3 km away from the river (Figure ESM-4, online resources) and 22 million m3/year infiltrates per
km river. For the 3,000 km river reaches considered by Revelle and Lakshminarayana (1975),
annual storage is 66 billion m3, similar to their estimate of 60 billion m3.
   River type (perennial vs. ephemeral) is found to be the most important factor controlling
total monsoonal flow storage volume. Although for the same pumping rate and aquifer
conditions, total annual storage for perennial and ephemeral rivers is the same, 70 % of the
Water Resources Management in the Ganges Basin


storage is from dry season flow for perennial rivers. This ‘short-circuiting’ of river water to
pumping wells increases cost per unit monsoonal flow storage, in agreement with Chaturvedi
and Srivastava (1979). Since pumping along perennial rivers would be inefficient, sensitivity
to all other parameters was tested only for ephemeral rivers and canals. For both river types,
storage volume is highly sensitive to riverbed conductance (C) as long as it is lower than the
Kv. For C > Kv, Kv primarily controls the leakage through riverbed.
   Hydraulic conductivity in an isotropic aquifer controls dynamic steady-state hydraulic head
and time required to reach it. A low-K system takes longer to reach dynamic steady state with
deeper hydraulic head than a high-K system. High anisotropy (i.e. lower Kv) also significantly
increases time to reach a dynamic steady state and results in a deeper pre-monsoon head for the
same pumping rate (Figure ESM-5 in online resources).
   Specific yield (Sy) has little effect on induced river recharge and time development of the
steady-state condition, but there is an impact on hydraulic head. A 50 % reduction in Sy from
base case values results in a 38 % decrease in pre-monsoon head at dynamic steady state
compared to that of the base case.
   Areal groundwater recharge also affects time development and depth of the water table and
pumping-induced storage volume. For a given pumping rate, higher recharge results in earlier
development of dynamic steady state with a shallower pre-monsoon head than the base case.
However, because additional recharge partially supplies withdrawal, there is a concomitant
reduction in storage from the river infiltration. The same is true for aquifer width because this
changes areal recharge. Increased river width also reduces time to reach dynamic steady state
and water table depth due to an increase in infiltration rate.

3.2 Results for Three Strategies Applied to UP

The total annual storage achieved with each strategy is reported here as a sum over the State of
UP at dynamic steady state. The estimates are based on three design water table depths for
GWM, two canal spacings for PAC, and two surface sediment types for DPR. The estimated
total annual subsurface storage of river flow for GWM is 17 billion m3, 28 billion m3, and 46
billion m3 for 30 m, 50 m, and 80 m pre-monsoon design hydraulic head, and for the total
annual groundwater pumping of 58 billion m3, 80 billion m3, and 110 billion m3, respectively
(storage for individual type areas are given in Table ESM-3, online resources). For PAC,
estimated groundwater storage rate per km canal length is approximately 1.7 million m3 per
year. Assuming that PAC canals would exist only along reaches of the rivers considered for
GWM pumping development, the total annual groundwater storage in UP is 20 billion m3 and
40 billion m3, and the required annual groundwater pumping is 64 billion m3 and 85 billion m3
for 10 km and 5 km canal spacing, respectively. Total annual storage for DPR would be 14
billion m3 and 90 billion m3 with required annual groundwater pumping of 56 billion m3 and
132 billion m3 for clayey and silty top soil, respectively, assuming that DPR would be
implemented in the 12 Mha irrigated area in UP. Over 85 % of total groundwater storage in
DPR occurs through field channels rather than primary and secondary distributary canals
because of their extremely dense networks.
    The difference between pumping and the storage volumes is the actual recharge from
rainfall, irrigation return flow, and existing canal seepage. This increases with time as the
drawdown cone grows, eventually reaching a steady percentage of potential recharge specified
on the model top. Depending on design head, actual recharge varies between 60 and 100 % of
potential recharge (Figure ESM-6, online resources).
    The cost of pumping depends on both depth to water (H in Section 2.3) and annual
pumping volume. Both pumping cost and storage are maximized when the system reaches
                                                                                               M.R. Khan et al.


dynamic steady state; the reported figures below are minimum and maximum estimates at
dynamic steady state. The estimated annual energy requirements would be 7 and 36 GW for
GWM, 3.7 GW and 4.9 GW for PAC, and 3.7 GW and 4.9 GW for DPR. Considering the
current diesel price in India as 0.86 USD per liter (Sahu and Sharma 2012), annual pumping
costs would be 1.5 and 7.7 billion USD for GWM, 0.8 and 1.0 billion USD for PAC, and 0.4
and 0.9 billion USD for DPR.


4 Discussion

4.1 Implications for Reducing Seasonality in River Flow

The two primary goals of water resources management in river basins with extreme seasonality
are reduction of wet season flooding and enhancement of dry season water supply. The
conjunctive use schemes simulated in this work would achieve these goals, though outcomes
would depend on complex factors.
   Estimated storage in the scenarios considered for UP represents a percentage of average
monsoonal river flow (Table 2), which does not necessarily translate directly into flood
reduction. Flooding in the Ganges Basin occurs intermittently during the 120-day monsoon
season, typically after heavy rains limited to 10–20 % of the period (Soman and Kumar 1990).
In contrast, storage through infiltration occurs continuously throughout the monsoon season,
decreasing over the season, particularly for GWM (Figure ESM-7, online resources). More-
thorough analysis of flood-reduction benefits, outside the scope of the current study, would
include estimation of peak flow reduction during a particular flood event rather than percent-
age of average monsoonal flow reduction, as considered here. Nevertheless, qualitative

Table 2 Strategy comparison. Ranges are for low to high storage scenarios. For GWM, the range encompasses
three design drawdown scenarios, for PAC the range is for two different canal spacing, and for DPR the range is
for silty to clayey near-surface sediment permeability values

Relative benefits/Drawbacks                           Ganges Water  Pumping Along Distributed Pumping
                                                      Machine (GWM) Canals (PAC)  and Recharge (DPR)

Storage (% of average monsoonal flow in Ganges        ~ 7–19 %          ~ 8–16 %          ~ 6–37 %
  exiting UP)a
Ratio of storage volume to annual volume pumped 0.29–0.42               0.31–0.47         0.25–0.68
Annual cost per m3 water storage [USD]                0.09–0.17         0.04–0.03         0.03–0.01
Proportion of the pumped water available for          0.57–0.77         0.78–0.84         0.91–0.96
  irrigation
Annual irrigation water cost per ha land irrigation   230–450           80–70             40–35
  [USD]
Increase of dry season flow (% of current dry         >25 %             >25 %             >25 %
   season flow in Ganges exiting UP)
Risk of land subsidence near well-fields              High              Low               None
Disruption of domestic water supply                   Yes               Possible          No
Requires ephemeral rivers                             Yes               No                No
Complexity/intensity of planning, management          High              High              Low
  and maintenance
a
 (Based on the estimated 240 BCM monsoon season flow at UP-Bihar boundary; source: World Bank, Ganges
Strategic Basin Assessment: A Regional Perspective on Risks and Opportunities, unpublished)
Water Resources Management in the Ganges Basin


insights on reduction of flood intensity and duration can be developed. Infiltration during the
early part of monsoon season would result in a lower river stage before peak flood flow, so
channels would accommodate more peak flow. Additionally, flow reduction would occur
because of river flow diversion for canal-based monsoon irrigation. Further, an increase in
irrigation activity is likely to increase groundwater recharge as evidenced from Bangladesh
(Fig. 1) (Michael and Voss 2009b; Shamsudduha et al. 2011), thereby decreasing immediate
runoff generation from overland flow. Lastly, in GWM, since the water table along river
channels where flooding occurs would be deep, floodwater could infiltrate the subsurface
quickly, reducing flood duration. Storage volumes reported here are for implementation of
schemes in UP only. Additional storage and flood reduction might be achieved should these
strategies also be applied in parts of the upstream and downstream states, Uttarakhand and
Bihar (Fig. 1).
    Ganges dry season flow can be increased by directly rerouting a portion of pumped
water to the river downstream of well-fields (for GWM) or by stopping the current
practice of using dry season flow for irrigation, which would occur under all strate-
gies. Currently, surface water-based irrigation projects in UP annually withdraw about
28 billion m3 of river-flow (Planning Commission 2007), at least half during dry
season. If this 14 billion m3 were not diverted, dry season flow in the Ganges at the
UP-Bihar boundary would increase by approximately 25 %.

4.2 Implications for Irrigation and Waterlogging Management in the Upper Basin

All three strategies have potential to provide irrigation water, though the efficacy varies among
strategies. GWM may provide 33–85 billion m3 of dry season irrigation water per year
whereas PAC and DPR may provide 50–71 billion m3/y and 51–127 billion m3/y, respectively.
These volumes were estimated by deducting non-irrigation dry season water demands in UP
from total seasonal pumping under each strategy (Section A-6, online resources). Assuming a
50 cm dry season irrigation water demand per unit irrigated area in UP (Planning Commission
2007), the available water, if used entirely for irrigation, would satisfy the needs of 6.6–
17 Mha for GWM, 10–14 Mha for PAC, and 10–25 Mha for DPR. Under the best-case
scenario, there would be sufficient water to expand the current 12 Mha irrigation are in UP
(Planning Commission 2007) by an additional 20–100 %.
    Irrigation water cost also varies among strategies. Based on model results, the cost of dry
season irrigation water/ha irrigated land is USD 230–450 for GWM, USD 70–80 for PAC, and
USD 35–40 for DPR. These estimates represent total annual irrigation water cost/ha under the
proposed strategies, because rainfall and diverted river flow satisfy needs of the monsoon
season crop. Compared to the current cost of groundwater irrigation in UP (USD 100–150/ha/
year, Garduño and Foster 2010), PAC and DPR might significantly reduce overall agricultural
production costs. Reduction of groundwater pumping costs due to reversal of declining water
table trends resulting from enhanced groundwater recharge from monsoon season canal
irrigation (similar to DPR) is already evidenced in some local areas in UP (Sakthivadivel
and Chawla 2002).
    All three management strategies have potential to reduce soil waterlogging, a common
issue in UP canal-irrigation areas by maintaining deep water tables. GWM pumping would
lower the water table, reducing waterlogging within 15–25 km of the rivers (Fig. 4a). PAC and
DPR pumping would lower the water table, reducing waterlogging throughout UP (Fig. 4b, c).
However, in high recharge areas, DPR may not effectively eliminate waterlogging
because the post-monsoon water table may rise close to the surface as shown in
Fig. 4c for silty surface sediments.
                                                                                                                                  M.R. Khan et al.


         (a)
                                         0
                                                    River
           Water table elevation [m]   −20
                                                                                                               Post−monsoon (30m)
                                       −40                                                                     Pre−monsoon (30m)
                                                                                                               Post−monsoon (50m)
                                       −60                                                                     Pre−monsoon (50m)
                                                                                                               Post−monsoon (80m)
                                       −80                                                                     Pre−monsoon (80m)
                                               Pump location
                                               (Pumping depth 100-150m)
                                       −100
                                           0                5            10             15                20             25            30


         (b)
                                         0
                                                                     Post−monsoon (10km canal spacing)            Second canal for
           Water table elevation [m]




                                                   Canal
                                                                     Pre−monsoon (10km canal spacing)             5 km canal spacing
                                        −5
                                                                     Post−monsoon (5km canal spacing)             scenario only
                                                                     Pre−monsoon (5km canal spacing)
                                       −10


                                       −15
                                               Pump location                                              Second pump zone for
                                               (Pumping depth 50-100m)                                    5 km canal spacing scenario
                                       −20
                                          0                     1              2                    3                4                  5


         (c)
                                         0
           Water table elevation [m]




                                        −2

                                        −4

                                        −6                                         Post−monsoon (silty top layer)
                                                                                   Post−monsoon (clayey top layer)
                                        −8
                                               Pumping was not simulated for this strategy              Pre-monsoon water table
                                       −10
                                          0                     1              2                    3                4                  5
                                                                                    Distance [km]

Fig. 4 Example model results, simulated water table elevations at dynamic steady state. a GWM for 30 m, 50 m,
and 80 m design pre-monsoon head scenarios. b PAC for 10 km and 5 m canal spacing scenarios. c DPR for silty
and clayey surficial layer scenarios



4.3 Strategy Comparison: Storage and Irrigation Costs

The storage cost differs among the strategies (Table 2). Cost depends on pumping required per
unit storage and average lift. For GWM, increase in lift is greater than increase in storage with
increased pumping. Thus, despite an increase in ratio of storage to pumped volume (Table 2),
storage cost increases. For PAC, average lift is almost the same for all scenarios, resulting in
nearly constant cost per unit storage (Table 2). For DPR, average lift is lower for the high
storage scenario than for the low storage scenario because greater infiltration results in a
shallower water table at the end of the infiltration period. However, cost may vary spatially
depending on local hydrogeological conditions. Two factors may reduce storage costs for
GWM. Areas with high Kv would have a shallower water table, and naturally-ephemeral rivers
Water Resources Management in the Ganges Basin


would reduce the need for flow maintenance in dry season. In contrast, PAC and DPR cost
would increase in areas with thick, clayey surficial sediments due to reduced canal-bed leakage
    Differences in groundwater irrigation cost among strategies are due to pumping cost and
proportion of water available for irrigation. The proportion of pumped water available for
irrigation is least for GWM followed by PAC (Table 2). This is because a significant
proportion of pumped water needs to be returned to the river to maintain downstream dry
season flow for these strategies. Moreover, this study assumes that distributary canals for these
two strategies are lined. Should canals not be lined, there would be a further reduction of
available water for irrigation resulting in a net increase in irrigation water cost. DPR is free of
these considerations.

4.4 Strategy Comparison: Implementation Needs and Potential Adverse Impacts

All three strategies would require appropriate planning and regular monitoring. These would be
particularly complex for GWM and PAC. GWM would require careful regulation of existing
dams and in some cases dam renovation or new dam construction to divert dry season river flow
upstream of well-fields and re-introduction of water downstream of well-fields along perennial
rivers to maintain dry river conditions. Similarly, PAC would require careful regulation of
canals to carry water during wet season and remain dry during dry season. Regular monitoring
of the water table and permeability of infiltrating river or canal beds would be essential to ensure
efficient operation, as clogging is a common problem in artificial recharge (Bouwer 2002).
Planning, maintenance, and monitoring of these strategies require a high level of government
coordination. This may be difficult because separate departments currently manage the ground-
water, surface-water-based irrigation, and groundwater-based irrigation in UP.
    Adverse environmental impacts are associated with GWM more than with the other
strategies. The dry river condition required along river reaches with well fields would impact
river ecosystems, likely with major environmental consequences. Diversion would also disrupt
river-based sewage management facilities currently in operation in many cities along these
river reaches in UP (e.g. Varanasi city; Hamner et al. 2006). In addition, the dry river
conditions required by GWM would have social impacts related to religious and other cultural
activities centering on the Ganges and tributaries.
    A potential hazard of groundwater pumping is subsidence. The deeper water table of GWM
may induce compression of Ganges alluvium clays and silts, a common result of regional-scale
groundwater withdrawal in alluvial aquifers (e.g., Galloway and Burbey 2011). A lowering of
land elevation near rivers may exacerbate flooding in these areas. PAC could also result in land
subsidence but it would likely be of lower magnitude due to less induced drawdown than in
GWM. Since DPR drawdown is very low, the risk of land subsidence is negligible.
    A substantial water table lowering near rivers and canals has additional implications. First,
pumping-induced infiltration of river water could alter aquifer geochemical conditions (Bourg
and Bertin 1993; Doussan et al. 1997), with potential subsurface clogging or contaminant
mobilization. Second, the lower water table resulting from GWM may cause existing domestic
shallow tube wells and irrigation pumps to become non-functional and the current domestic
water-supply system, dependent on privately-owned shallow hand-pumped tubewells, would
require modification.

4.5 Socio-Political Implementation Challenges

The most significant socio-political challenge in implementing these strategies is the need to
change current water use practices. All strategies considered require groundwater-based dry
                                                                                             M.R. Khan et al.


season irrigation, whether pumped at point of use by farmers (DPR) or from designed well
fields by the government (GWM and PAC). However, current groundwater pumping is costly,
~USD 100–150/ha per year, whereas canal water costs only USD 5/ha/year. The proposed
strategies would minimize this disproportional distribution of costs among users, as a canal
head user would use as much groundwater as a canal tail user. Although this would reduce
overall groundwater pumping cost for UP (at least for PAC and DPR), in canal head areas it
would locally increase fiscal burdens on either the water resource/irrigation departments or on
the water users. This factor may be an important socio-political impediment for which local
incentives may need to be developed as part of a successful implementation plan.


5 Conclusions

The analysis presented in this paper, based on simplified scenarios, demonstrates that all three
strategies have potential for effectively managing the dual water excess - water scarcity
problem in the Ganges Basin. These strategies would increase dry season flow and decrease
monsoonal flow in rivers, while augmenting water supply for irrigation and reducing the extent
of soil waterlogging. Modeling suggests that annual monsoonal storage would be between 17
and 46 billion m3 for GWM, 20 and 40 billion m3 for PAC, and 14 and 90 billion m3 for DPR.
These volumes correspond to 6–37 % of the average monsoonal flow in the Ganges exiting
UP. However, the cost, management, and infrastructure requirements for implementation can
be very high. The strategies require re-engineering of the river and canal systems, and
significant changes in irrigation practices throughout the basin. GWM is the most costly to
operate, and has greatest potential for adverse environmental impacts due to the required
pumping intensity, followed by PAC. DPR has the lowest operating cost, but still requires
significant management and infrastructure investment.
    Although this analysis encompasses a wide range of scenarios, the actual efficacy of the
conjunctive-use management schemes considered would vary in the basin depending on local
aquifer geology, the local nature of riverbed and surficial sediments, river stage, river geom-
etry, topography, and other hydrologic, geologic, and anthropogenic factors. Implementation
would require testing in pilot projects within limited areas. Observations made in such projects
can provide direct information for improving design, perhaps by narrowing the possible range
of hydrogeologic parameters and conditions for each local area and by improving the modeling
analysis to provide more locally descriptive predictions of system response.

Acknowledgments This work was funded by The World Bank South Asia Water Initiative (SAWI). The authors
thank Natalie Giannelli, Marcus Wijnen, Jorge Jose Escurra and Hrishikesh Patel of the World Bank for support
and GIS data. We thank Sean Krepski (University of Delaware) for helpful editing, and Alan McDonald (British
Geological Survey) and two anonymous reviewers for suggestions that greatly improved the manuscript.




References

Abadia R, Rocamora C, Ruiz A, Puerto H (2008) Energy efficiency in irrigation distribution networks I: theory.
    Biosyst Eng 101:21–27
Ala Eldin MEH, Sami Ahmed M, Gurunadha Rao VVS, Dhar RL (2000) Aquifer modelling of the Ganga-
    Mahawa sub-basin, a part of the Central Ganga Plain, Uttar Pradesh, India. Hydrol Process 14:297–315
Bandyopadhyay J (1995) Water management in the Ganges-Brahmaputra basin: emerging challenges for the 21st
    century. Int J Water Resour Dev 11:411–442
Water Resources Management in the Ganges Basin

Baxter RM (1977) Environmental effects of dams and impoundments. Annu Rev Ecol Syst 8:255–283
Bourg ACM, Bertin C (1993) Biogeochemical processes during the infiltration of river water into an alluvial
     aquifer. Environ Sci Technol 27:661–666
Bouwer H (2000) Integrated water management: emerging issues and challenges. Agric Water Manag 45:217–228
Bouwer H (2002) Artificial recharge of groundwater: hydrogeology and engineering. Hydrogeol J 10:121–142
Bredehoeft JD, Young AR (1983) Conjunctive use of groundwater and surface water for irrigated agriculture’
     risk averson. Water Resour Res 19:1111–1121
Camnasio E, Becciu G (2011) Evaluation of the feasibility of irrigation storage in a flood detention pond in an
     agricultural catchment in Northern Italy. Water Resour Manag 25:1489–1508
Chaturvedi MC, Srivastava VK (1979) Induced groundwater recharge in the Ganges Basin. Water Resour Res
     15:1156–1166
Coe J (1990) Conjunctive use-advantages, constraints, and examples. J Irrig Drain Eng 116:427–443
Doussan C, Poitevin G, Ledoux E, Detay M (1997) River bank filtration: modelling of the changes in water
     chemistry with emphasis on nitrogen species. J Contam Hydrol 25:129–156
Flint AL, Ellett KM (2004) The role of the unsaturated zone in artificial recharge at San Gorgonio Pass,
     California. Vadose Zone J 3:763–774
Galloway DL, Burbey TJ (2011) Review: regional land subsidence accompanying groundwater extraction.
     Hydrogeol J 19:1459–1486
Gandhi VP, Bhamoriya V (2011) Groundwater irrigation in India: growth, challenges, and risks. In: India
     infrastructure report 2011 water: policy and performance for sustainable development. Oxford University
     Press, New Delhi, pp 90–117
Garduño H, Foster S (2010) Sustainable groundwater irrigation approaches to reconciling demand with
     resources. Strategic overview series; no. 4. World Bank, Washington, DC
Gopal B, Chauhan M (2006) Biodiversity and its conservation in the Sundarban Mangrove ecosystem. Aquat Sci
     68:338–354
Government of India (1997) Report of the groundwater resource estimation committee: Groundwater resource
     estimation methodology. Ministry of Water Resources. Government of India, New Delhi
Gupta H (1992) Reservoir-induced earthquakes. Elsevier, Amsterdam
Hamner S, Tripathi A, Mishra RK et al (2006) The role of water use patterns and sewage pollution in incidence of
     water-borne/enteric diseases along the Ganges river in Varanasi, India. Int J Environ Health Res 16:113–132
Harbaugh BAW, Banta ER, Hill MC, Mcdonald MG (2000) MODFLOW-2000, The U.S. Geological Survey
     modular ground-water model -user guide to modularization concepts and the ground-water flow process
     U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 00–92
Immerzeel WW, van Beek LPH, Bierkens MFP (2010) Climate change will affect the Asian water towers.
     Science 328:1382–1385
Jarvis A, Reuter HI, Nelson A, Guevara E (2008) Hole-filled seamless SRTM data V4, International Centre for
     Tropical Agriculture (CIAT), available from http://srtm.csi.cgiar.org
Kundzewicz ZW, Hirabayashi Y, Kanae S (2010) River floods in the changing climate -observations and
     projections. Water Resour Manag 24:2633–2646
Michael HA, Voss CI (2009a) Estimation of regional-scale groundwater flow properties in the Bengal Basin of
     India and Bangladesh. Hydrogeol J 17:1329–1346
Michael HA, Voss CI (2009b) Controls on groundwater flow in the Bengal Basin of India and Bangladesh:
     regional modeling analysis. Hydrogeol J 17:1561–1577
Mirza MMQ (1998) Diversion of the Ganges water at Farakka and its effects on salinity in Bangladesh. Environ
     Manag 22:711–722
Mishra DK (1997) The Bihar flood story. Econ Polit Wkly 32:2206–2217
O’Hare G (1997) The Indian Monsoon Part 2: the rains. Geography 82:335–352
Pavelic P, Srisuk K, Saraphirom P et al (2012) Balancing-out floods and droughts: opportunities to utilize
     floodwater harvesting and groundwater storage for agricultural development in Thailand. J Hydrol 470–471:
     55–64
Planning Commission (2007) Uttar Pradesh development report, vol 2. Government of India, New Delhi
Raut AK (2009) Preparation of Ghaghra Gomti Basin plans & development of decision support systems. Final
     report Ghaghra Gomti Basin Water Resource Master Plan. State Water Resources Agency UP. Government
     of India, Lucknow
Revelle R, Lakshminarayana V (1975) The Ganges water machine. Science 188:611–616
Robinson D (2002) Construction and operating costs of groundwater pumps for irrigation in the riverine plain.
     CSIRO Land and Water, Technical Report 20/02
Sahu P, Sharma R (2012) India considers Diesel, Kerosene price increase. The Wall Street Journal, December 27.
     http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424127887324669104578204703784680388.html. Accessed 27
     December 2012
                                                                                            M.R. Khan et al.

Sakthivadivel R, Chawla, AS (2002). Innovations in conjunctive water management: artificial recharge in
     Madhya Ganga Canal Project. IWMI-TATA Water Policy Research Program Annual Partners’ Meet,
     2002, Vallabh Vidyanagar, Gujarat, India
Shamsudduha M, Taylor RG, Ahmed KM, Zahid A (2011) The impact of intensive groundwater abstraction on
     recharge to a shallow regional aquifer system: evidence from Bangladesh. Hydrogeol J 19:901–916
Singh A, Nath Panda S, Flugel W-A, Krause P (2012) Waterlogging and farmland salinisation: causes and
     remedial measures in an irrigated semi-arid region of India. Irrig Drain 61:357–365
Soman MK, Kumar KK (1990) Some aspects of daily rainfall distribution over India during the south-west
     monsoon season. Int J Climatol 10:299–311
Uitto JI, Duda AM (2002) Management of transboundary water resources: lessons from international cooperation
     for conflict prevention. Geogr J 168:365–378
Umar A, Umar R, Ahmad MS (2001) Hydrogeological and hydrochemical framework of regional aquifer system
     in Kali-Ganga sub-basin, India. Environ Geol 40:602–611
UNDP (2006) Managing transboundary waters. In: Human development report 2006, Beyond scarcity: power,
     poverty and the global water crisis. pp 202–231
World Bank (2010) Deep wells and prudence- towards pragmatic action for addressing groundwater overexploi-
     tation in India. World Bank, Washington DC
