T HE URBA N I MP E RAT I VE
  Towards Compet i t i ve C i t i es
               EDITED BY
           EDWARD GLAESER
           ABHA JOSHI-GHANI
The Urban Imperative
The Urban Imperative
 Towards Competitive Cities




          Edited by
    Edward Glaeser
          and
    Abha Joshi-Ghani




       1
                              1
      Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford.
   It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship,
  and education by publishing worldwide. Oxford is a registered trademark of
        Oxford University Press in the UK and in certain other countries

                          Published in India by
                         Oxford University Press
     YMCA Library Building, 1 Jai Singh Road, New Delhi 110 001, India

        © The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development /
                            The World Bank 2015

 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
                              1818 H Street, NW
                            Washington, DC 20433

               The moral rights of the authors have been asserted

                         First Edition published in 2015

  All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in
  a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the
prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press, or as expressly permitted
  by law, by licence, or under terms agreed with the appropriate reprographics
rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction outside the scope of the
above should be sent to the Rights Department, Oxford University Press, at the
                                   address above

              You must not circulate this work in any other form
           and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer

                         ISBN-13: 978-0-19-945777-9
                           ISBN-10: 0-19-945777-8


                     Typeset in Adobe Garamond Pro 11/13
            by Excellent Laser Typesetters, Pitampura, Delhi 110 034
              Printed in India at Rakmo Press, New Delhi 110 020

  The ﬁndings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed herein are those of the
  author(s) and do not necessarily reﬂect the views of the Executive Directors of
The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank or
the governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy
  of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and
  other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment
 on the part of the World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the
                  endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.
Contents



List of Tables, Figures, Boxes, and Maps vii
Preface xi
Acknowledgments xiii
Rethinking Cities xv
Edward Glaeser and Abha Joshi-Ghani

1   Urbanization as Opportunity 1
    Brandon Fuller and Paul Romer
2   The Shifting Urban Economic Landscape: What Does
    It Mean for Cities? 18
    Richard Dobbs and Jaana Remes
3   Urbanization and the Geography of Development          51
    J. Vernon Henderson
4   Analyzing Urban Systems: Have Megacities Become
    Too Large? 89
    Klaus Desmet and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg
5   Are Cities the New Growth Escalator? 116
    Enrico Moretti
6   Entrepreneurship, Public Policy, and Cities      149
    Joshua Lerner
7   Urbanization and (In)Formalization         173
    Ejaz Ghani and Ravi Kanbur
vi   Contents


8    Bridging Divides: Enabling Urban Capabilities   210
     Saskia Sassen

9    The Great Migration: Urban Aspirations   234
     Michael Keith

10 Infrastructure: Doing More with Less    261
   Jonathan Woetzel and Herbert Pohl

11 Urban Transport: Can Public-Private Partnerships Work?    290
   Eduardo Engel and Alexander Galetovic

12 Sustainable and Smart Cities    309
   Matthew E. Kahn

13 Housing Matters     336
   Sonia Hammam

14 Converting Land into Affordable Housing Floor Space      378
   Alain Bertaud

15 Housing and Urbanization in Africa: Unleashing a Formal
   Market Process 413
   Paul Collier and Anthony J. Venables

Index 437

About the Editors and Contributors 457
Tables, Figures, Boxes, and Maps



Tables
1.1 Urban residents and population, 1910, 2010,
     2110, and 2210                                           9
4.1 Variables and sources                                    95
4.2 Urban policies in China                                 104
4.3 Urban policies in China for constant population-
     weighted characteristics                               106
4.4 Urban policies in Mexico                                110
4.5 Urban policies in Mexico for constant population-
     weighted characteristics                               111
5.1 Metropolitan areas with the largest percentage of
     college graduates                                      119
5.2 Metropolitan areas with the smallest percentage of
     college graduates                                      120
7.1 Harnessing entrepreneurship and job creation in
     cities—formal manufacturing                            189
7.2 Harnessing entrepreneurship and job creation in
     cities—informal manufacturing                          191

Figures
1.1 Observed and projected normalized population for more
     developed and less developed regions, 1700–2200          6
1.2 Observed and projected urban share of the population
     in more developed and less developed regions,
     1700–2200                                                7
1.3 Observed and projected number of new urban
     residents in more developed and less developed
     regions, 1900–2200                                       8
viii Tables, Figures, Boxes, and Maps


2.1    Per capita GDP has risen in tandem with increases
       in urbanization                                           19
2.2    The relative economic weight of large cities varies
       across regions                                            24
2.3    The Emerging 440 is expected to generate 47 percent
       of global GDP growth to 2025                              30
2.4    Household income pools are poised to grow at twice
       the rate of the number of households in the
       Emerging 440                                              33
3.1    Urban-rural divergence and then convergence as
       urbanization proceeds                                     54
3.2    Urbanization, income, technology, and sector change       56
3.3    The spatial Gini and political structures                 73
3.4    The world size distribution of cities                     81
4.1    Counterfactuals without differences in one city
       characteristic (United States)                             97
4.2    Counterfactuals changing dispersion in characteristics
       to U.S. levels (China)                                    101
4.3    Counterfactuals different urban policies (China)          107
4.4    Counterfactuals changing dispersion in characteristics
       to U.S. levels (Mexico)                                   108
5.1    Fraction of college-educated workers and salary of
       high school graduates in the United States, by
       metropolitan area                                         128
7.1    Jobs in developing countries are concentrated in the
       informal sectors                                          179
7.2    Informal sectors are exceptionally persistent (share of
       population in informal employment, earliest and
       latest data points available)                             180
7.3    Spatial location of economic activity in India            186
7.4    Large informal sectors are associated with high
       poverty rates                                             194
7.5    Convergence in productivity in India’s unorganized
       manufacturing, 1989–2005                                  197
7.6    Convergence in productivity in India’s organized
       manufacturing, 1989–2005                                  197
9.1    The indicators of integration framework                   245
                                  Tables, Figures, Boxes, and Maps ix


10.1 All regions contribute to growth in urban demand, but
     China’s share is highest in key categories                 267
10.2 Deliver infrastructure productively—lean construction
     reduced construction costs 10 percent and completion
     times 40 percent                                           278
11.1 Contracting under public-private partnerships and
     conventional provision                                     293
13.1 Incidence of renters by income quintile in selected
     Latin American countries, 2006                             346
14.1 Commuting trip travel time in Gauteng, 2009                385
14.2 Land supply corresponding to one hour commuting
     time for three spatial arrangements for jobs and
     amenities                                                  386
14.3 The potential supply of land depends on the speed of
     different transport modes                                  391
14.4 Ahmedabad’s land supply within 30 kilometers of
     the city center                                            393
14.5 The land allocation process in new areas in
     Ahmedabad over 2000–10                                     398
14.6 Typical low-cost housing layout according to Gujarat
     Development Control Regulations                            401
14.7 Ahmedabad—typical slum layout: Sankar
     Bhuvan Shapur                                              406

Boxes
2.1 The McKinsey Global Institute’s Cityscope                    21
2.2 The rising consumer class                                    32
3.1 Urbanization fostered by agricultural booms in
     Sub-Saharan Africa                                          58
3.2 New York City’s transformation                               63
3.3 Industrial decentralization in India                         66
3.4 Hinterland income and the cost of transport in
     Sub-Saharan Africa                                          70
3.5 Essentials for timely city formation and expansion           78
8.1 Foreign domestic worker rights, Hong Kong
     SAR, China                                                 217
8.2 Female Youth Employment Initiative, Afghanistan             218
x Tables, Figures, Boxes, and Maps


8.3  Childcare for factory workers, Bangladesh              219
8.4  Juntos program: conditional cash transfers targeting
     women in Peru                                          220
8.5 Mother Centers International Network for
     Empowerment                                            221
9.1 Plural migrations and welfare externalities: social
     housing eligibility in east London                     238
9.2 Shenzhen Speed: city growth and migrant integration     242
9.3 Migration settlement dynamics in the city:
     inclusive exceptionalism                               248
9.4 Geographic scale jumping and urban migration            251
9.5 From basic principles to policy instruments in
     cities of migration                                    257
14.1 The five-hour commuting burden in Gauteng,
     South Africa                                           389
14.2 Door-to-door speed of public transport                 392

Maps
2.1 The globe’s shifting economic center of gravity          28
11.1 Urban Highways in Chile                                305
Preface



Cities can be understood as the product of a triad of forces. First,
and most obvious, cities are physical entities—streets, buildings, and
subways. Visitors see these realities first, and while they are only part
of the city, they shape everything else that occurs in an urban area.
The physical bones of the city help determine the cost of housing, the
integration of rich and poor, the ease of getting around, the quality
of air and water.
   The second force is the public sector, which defines the borders
of the city and has the responsibility for providing clean water and
public safety. Public regulations shape private entrepreneurship and
the buildings that give any city its skyline. Close proximity increases
human connections, for good and bad. And the public sector helps
manage those interactions, allowing the benevolent ones to flourish
and limiting the more damaging consequences of urban interaction.
   Third is the magic of human interaction. Certainly, cities are
physical entities and governmental units, but the real heart of the
city is its people. Shiny buildings do not mean urban success—true
success means that ordinary humans are finding success, by finding
each other, within dense urban enclaves. These interactions gener-
ate innovations in art and technology, and religion and politics, as
they have for thousands of years since Pericles’ Athens and Kautilya’s
Taxila.
   The goal here is to explore how these forces come together and
shape cities, and how the public sector can play a more positive
role in enabling the cities of the developing world to flourish. Too
many cities in Sub-Saharan Africa continue to suffer from the oldest
urban scourge—unclean water. In Uganda, only a fifth of the urban
xii Preface


population has access to piped water. Crime and murder turn many
Latin American neighborhoods into places of terror rather than
opportunity. Limited transport options can turn daily commutes in
Asia’s megacities into arduous treks. Shantytowns are a regular sight
in many of the world’s burgeoning cities.
   There are no easy solutions. The cities of the West acquired clean
water only through massive expenditures on infrastructure. In
America’s cities the battle against crime seemed unwinnable just two
decades ago. Long commutes and expensive housing infect almost
every thriving city. But even if the great problems of urban life cannot
be simply solved, there are better—and worse—policy approaches to
these problems. Human history provides hard-won knowledge about
how to make cities more livable.
   No discipline has a monopoly on wisdom. We have brought
together leading thinkers from several fields to bring their insights to
urban issues. Collectively, their message is that the public sector must
play a significant role, but that there is a danger for overreaching.
Governments can over-regulate and build the wrong infrastructure.
Without better decision making, the world’s cities will be unable to
realize their true potential.
   The chapters in this book are intended not to prescribe ways
forward but rather to incite debate and further research. And while
exploring many key issues in rethinking cities, they are by no means
exhaustive. We do not address several issues, among them urban
governance and municipal finance since any meaningful discussion
on these would require taking into account the huge diversity of
approaches and constructs.
   We hope that you will find this collection of essays informative
and thought-provoking.

                               Edward Glaeser and Abha Joshi-Ghani
Acknowledgments




This volume benefitted from the contributions, support, and advice
of many. The chapters in this volume were commissioned under the
Urbanization Knowledge Platform launched by the World Bank
in 2011 to strengthen its links with research institutes, the private
sector, policy makers, and non-governmental organizations. We
are most grateful to the Urbanization Knowledge Platform and the
World Bank’s research committee for their strong support.
   First and foremost, we wish to thank the individual con-
tributors to the volume for their contributions and also for their
immense patience: Paul Romer and Brandon Fuller, New York
University, Stern School of Business; Richard Dobbs and Jaana
Remes, McKinsey Global Institute; Enrico Moretti, University of
California, Berkeley; Joshua Lerner, Harvard Business School; Saskia
Sassen, Columbia University; Michael Keith, COMPAS, University
of Oxford; Ejaz Ghani, The World Bank; Ravi Kanbur, Cornell
University; Jonathan Woetzel and Herbert Pohl, McKinsey & Co.;
Eduardo Engel, Yale University; Alexander Galetovic, Universidad
de los Andes; Alain Bertaud, Urban Planner; Sonia Hammam,
The World Bank; Paul Collier and Tony Venables, University of
Oxford; Matthew E. Kahn, University of California, Los Angeles;
Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, Princeton University; Klaus Desmet,
Universidad Carlos III de Madrid; and Vernon Henderson, Brown
University.
   We benefitted immensely from the suggestions of the peer reviewer,
Henry Overman, London School of Economics; David Dowall,
xiv Acknowledgments


UC Berkeley; and Uwe Deichmann and Jean-Jacques Dethier, The
World Bank.
   We would also like to thank the following for their insights, sug-
gestions and contributions: Sameh Al Wahba, Marianne Fay, Daniel
Hoornweg, Abhas Jha, Hyoung Gun Wang, Austin Kilroy, Dennis
Linders, Greg Clark, and Miguel Luiz Bucalem. A special thanks to
Somik Lall for his help and contribution during the earlier phase
of the book. Paola Colla, Berenice Sanchez, Fernando Armaderis,
Punam Prakash, and Vivien Cherian provided critical administrative
support.
   Bruce Ross-Larson and his team from CDI edited the manuscript
and were generous with their time and attention, the Office of the
External Publisher at the World Bank provided very useful sugges-
tions. James Yang did the original illustration for the cover and he
and his team were gracious in their accommodation of the iterations.
   A very heartfelt thanks to Sanjay Pradhan, Vice President,
Learning, Leadership, and Innovation, The World Bank, and Kaushik
Basu, Chief Economist, The World Bank, for their advice, guidance
and incredible support.
   Finally, a special thanks to Mark Hirschboeck, The World Bank,
for patiently, humorously and steadily tracking the edits, collating
the chapters, following up with all the contributors, and keeping a
keen eye on the various iterations.
Rethinking Cities

Edward Glaeser and Abha Joshi-Ghani




Some three billion people will move into cities by 2030. The vast
majority of this demographic shift will take place in developing
countries. Urbanization is undoubtedly a key driver of development—
cities provide the national platform for shared prosperity. But
urbanization also poses enormous challenges—congestion, air
pollution, social and economic divisions, crime and violence, the
breakdown of public services, and creation of the slums that 1 billion
urban residents call home. It is clear that cities have not performed
as well as can be expected in their transformative role. But they have
enormous potential to lift millions out of poverty and become hubs
of knowledge, innovation, and entrepreneurship.
   How do we empower city leaders to harness the unprecedented
urbanization taking place today and address the vast inequalities of
access and opportunity that cities present? How do we avoid the
mistakes of the past to ensure that the aspiring cities of the developing
world grow in a way that is inclusive, equitable, and sustainable.
Business as usual is not an option. So, what should be done—and
why do we need to get it right?

Why Rethink Cities?

In 1899, Adna Weber began his magisterial survey of urban growth
by observing that “the most remarkable social phenomenon of the
xvi   Rethinking Cities


present century is the concentration of people in cities” (Weber 1899).
Yet when Weber wrote, populations remained predominantly rural,
even in wealthy countries, and poorer nations were overwhelming
rural, as they had been for millennia. At the end of the 20th century,
the developed world was overwhelmingly urban, but more than
60 percent of the populations of Africa and Asia were still rural
(United Nations 2001). The 21st century has already witnessed the
halfway point where more than 50 percent of the world’s population
is now urban, and in this century, almost every nation is likely to
become predominantly urban.
    The great transition from farm to city is filled with economic, social,
and political promise. Few countries have transitioned from poverty
to prosperity without urbanizing. The concentration of people in
cities can offer both economic opportunity and the chance for social
change toward a more open, innovative, inclusive, and democratic
society. The easy spread of knowledge within dense areas does not
just enable computer programmers to enter the global economy, it
also enables the spread of new ideas about equality and opportunity
and gives voice to multiple and diverse stakeholders, who are the
lifeblood of political reform.
    While urbanization can mean economic dynamism, inclusion,
and democracy, it also creates enormous challenges, and the diffi-
culties of urban life are magnified when the public sector is weak.
Urban proximity enables the exchange of bacteria just as easily as the
exchange of new thoughts. It took centuries for the cities of the West
to become places of good health, rather than contagious disease, but
congestion and high housing prices continue to bedevil the world’s
more prosperous urban places. The cities of poorer nations, especially
those with more problematic public sectors, remain beset by enor-
mous challenges.
    Despite these difficulties, urbanization will, and should, continue.
Widespread prosperity seems much more likely to emerge from new
cities than from the farms of the less developed world. The right
response to the challenges of urban life is not to try to confine aspiring
urbanites to rural poverty, but to defeat the demons that come with
density.
    There are no easy solutions. The cities in developed coun-
tries acquired clean water only through massive expenditures on
                              Edward Glaeser and Abha Joshi-Ghani xvii


infrastructure. In American cities, the battle against crime seemed
unwinnable just two decades ago. Long commutes and expensive
housing infect almost every thriving city. But even if the great prob-
lems of urban life cannot be simply solved, there are better—and
worse—policy approaches to these problems. Human history pro-
vides hard-won knowledge on how to make cities more livable.
   There are many different plausible approaches to understanding
urban solutions. One approach emphasizes clearly defined public
sectors—such as transportation, police, and public health—and
focuses on solutions in each sectoral silo. Yet some problems—such
as economic vitality and quality of life—span sectors and require
solutions outside any one area of public intervention. Therefore, a
second approach might start with clearly defined objectives, such as
longevity and economic prosperity, but these can be too broad, and
different fields often differ in their approaches. This chapter presents
a hybrid approach traversing both.

Rethinking city strategies

Policy makers and city mayors need to tackle a wide range of prob-
lems, from debilitating conditions in urban slums to the lack of basic
services such as clean water and sanitation, inadequate housing, the
exclusion of the poor from the city’s socioeconomic fabric, and the
management of natural hazards and pollution. If these problems
are left unaddressed, cities can become a source of social and
political instability. But cities can instead become the engines of
transformative change toward inclusive, people-centered, and sus-
tainable development.
   The key questions examined here center on cities and economic
growth and the changing dynamics of world economic geography.
Should we expect the economic success of cities like Bangalore and
Shenzhen to trickle down to the less fortunate? What policies can
ensure that the economic benefits of urbanization help a broad swath
of the population?
   From the economy, pivot to the physical city: the market failures
that lead to sprawling congested cities also cause environmental dam-
age, increase greenhouse gas emissions, and inflict deleterious impacts
on the most vulnerable citizens, the urban poor. How do cities
xviii Rethinking Cities


manage urban land, housing, and transportation to become sus-
tainable and livable? No one doubts that cities need infrastructure,
including sewage facilities, roads, and power generation. Yet while
the need for infrastructure is clear, the best means of providing it are
less obvious. Should it be provided by the public or private sectors?
How can limited financing be used more effectively? National poli-
cies matter for cities, and national policy makers can no longer afford
to ignore this if they want to harness urbanization for economic
growth, job creation, inclusion, and sustainability.

The urban imperative: unleashing economic change

Few cities expand without economic success. Just a handful of cities
have had such powerful non-economic attractions that they have
grown without a core economic comparative advantage. In the United
States, early Boston attracted religious migrants, and Los Angeles
drew in Midwestern farmers interested in a more Mediterranean
climate. But even in these cases, urban pioneers wanted to earn a
living, and later urbanites were attracted by the economic potential
unleashed by the first residents. A more common historical pattern
is that a city forms around a political nucleus. But even if political
power is the primary source of the city’s external revenues, people
cluster around that power searching for economic advantage.
    Every large city that is also a capital—from Washington, DC, to
Kinshasa and Ankara—has grown in part because of the economic
activity generated by the central authority. Yet even those cities
are usually eager to see more non-political sources of prosperity.
In commercial cities, the fight for economic success is even more
critical.
    What do we know about urban productivity? The first, and most
central, fact about the prosperity of cities is that productivity and
incomes typically increase with city size and density. Glaeser and
Gottlieb (2009) provide evidence for the economies of agglomera-
tions in the United States, and there are many studies document-
ing similar patterns in other wealthy nations (for example, Combes
et al. 2008). If anything, the connection between urban density and
prosperity seems to be even stronger in the developing world. Wages
                              Edward Glaeser and Abha Joshi-Ghani xix


typically rise by 6 percent as density doubles in the United States.
The connection between density and incomes appears to double in
India and triple in China (Chauvin et al. 2014). These facts just con-
firm what seems obvious to the naked eye—economic growth in the
developing world is uneven and highly concentrated in cities.
   Economists since Adam Smith have sought to understand why
prosperity is higher in large population centers. One hypothesis is
that some areas have innate productivity advantages as a result of
natural factors, such as access to waterways or mines, and people
come to cities to be near those productivity advantages. A related
view is that some cities have manmade advantages, including the
presence of national government, which attracts people. According
to this view, the link between density and prosperity reflects largely
reverse causality—productivity causes density, not the reverse.
   There surely was much truth to this view historically. The ports of
Liverpool, New York, and Shanghai were major geographic advan-
tages that helped those cities grow. Bleakley and Lin (2012) docu-
ment how U.S. cities grew at fault lines, the natural stopping point of
inland navigation. Coal mines were critical to Essen and Pittsburgh.
The perceived political advantages of British control during the colo-
nial era were surely part of the appeal of Singapore and Hong Kong
Special Administrative Region (SAR), China.

The economies of agglomeration

Few scholars see natural resources as the cause of most urban
productivity today. Commodities, like coal, can be easily shipped
and the natural harbors of many cities have become irrelevant.
Soil quality may explain historical density levels (Combes et al.
2008), but it is hard to imagine that soil quality has any direct
impact on productivity today. Even in Africa, where urbanization
is often associated with commodities, there is increasing evidence
of agglomeration economies. Instead, most scholars believe that the
agglomeration produces its own productivity, perhaps abetted by
governmental factors and connections to the outside world.
   The benefits of being around other people are typically labeled
agglomeration economies, the starting point for understanding
xx   Rethinking Cities


the sources of urban success. Since agglomeration economies are
so basic, and so ubiquitous, it is useful to review them, for they
underlie everything else that follows. At their core, agglomeration
economies occur because density increases the ease of moving goods,
people, and ideas. Cities remove the physical spaces between people
and firms, and proximity is valuable precisely because it makes con-
nections easier.
   The most basic agglomeration economy is the reduction of trans-
port costs for goods, which is emphasized by Krugman (1991) and
others: if a supplier locates near customers, the costs of shipping
decline. Ellison et al. (2007) show that manufacturing industries
that buy and sell to each other also locate near one another. This
agglomeration economy is closely linked to economies of scale at the
firm level, because if factories were infinitely indivisible, they would
just spread out to be located near every conceivable customer. Cities
enable scale economies and proximity for trading partners.
   The decline in transport costs has made this agglomeration force
less important in the developed cities of the West. For example, cities
such as New York and London were once manufacturing power-
houses, places where factories located to be close to customers and
transport infrastructure. As it became easier to ship goods, manu-
facturing left older, wealthier cities for cheaper locales in suburbs or
lower-cost regions or lower-cost countries. In the 1960s and 1970s,
many older cities had to struggle with the challenges created by this
deindustrialization. A similar trend can be observed in some develop-
ing countries today, where manufacturing is gradually moving out of
cities in search of cheaper locales.
   But even if manufacturing is now far less important to San
Francisco and Milan, it remains a mainstay for urban areas in the
developing world. Developing countries are at an earlier stage of
development, and lower labor costs give them an advantage in pro-
ducing manufactured goods. Moreover, transportation networks are
far less reliable in the developing world, which give a greater edge to
urban areas, especially if they are also well-functioning ports. It is
far easier to ship from rural Ohio than from rural Maharashtra, so
new manufacturing is far more likely to locate in Mumbai than in
Cleveland.
                                Edward Glaeser and Abha Joshi-Ghani xxi


Specialized business services

Adam Smith focused on the benefits of the division of labor, which
he connected with urban densities, noting that in “the Highlands of
Scotland, every farmer must be butcher, baker, and brewer for his
own family” (Smith 1776). During Smith’s era, factory production
was strongly associated with specialized labor, so Smith’s observation
can be interpreted as suggesting that benefits of factories were easier
to exploit in cities with large home markets. His exact words, howev-
er, refer to the service industry, which is particularly targeted toward
local customers, and the benefits of specialization in urban service
industries continue even in cities that have largely deindustrialized.
    At its most tangible level, Smith’s observation can be seen in the
abundance of specialized shops, salons, and restaurants in large cit-
ies. Yet in most cities, specialized business services are even more
important. Kolko (2010) documents how business services have
largely replaced manufacturing as the heart of urban economies
in the developed world, and that they are becoming an important
source of employment in developing countries too. These sectors
have a natural affinity for high density locales, because they typi-
cally involve a lot of face-to-face contact. One advantage of locating
in London is proximity to an abundance of legal, accounting, and
financial expertise, and that expertise can be extremely specialized, an
added benefit to local customers.
    The urban edge in providing business services essentially reflects
the fact that cities reduce transportation costs for people, but there
are other ways for that edge to make cities economically dynamic—
by creating thick urban labor markets (Marshall 1890). In a city with
a panoply of diverse employers, the economic difficulties of a single
firm may not cause much hardship for those firms’ employees who
can readily work somewhere else. In a company town, however, the
travails of that company will lead to far more distress.
    The abundance of local employers also eases the job search pro-
cess, part of connecting labor and capital. Young workers may not
know what sector or employer is a good match for their talents and
inclinations. A city filled with different workplaces allows workers to
try things out, to experiment with acting before entering into a career
xxii Rethinking Cities


in accounting. The fallbacks may also support more risk taking by
urban workers, who can try something uncertain, knowing that there
will be other opportunities if things do not pan out.
   The ease of connecting with other people also produces non-
pecuniary benefits of urban living. Young people come to cities, in
part, to be near other young people and because cities are marriage
markets (Costa and Kahn 2000). The diversity of urban pleasures
helps to make cities even more attractive than urban wages on
their own.

Speeding the flow of ideas

Perhaps the most important urban advantage, however, comes from
speeding the flow of ideas. Jane Jacobs (1970) considered cities the
well-spring of innovation because they enable old ideas to be trans-
formed into new ideas. There is an abundance of examples, from the
creation of the skyscraper in 1880s Chicago to the development of
modern finance in post-1970 New York, of how personal connections
among innovators helped create a collaborative chain of brilliance.
   There are at least two distinct ways for workers to benefit from
the free flow of ideas in cities. First, when ideas generate entrepre-
neurship and jobs, the extra labor demand increases wages. Second,
when the workers learn from the people around them, their human
capital increases, and that makes them more productive. Both forces
tend to raise wages in urban areas. One piece of evidence supporting
the second hypothesis is that workers who come to cities typically
see their wages rise slowly with their experience in the city, rather
than instantly increasing to the average in the area (Glaeser and Mare
2001). This pattern is perhaps most compatible with the view that
cities are drivers of human capital, where workers become skilled by
being around other skilled people.
   General agglomeration economies should occur everywhere, but
policy makers should seek to understand what forces are most power-
ful in their community. The more critical question for policy makers
is how to harness related forces that explain differences across space.
Empirical work has documented two major factors that determine
the success of cities: education and entrepreneurship. In India, the
quality of infrastructure and the education of the local labor force are
                             Edward Glaeser and Abha Joshi-Ghani xxiii


the strongest predictors of city competitiveness for new firms (Ghani
et al. 2012).

Spillovers of knowledge

In the 1980s, the new growth theory, led by scholars such as Paul
Romer and Robert Lucas, focused on knowledge spillovers as the
source of increasing returns economy-wide that enabled long-run
economic growth. The focus on the flow of knowledge pointed
toward both education and cities.
   In the United States, workers who live in more educated cities
typically earn more, even holding their years of schooling constant
(Rauch 1993). And the connection between an area’s education level
and earnings appears to be even stronger in China and India than it is
in the United States (Chauvin et al. 2014). Policy makers now focus
on job creation in cities in addition to increasing productivity and
raising incomes.
    Moretti (Chapter 5) sifts through the evidence on education as a
source of local economic success and urban productivity. Productivity
differences and economic disparities between geographical areas are
not a consequence of exogenous factors like natural resources alone.
Much of it is driven by forces of agglomeration economies such as
thick labor and marriage markets, specialized service providers, and
knowledge spillovers. The location of workers and firms shape the
futures of entire communities.
   Moretti’s (2004) earlier work has shown how educational insti-
tutions appear to be particularly powerful predictors of urban pro-
ductivity. U.S. cities that had land grant colleges before 1940 have
experienced higher wages and faster population growth in recent
decades. These facts lend support to Senator Moynihan’s claim, “If
you want to build a world class city build a great university and wait
200 years.”
   But most public officials have neither the ability to build a world-
class university nor the patience to wait 200 years. So, the impor-
tance of education must lead to a different set of policy levers. The
education of an area reflects both selection, the in-migration of the
skilled, and treatment—the education of the citizenry. Education
strengthens a nation as a whole; therefore, attracting more skilled
xxiv Rethinking Cities


migrants means strengthening one community at the expense of
another. In many cases, better local school systems will do double
duty both by building a more educated workforce and by attracting
skilled parents interested in better education for their children.
   What policies will attract more skilled workers? The literature on
this question is limited, but it seems to call for investing in amenities
that are particularly relevant to the more skilled. One line of thought
emphasizes core urban amenities such as safe streets, good schools,
and swift commutes, which should be valued by everyone. A second
view focuses on urban attributes, like the arts and a thriving nightlife,
which may be particularly attractive to more educated workers. The
threat of inducing an exodus of the most skilled remains a major
argument against attempts at local redistribution.
   The literature on education is far larger, but there remains rela-
tively little consensus on the determinants of a first-rate education
system. High-quality teachers appear to be a primary ingredient in
educational success (for example, Chetty et al. 2011), but better
management and governance are also important. In the develop-
ing world, the problem of teacher absenteeism remains particularly
acute. In some countries, like the United States, charter schools have
achieved remarkable success, especially where public school systems
are underperforming (Angrist et al. 2010). Similarly, the mush-
rooming of private schools in India is meeting the gap created by
underperforming and low-quality public education in many of the
country’s urban areas.

Nurturing entrepreneurs

While the skills learned in school are surely important, the skills
acquired out of school are likely to have an even greater impact.
While many different skills are assuredly important to urban success,
one particularly important knowledge base concerns entrepreneur-
ship. The most traditional forms of economics tend to assume that
the supply of entrepreneurship is constant across space, but since
Chinitz (1961), economists have been aware of at least the possibility
that the supply of entrepreneurs differs across space.
   In Chinitz’s (1961) comparison of New York and Pittsburgh, New
York appeared to be more resilient even in the 1950s—in part thanks
                               Edward Glaeser and Abha Joshi-Ghani xxv


to the supply of entrepreneurship, a legacy of the city’s industrial past.
New York’s largest industry had been garment production, which had
few barriers to entry and provided a starting point for thousands of
would-be entrepreneurs. Those entrepreneurs gained experience not
just in making clothes, but also in starting a business—and they often
took those skills into different industries, including banking and real
estate. They also appear to have passed along some of those skills
to their children. Pittsburgh, by contrast, was dominated by large
firms, such as U.S. Steel. These companies may have been extremely
efficient, but they tended to train middle managers rather than entre-
preneurs. According to Chinitz (1961), the absence of entrepreneurs
in Pittsburgh thus contributed to making the city less effective at
reinventing itself.
    Typically, area-level entrepreneurship has been measured either
using average firm size, controlling for industry, or the share of
employment in newer establishments. Both measures are strongly
correlated with subsequent employment growth, both across and
within metropolitan areas (Glaeser et al. 2009). Chinitz’s hypothesis
that natural resources, such as coal mines, led to heavy industries
with fewer entrepreneurs and less capacity for urban regeneration
also seems to be supported by the data (Chatterji et al. 2013).
    While the statistical work on entrepreneurship is at an early stage,
the important role of entrepreneurship in generating local success
is also supported by abundant urban history. Henry Ford played
an outsized role in Detroit’s history, and the resurgence of Seattle
since the 1970s seems linked to an abundance of start-ups, including
Microsoft, Amazon, and Starbucks. Entrepreneurs, like most people,
are not perfectly mobile, and they often locate their businesses where
they have spent their early adult lives. These businesses can often
become mainstays of local employment, often for decades.
    But even if the value of entrepreneurs is widely accepted, it is less
clear what that implies for local policies (Lerner, Chapter 6). One
activist school sees a role for large-scale government leadership in
funding entrepreneurship and establishing a spatial cluster. Public
support did play some role in creating Silicon Valley and the Bangalore
Cluster. An alternative school argues that entrepreneurship is far too
complicated for the public sector to effectively micromanage and
instead argues for a more laissez-faire approach, emphasizing limited
xxvi Rethinking Cities


regulations and low taxes. A middle position focuses on improving
the local business environment, improving physical infrastructure,
attracting skilled workers, funding basic research, and provid-
ing an appropriate legal infrastructure to allow that research to be
commercialized.

Toward a more inclusive city

Successful urban entrepreneurs can earn billions, but urban success
requires that prosperity comes to more than just a few. Inequality is
a long-standing feature of urban life. Plato wrote, “Any city, however
small, is in fact divided into two, one the city of the poor, the other of
the rich” (Plato 363 bce [reprinted 2012]). In a highly unequal world,
we should not be surprised that cities are also unequal, especially
when poorer people can choose to come to cities. Urban poverty
reflects, in part, the enduring attraction that cities have for poorer
people, because cities provide economic opportunities and often a
more robust safety net. Yet we should still worry about whether cities
are doing enough to provide economic opportunity for everyone.
   The great-growing cities of the developing world are attracting
millions of people from poor, rural areas. This migration process
makes urban poverty inevitable. When those cities succeed, the flow
of poorer people only increases, as it does when cities help poor
people become more prosperous. So, successful cities cannot eradi-
cate poverty, but they do provide opportunities to reduce the number
of poor people within their borders. Wealthy countries often have
communities without poverty, like the United States’ Greenwich,
Connecticut, but such places are uniformly prosperous because
they are unaffordable and have no space for the poor. That certainly
is not success.
   A more inclusive city is not without slums and poverty, but it
does manage to regularly enable poor people to escape poverty. It
creates jobs and provides ladders of wealth and occupations that
provide a means of moving toward prosperity. There are many causes
of exclusion within metropolitan areas. Neighborhoods differ in
core amenities, including access to public transport, employment, or
parks and safe public spaces. The rich are often willing to pay more
for such local assets, and that leads to clusters of wealth in a city’s
                               Edward Glaeser and Abha Joshi-Ghani xxvii


most desirable neighborhoods, and clusters of poverty where prices
are lowest. If the rich are also willing to pay more for the privilege
of living around other rich people, possibly because of better local
schools or less crime, this will also lead to segregation by income.
   As natural as some sorting by income within an urban area might
be, the isolation of the poor in specific neighborhoods works against
the ideal of the inclusive city. After all, isolated pockets of poverty
can seem very far from the thriving heart of a city. Children raised
in segregated slums would seem to lose the benefits of being part of
a connected city. Unsurprisingly, social reforms have long desired to
build cities with more social and economic integration.
   The segregation of the poor should be a concern—divided cit-
ies are neither productive nor sustainable. At the least, governments
should worry about public policies that might contribute to segrega-
tion, such as artificial differences in the levels of public services across
space or land-use controls that make it difficult to build affordable
housing in more expensive neighborhoods. Public policies must
address the unnecessary segregation resulting from significant differ-
ences in the availability of public services over space.

The returns to education

Historically, education has been a primary tool for creating inclusion
at the level of the city and the country. The returns to education are
typically high in the developing world, and education provides a far
more sustainable path toward social mobility. Despite the extremely
high motivation of many students, education in developing cities is
often beset by significant difficulties, including limited resources,
teacher absenteeism, and extreme heterogeneity in student prepara-
tion. These problems can be even more extreme in the rural areas of
the developing world.
   However, this note is not an education policy primer, and does
not take any stand on the appropriate path for education reform.
This is a golden age of education research, where randomized trials
and other statistical methods are enabling us to learn much more
about how to make teaching effective. In some cases, private pro-
viders, such as charter schools in the United States, have achieved
remarkable results. Other work shows that teacher quality is of
xxviii Rethinking Cities


enormous importance and teacher incentives can make a great differ-
ence. There are clearly different paths toward educational quality, and
local circumstances may dictate which path will be more effective
within any country. The point is that improving education, particu-
larly for the poorest in society, is likely to be the most effective way of
ensuring more inclusive cities.

The mix of industries

Sassen (Chapter 8) approaches inclusiveness by contemplating the
industrial mix of an area, and specifically discusses the connection
between services and manufacturing. There are two important ways
the industrial mix relates to earnings for the less advantaged. First,
some industries may simply have more demand for less-skilled work-
ers than others, and this will tend to increase earnings for the less
skilled. Indeed, one cause of the rise in inequality in the West since
the 1970s has been a relative decline in industries and occupations,
especially in manufacturing, which disproportionately employed
those with less education. The rise of urban manufacturing in the
developing world, by contrast, increases the demand for less-skilled
workers.
   Wage differences alone do not tell much about the quality of
the jobs on offer. One reason that service sector jobs traditionally
offered lower wages than manufacturing jobs, for comparably skilled
workers, is that the service jobs had less physical discomfort than
traditional manufacturing or mining. And an increase in demand
for less-skilled workers in the city will also tend to attract less-skilled
workers, limiting the local wage effects of the increase in demand.
   From a national perspective, there is nothing bad about the fact
that rural migrants come to take up urban jobs seeking better eco-
nomic opportunities and a better life for their families. However, as
Keith (Chapter 9) reminds us, current urbanites will often oppose
their migration. Antipathy toward urban growth is then reflected
in overly draconian land-use policies or other rules favoring insid-
ers over outsiders. In some cases, as in China, internal migration is
limited by rules, and the migrants that do arrive are often given far
fewer privileges than the insiders. Managing the conflict between
                               Edward Glaeser and Abha Joshi-Ghani xxix


current insiders and future migrants will be a major political task for
developing world cities for decades.
   But the industrial mix affects worker productivity in a second and
perhaps a more important way. A job is not just a paycheck; it is also
an opportunity to learn. The disadvantaged benefit most from jobs
that give them skills to help them move up. One plausible interpreta-
tion of the apparent success of industrial policy in Singapore is that,
as workers moved from textiles to electronics and then up the qual-
ity ladder, they acquired human capital as they went. In this view,
industrial policy is really human capital policy.
   Despite Singapore’s success, there are good reasons to suspect that
industrial policy will more often produce cronyism than concrete
benefits. Economists for centuries have urged a more laissez-faire
approach to managing firm growth. But even if a government wants
to avoid picking winners, choices regarding infrastructure and invest-
ment will inevitably favor one industry or another.

The overwhelmingly large informal economy

One major feature of developing world cities is that the poorer labor-
ers often work in an informal sector that is free from regulations and
taxes, but where workers lack access to public services and some parts
of the safety net. The scale of the informal economy is overwhelming,
reflecting a state that engages in ambitious regulations, but lacks the
ability to enforce them (Ghani and Kanbur, Chapter 7). While we
may wish that every government had the inclination to engage in
only limited, sensible regulations and the ability to enforce them, this
is not the case in much of the developing world. In the world’s poorer
cities, the informal sector is an escape valve, enabling entrepreneurs
to succeed and employ less-advantaged workers despite significant
regulatory barriers.
    In Indian cities, the informal sector is increasing in size relative to
the formal sector. One interpretation of this increase is that density is
even more valuable in the informal sector than in the formal sector.
Since informal firms may rely more on tacit agreements between sup-
pliers and customers, the benefits of easy face-to-face communication
may be greater. Alternatively, informality may be more prevalent in
xxx   Rethinking Cities


smaller firms that disproportionately locate in cities because of their
need to partner with other firms. A third force pulling informality
into cities is that large-scale manufacturing, which tends to be for-
mal, is typically more land intensive and thus more suburban. Small
service firms that prize informality are more naturally urban.
   Millions of less-advantaged workers benefit from the employment
the informal sector provides, but informality is far from a perfect
solution. In the “gray” market, there are no rules protecting worker
safety and often little legal recourse for workers who have been mal-
treated. Informality may be a reasonable response to a bad situation,
and it may foster entrepreneurship and create jobs, but that does
not mean there are no significant costs in having millions of workers
without social safety nets.

Rethinking city interventions

Cities are people and political units, but they are also physical enti-
ties, filled with vast amounts of housing and infrastructure and
deeply shaped by public policies. Barriers to building can produce
a flat city that sprawls and a proliferation of slums. New transport
infrastructure can pull a city outward, as new settlements occur along
the highway or subway line. The physical challenges facing develop-
ing world cities can be daunting, and historically many of these cities
have made decisions with severe adverse consequences. Housing,
land, and transportation are at the nexus of how a city develops and
how livable and inclusive it is for those who come attracted by new
opportunities.

The provision of core urban services

To be inclusive, a city needs to provide more than just decent wages to
its poorer workers, it needs to provide core urban services as well, such
as clean water and sanitation. Workers need safety and decent com-
mutes too, and they need decent housing. These issues are discussed
by Woetzel and Pohl (Chapter 10), who observe that basic services
are often concentrated in the city core, and access to clean water and
sanitation drops rapidly as one moves out of the core. The disparities
between core and periphery are most acute for megacities. The benefits
                              Edward Glaeser and Abha Joshi-Ghani xxxi


of urbanization do not seem to extend beyond the core. While density
makes it more cost-effective to provide basic infrastructure services
to urban residents, city governments often do not collect enough
revenues to extend these services to the expanding urban population,
or even to maintain existing services for current residents.

Housing

Take a panoramic look at the physical problems of African cities,
especially their housing challenge (Collier and Venables, Chapter
15). Shantytowns have always existed in cities, though colder climates
have tended to limit people’s willingness to urbanize in completely
substandard dwellings. In warmer locations, where rural settings have
become perilous due to conflict or crop failures, migrants are willing
to come to cities even if housing is wildly inadequate. The challenge
of providing decent housing involves a number of constraints—the
limited supply of urban land, the lack of property rights, outdated
and unpractical regulations on minimum lot sizes and floor area
ratios, as well as weak construction sectors and a lack of suitable
housing finance mechanisms for the poor and the middle class.
    Housing is really a combination of two attributes—a physical
home and a location (Hammam, Chapter 13). Housing values differ
so much within and across cities precisely because locations differ so
much in their value. Housing markets are essentially local, so inter-
ventions that provide more public housing in a far-flung suburb do
little to ease the cost of living within a dense city. The key to solving
the urban housing problem is not just to deliver more cheap hous-
ing—it is also to make sure that housing is in places that provide
plenty of value for residents. Understanding the constraints on sup-
ply of adequate housing and the rising demand for affordable and
adequate housing is important.
    Shaping the demand for housing is the demand for structures and
particular locations, but housing policy often does more to influence
housing supply than housing demand. Supply is shaped by build-
ing technology, land availability, and the rules that influence con-
struction. In some cases, those rules are widely flouted, so cities can
develop an ocean of substandard housing despite having extremely
tight building rules—Mumbai is one such example. Similarly, the
xxxii Rethinking Cities


provision of public subsidized housing in far-flung places, away from
jobs and adequate transport, fails to generate complementary private
investments in housing maintenance or upgrading and creates inef-
ficient and divided cities
    The supply of housing is built up over time, and understanding
supply means understanding both the stock of homes and the flow.
The flow of homes is determined by the combination of supply and
demand, and then the stock represents the history of past flows.
Typically, the flows are positive and the stock gradually increases,
but there are times when the stock can be radically reduced either
through planned demolitions or natural disasters. A radical reduction
in the stock of housing due to a calamity can represent one of the
greatest urban challenges.
    Both rules and building technology determine the speed of the
flow of housing supply. Complex multistory dwellings can take
many months or years to build. A Byzantine permitting process can
double or triple the construction time. Conversely, simple self-made
or prefabricated homes can be put up in days, especially if there is
no effective regulation. The speed of building can be considerably
faster if residents are doing the building, avoiding the need to bring
in outsiders to build more formal structures.
    Housing in many developing countries is often marked by
physical and legal inadequacies (Collier and Venables, Chapter 15).
Physically, the housing can be unsafe and lacking in core amenities,
including running water and electricity. Legally, many residents lack
clear title to their property, usually because homes were built without
the permission of the land’s owner. Developing world cities have an
enormous informal housing market, just as they have an enormous
informal labor market, and the results are similar. The informal
housing market provides usable space for poorer people who could
not otherwise live in the city, but the residents of this housing have
few of the protections of a more legal market.
    As we contemplate solutions to the housing problems of the
developing world, we should be cautious about applying wealthy
world standards to poorer nations. Housing that would be torn down
in New York or London would often be seen as luxurious by the
poorer residents of Addis Ababa. If housing is kept to standards that
                             Edward Glaeser and Abha Joshi-Ghani xxxiii


seem adequate to the wealthy world, the price will be prohibitive for
poorer urbanites if they must pay for it themselves. If the housing is
provided by the government, the public sector both risks crowding
out other potentially more valuable forms of social spending, like
education, and creates powerful, artificial incentives encouraging the
poor to migrate to cities.
   The gulf in wealth between developing world and developed
world cities also suggests the value of planning for obsolescence.
Any housing that is appropriate for Africa or India today will (it
is hoped) be inadequate 40 years down the road, when both areas
are far wealthier. So, any housing policy needs to be self-consciously
temporary and adaptable to the rapidly changing nature of developing
world economies.

Land use

The public approach to housing in developing world cities always
includes land-use regulations, although they may be only sporadi-
cally enforced. Those regulations can have many purposes, but one
typical goal is to ensure a minimum standard of living. Yet the impact
of those requirements often increases the cost of housing precisely for
people the rules are trying to help. This limits the ability of land-use
regulations to ensure better housing standards.
   It is perhaps possible to accept that poorer urbanites will live
in very small, very simple homes. It is harder to accept that these
homes will be unsafe because of unsound building, have sanitary
issues related to lack of sewage and other infrastructure, or be in
precarious areas prone to natural disasters like flooding or landslides.
These safety challenges are particularly hard to solve, because poorer
residents often take on considerable risks in urban labor markets and
disregard rules against living in dangerous locales.
   For the developing world, slums are often built ignoring both
land-use restrictions and indeed property ownership itself. Many
favelas and shantytowns were built on government land that was not
intended to provide space for housing. In some cases, settlements
grow up on private land that was being kept vacant for another
purpose. There are difficult tradeoffs among the rule of law: the
xxxiv Rethinking Cities


preservation of space for alternative uses, or the very real housing
needs of the urban poor.
   Housing involves structures as well as land, and the quest for
better housing also involves innovative means of delivering inexpen-
sive structures. A number of private companies have been experi-
menting with smaller, prefabricated homes, often using inexpensive
recycled materials. These strategies hark back to the days when Sears
Roebuck sold thousands of cheap, do-it-yourself home-building kits
throughout America, and private innovation helped create cheaper
housing.
   But it is hard to imagine that cheap housing structures will solve
the problem of affordable urban housing unless the legal infrastruc-
ture is also effective and sensible. Ideally, land-use planning should
aim at providing safe, affordable housing in a connected city, with
functional transport corridors and easy connections between jobs
and housing (Bertaud, Chapter 14). Yet, too often land-use systems
produce sclerotic cities that provide insufficient legal, dense hous-
ing and too many extremely arduous commutes. The focus on static
urban design plans has resulted in massive urban sprawl and the
development of new towns with little market demand.
   Land use is closely tied to transportation planning. Housing
may be the combination of structures and location, but the value
of location is determined by the ease of access to other locations.
The core model of urban housing prices, first articulated by William
Alonso almost 50 years ago, describes how density and price reflect
the ease of access to jobs at the center of the city. The importance of
transportation has not diminished since Alonso’s day (Alonso 1964).
Transportation and land-use planning should be seen as a single topic
(Bertaud, Chapter 14).
   For example, the impact of an urban height limitation will be
determined in part by the ability to get to urban jobs from more
distant locales. When a city with abundant public transportation
limits the urban core, development for rich and poor will move away
from the core, people will still be able to reach jobs, and the city
will continue to grow. If only car transportation is possible, the poor
are more likely to try to remain at the center, leading to overcrowd-
ing, but the rich will suburbanize. If all travel links are poor, either
the city’s growth will stop or it will still sprawl outward, but at an
                             Edward Glaeser and Abha Joshi-Ghani xxxv


enormous cost of time and comfort as the new populations engage in
long, difficult commutes.

Approaches to affordability
Many affordability measures are foolish. The ratio of income to
housing costs is one measure, but it is essentially arbitrary and often
misleading. Consider a city and a rural area: in the city, workers can
earn $5,000 a year, but must pay $2,000 in housing. In the rural area,
housing costs only $500 a year, but earnings are only $2,500. The
housing cost to income ratio is much higher in the city, suggesting
an affordability problem, but earnings after paying for housing costs
are 50 percent higher in the city, suggesting that the urban residents
have a good deal. Indeed, the logic of spatial equilibrium would sug-
gest that if there were no other particularly urban problems, housing
costs should rise to $3,000 a year, so that after-housing earnings were
equalized between the two locales (Bertaud, Chapter 14).
    Another approach to housing affordability is the physical cost of
delivering housing and whether housing prices substantially exceed
physical costs. This process does not reveal whether poorer urban-
ites can afford the houses, but it does give some information about
whether the housing market is functioning well. If the physical costs
are relatively high, this suggests a problem in building technology. If
prices are much higher than physical construction costs, this implies
either high land values or regulatory barriers to construction.
    The other side of land-use planning involves commercial struc-
tures, and comes with many of the same concerns: affordability is
still desirable and safety remains a concern. Land-use regulations also
affect the physical landscape. There has, however, been something of
a sea change in the thinking on zoning for non-residential uses. A
century ago, planners were very concerned with separating industrial
and commercial from residential uses of land. They saw negative
impacts of industry on residential neighborhoods. Today, mixed-use
planning is far more popular, because planners now recognize the
environmental and social costs of artificially separating people from
their work. Jane Jacobs (1970) was one of the great advocates of
mixed-use cities. There may still be cases where particularly noxious
xxxvi Rethinking Cities


factories need to be isolated, but in many cases, mixing rather than
separating seems the more sensible policy.

The challenge of financing environmentally
sound infrastructure
The environment, particularly the impact of climate change, is an
important reason to focus on minimizing travel distances. Shorter
commutes mean less energy use, which is of even more consequence
if developing world cities develop automobile habits similar to the
developed world. Cities are full of instances where individuals impose
costs on third parties—externalities in the language of economics.
The costs potentially related to carbon emissions provide an example
of one such externality. This volume does not methodically consider
the externalities inherent in urban congestion and contagious disease,
although these provide a major motivation for spending on urban
infrastructure.
   There is both a local and a global side to urban environmentalism
(Kahn, Chapter 12). The global side focuses on city-level activities
that may affect the entire planet, particularly through climate change.
Cities do have higher carbon emissions than many traditional rural
areas, but that is true of all more prosperous lifestyles. The relevant
comparison is not between city living and rural poverty, but between
city living and less dense, but still affluent, lifestyles, like sprawling
suburbia. In that comparison, city living looks pretty green, because
people drive less at higher densities and typically inhabit smaller liv-
ing spaces, even holding family size and income constant (Glaeser
and Kahn 2010). Recent literature also offers evidence of this rela-
tionship between urban form and per capita emissions and, specifi-
cally, the association of urban density with lower per capita emissions
(Hoornweg et al. 2011).
   If India and China see their per capita carbon emissions rise to
the level in the sprawling United States, global carbon emissions will
increase by more than 125 percent. But if they rise only to the level
seen in wealthy but hyper-dense Hong Kong SAR, China, global
carbon emissions will rise by less than 30 percent. The environmental
advantages of dense living provide one reason to rethink land-use
policies that artificially limit building within the city center. Policies
                             Edward Glaeser and Abha Joshi-Ghani xxxvii


that limit driving, such as Singapore’s electronic road pricing, were
implemented mainly to limit congestion for economic and social
reasons, yet they also support global environmental concerns.
   Air quality, water pollution, and green spaces are three primary
local concerns that help determine the local quality of life (Kahn,
Chapter 12). In each case, private individuals tend to ignore the local
impacts of their actions, such as when they deposit waste in common
land areas, contaminating it, or drive polluting cars. For cities to be
pleasant as well as productive, they must pursue policies that counter
these costs of dense living.
   Developing world cities are likely to pay more attention to envi-
ronmental concerns as they become wealthier and better educated
(Kahn, Chapter 12). A pleasant environment is a luxury good, and
richer people are willing to pay more for a pleasant location. The
poorer residents of developing world cities are more likely to put
basic necessities ahead of parks and clean air. Education also matters,
because a more educated population is likely to be more effective at
lobbying for local concerns, including the environment.
   Even if developing world cities do not get wealthier, many of them
may still have to grapple with the challenges of climate change. If
greenhouses gases lead to rising sea levels, or more extreme weather
events, developing country cities are likely to face the consequences.
Nearly two-thirds of urban settlements with more than 5 million
people are located partly in low elevation coastal zones, which con-
tain 13 percent of the world’s population (McGranahan et al. 2007).
Many of them lack the infrastructure needed to cope with extreme
weather events, so the possibility of major disasters is a looming chal-
lenge for the developing world.

Alternative approaches to environmental issues

Economics and engineering offer alternative approaches to these
environmental issues. Economics emphasizes using incentives to
change individual behavior. A carbon tax that makes energy users pay
for the social costs of their actions is a classic example of a tax aimed
at reducing socially costly behavior. Congestion charging is another
example. Engineering focuses on changing the physical environment
to reduce the negative consequences of dense living. If congestion
xxxviii Rethinking Cities


charging is the economists’ approach to traffic congestion, the
engineering approach is to build more highway lanes or to provide
more public transit options. For highways and driving, the economic
approach seems quite sensible: vehicle miles traveled increase roughly
one-for-one with highway miles built (Duranton and Turner 2011).
If this continues to hold in the developing world, just building more
roads will not solve the traffic, since this will just induce more people
to drive. It is hard to imagine that people will start limiting their
driving unless they are charged for the social costs of driving and a
viable alternative (such as reliable public transport) is available.
    But in other cases, the engineering approach is far more feasible
than using economics. It is difficult to imagine relying on private
provision and taxes for clean water and sewage. How could such a
system be enforced in the informal communities of the developing
world? The engineering approach to clean water and sewage, which
involves massive public investment in infrastructure, seems the only
feasible solution.

Building the right infrastructure

But providing infrastructure in the developing world is also daunt-
ing. The infrastructure need is enormous, but so is the possibility of
building the wrong infrastructure. Moreover, the building process is
extraordinarily difficult, with plenty of opportunities for corruption
and mismanagement. The public sector is often ill-suited to man-
age such projects, because of both a lack of technical expertise and
because of the short time horizons that often influence political lead-
ers (Woetzel and Pohl, Chapter 10).
   Infrastructure challenges start with project selection. For decades
economists have promoted cost-benefit analysis, and for centuries
they have argued that infrastructure is best financed by user fees.
Adam Smith argued that funding infrastructure with tolls can ensure
that the projects built are also those that deliver sufficient social value
added (Smith 1776). User fee financing may be politically difficult
in some cases, and just plainly infeasible in others. Occasionally,
the externalities that justified the infrastructure to begin with push
against charging too much for the infrastructure’s use. For example,
                              Edward Glaeser and Abha Joshi-Ghani xxxix


if the goal is to eliminate contagious disease, then charging too much
for potable water may push people to continue using unsafe sources.

Paying for infrastructure

When user fees cannot pay for the infrastructure, the push is toward
conventional cost-benefit analysis and the use of more general tax
funds. Even in this case, however, it is probably sensible to pay for
infrastructure with local taxes paid by the people who use the infra-
structure. Tax increment financing, which pays for infrastructure by
taxing the increases in value of neighboring properties, provides an
alternative way of making sure that the costs of infrastructure are
paid for by people who actually benefit from it.
   While the basic tools for cost-benefit analysis are well understood,
there are numerous problems with implementation. Often project
supporters will try to significantly overstate benefits by overestimat-
ing future use. In other cases, costs may be underestimated. When
infrastructure creates significant benefits for the local community, it
may be hard to estimate these benefits, especially if they are diffuse.
For example, it is hard to determine the value of a project meant to
make a neighborhood more attractive. This unpredictability leaves
plenty of room for manipulating estimates for political ends.
   Too often governments invest too much in new infrastructure and
too little in maintaining the existing infrastructure stock. Getting
the most out of existing infrastructure can include policies such as
congestion pricing, which efficiently rations access, but politics tends
to resist such charges (Woetzel and Pohl, Chapter 10).

Public-private partnerships

Greater technical expertise in local governments is crucial if the
government is managing the project, but it is also necessary if infra-
structure provision has been farmed out to the private sector. But
public-private partnerships (PPPs) are not a panacea (Engel and
Galetovic, Chapter 11). There is plenty of room for failure in PPPs,
especially if the government ends up expropriating the private firm
or if the private firm ends up subverting the government. At their
xl   Rethinking Cities


best, PPPs enable private expertise and incentives to accomplish a
socially desirable task, like building a new bridge or highway. The
basic structure is that the private builder receives the right to build
the project and agrees to a time path of user fees. Those fees then
provide incentives for the private sector to maintain the project, since
it can cover its costs only if it continues to attract users. In cases
where user fees do not cover the costs, the government will need to
supplement these fees with a direct subsidy.
    PPPs offer tremendous promise, but there are many paths toward
disaster as well. One possibility is that the private entity will convince
the government to give them far too generous a subsidy. Any time
the government is giving cash to a private entity, there is potential
for corruption, since side payments to public officials can bring huge
profits. Technical expertise is helpful in evaluating the project, but it
will do little good if the official is on the payroll of the private com-
pany. A second problem is if the government decides not to honor
its contract. Once the infrastructure is in place, the government has
an incentive to lean on the private entity to reduce its user charges.
If firms anticipate such expropriation, they will be unwilling to make
investments in the first place. A third problem is that firms may
skimp on investments that could prevent low probability disasters.
The advocates of PPPs correctly emphasize that a private firm will not
let the project deteriorate to the level where users disappear, but they
may take risks, betting that disaster will not materialize. If there is a
catastrophe, the company may trust that its liability will be limited.
    These fears have materialized in many PPP projects throughout
the world. Weaker public sectors are less likely to deliver projects
efficiently on their own, but they are also less effective at monitor-
ing private providers. PPPs are well worth investigating, but their
downsides must also be anticipated.
    The infrastructure needs of developing world cities are among
the greatest challenges of the developing world. Vast sums will be
spent, and there is sure to be corresponding waste. Fuller and Romer
(Chapter 1) emphasizes the role of government, new rules, the
importance of local capacity, and the critical role of strong institutions
and governance. Good governance is most important in areas where
the government and the private sector can be most productive.
Further, the capacity to enforce rules should be complementary to and
                                Edward Glaeser and Abha Joshi-Ghani xli


not a substitute for market activity. The hope is that an increasingly
sophisticated local public sector will be able to manage the process
so that the lives of ordinary citizens are truly transformed with clean
water, reliable electricity, and faster commutes. But this is predicated
on investing in and bolstering local capacity, as Romer makes clear.

Cities in a national system: the spatial dynamics

Apart from Singapore, cities are part of a nation-wide economic sys-
tem that contains other cities and rural areas. The remarkable urban
success of the Republic of Korea was driven mainly by the national
government’s comprehensive planning and investment policies.
National governments make policies that will influence the growth of
the city, including investments in nation-wide transport systems and
more location-specific interventions. In many countries, subnational
political units, such as states or provinces, exert a fair amount of con-
trol over individual cities. How should higher levels of government
react to urban growth?
   Should national governments favor large cities, or should they
push populations into more medium-sized cities? As cities grow, they
generate agglomeration economies, but there are also externalities
associated with greater population densities. Optimal policies toward
medium and large cities need to not only recognize the existence of
these effects, but also to understand how these effects differ by city
size (Desmet and Rossi-Hansberg, Chapter 4).
   The existence of agglomeration economies on their own does not
imply favoring big cities. When people and businesses are pushed
from medium to large cities, the large cities become more productive,
but the smaller cities become less productive. Those effects need to
be weighed against each other. If there were no negative effects of
big city density, then even with these losses, there would be a good
reason to channel people toward the largest metropolitan areas. Yet
because density has downsides, the benefits must be weighed against
the costs. Desmet and Rossi-Hansberg (Chapter 4) present a tool
for calibrating the relative size of the benefits and costs of city big-
ness. There is an associated online tool, which national leaders can
use to actually determine whether their country might use more or
less urban concentration. The tool attempts to measure these positive
xlii Rethinking Cities


and negative effects using commonly available data and then use this
measurement to predict optimal public policy.
    Agricultural productivity is often a precondition for urban
growth: a nation rarely moves to urban living until its farms can feed
its citizens. But big factories often leave urban areas, leaving services
in the urban core. This is because in the long term, the largest cities
are expensive places for industry, and with further development,
modern industry tends to decentralize from the biggest cities, first
to their peri-urban areas, and then to smaller cities and rural areas
(Henderson, Chapter 3). Gradually, there emerges a geography of
production in the urban hierarchy, whereby smaller cities tend to
specialize in standardized manufacturing or certain services, while
the largest cities tend have a diverse set of business and financial
services, dependent on an information-rich, dense local environment.
However, the link between industrialization and urbanization is not
always as clear cut and as we would like to believe. National policies
should therefore be directed towards creating a level playing field
and creating strong institutions rather and favoring specific cities
(Henderson, Chapter 3).
    In practice, national leaders will rarely consider explicit policies
that favor one locale over another, except if a particular place is
economically disadvantaged relative to the rest of the country. Still,
in many cases, national governments do make choices that implicitly
favor one area over another and these can be justified on grounds of
either efficiency or equity. The location of highways and rail networks
leads to choices between cities. Understanding when government
interventions make sense and when they do not is important in setting
sound development policies. It is also important to understand who
benefits from place-based policies, for often the beneficiaries of these
polices are not those targeted by national or regional governments
(Moretti, Chapter 5).

Areas for future research

The challenges facing the world’s developing cities also call for more
research on economic development, social mobility, and the impacts
of government policies. Development research has experienced
a revolution over the last 15 years, as increasingly sophisticated
                               Edward Glaeser and Abha Joshi-Ghani xliii


methods, especially randomized trials, have begun to emerge. In
many situations these new methods have proved crucial, but other
contexts require different approaches.
   While there is widespread agreement that entrepreneurship can be
an important ingredient for economic success, there is less agreement
about what drives entrepreneurship or what government policies
encourage and incubate new economic enterprises. Most of the
research on entrepreneurship has been in the developed world, but
even that is just beginning to focus on the causes of entrepreneurial
differences across space. An important new branch of research in the
developing world would be to document the connections between
entrepreneurship and growth, but more work is also needed that
recognizes that entrepreneurship and growth may be the result of
deeper forces. Further research is needed on government policies,
including regulation, that may affect entrepreneurship. The World
Bank’s ground-breaking work on measuring regulations can inform
this research. Randomization is most likely to occur in this area
around policies that target aid to individual entrepreneurs, rather
than in regulations or other more widespread economic policies.
   It is critical that more research be conducted on the impact of
infrastructure on economic, social, and health outcomes. There has
been a considerable amount of water and sanitation-related work on
health outcomes, on private provision and on targeted subsidies, but
even more is needed. There may be scope for randomized trials, but
large-scale infrastructure cannot be randomly allocated. In these cases,
the best option may be to hope for natural experiments that allow
estimations of full-range impacts of particular forms of development.
   Human capital and skills are at the center of urban success, and there
are already a large number of researchers examining the determinants
of educational outcomes. This is an area where randomized trials are
particularly useful. There are numerous examples of settings where
classrooms have been randomly selected to use different techniques
or to offer varying incentives to students. The main failing of this
research is that outcomes are typically test scores, and we are primarily
interested in adult outcomes. Some research in the United States
has documented the connection between teacher quality and adult
earnings, but more work in this area is needed in the developing
world.
xliv Rethinking Cities


   The phenomenon of growing informality in the face of rapid
urbanization is relatively new to the research and policy-making
arena. Further research is needed to identify the causes underlying
this trend, such as the nature of agglomeration externalities and how
they play out in the formal and informal sectors; the precise reasons
why productivity in the informal sector is lower than in the formal
sector, especially if agglomeration benefits seem to accrue equally, if
not more so, to informal enterprises. Why does informality persist
in the face of rapid growth and continued deregulation in many
countries; how to bring informal enterprises into the fiscal net so
that they can contribute to the services needed for them to flourish;
and what policy measures can be undertaken to support job creation,
considering that job creation in the formal sector has not been or
is unlikely to be sufficiently vigorous to meet the employment and
poverty challenges of the next two decades.
   Other areas for research are on how regulations restrict and
constrain the provision of affordable housing and on what can be
done on both the supply and demand side for housing, including
stimulating the private sector’s provision of affordable housing. More
research and city-based analyses of the impact of specific regulations
on housing costs, housing supply, and housing affordability are
needed.
   Most knowledge on resilience today is based on rates of urban and
economic growth and infrastructure typology of the last 50 years.
But the pace and magnitude of urbanization are currently such that
the built-up area will triple in the next 30 years. One of the biggest
challenges today is resilience in the face of much greater uncertainty;
a more rapidly changing climate; significantly increased variability in
political stability and commodities pricing; more demands on food
and water; and the rapidly changing geopolitical landscape. Research
on resilience in an integrated context—resilient systems design—is a
critical aspect of urban system design.
   While many relevant policy decisions are made and implemented
locally, most statistical data are collected at the national level. A lack
of globally comparable data on cities has fragmented urban research
agendas and limited the growth of cumulative knowledge generation
across countries, regions, and disciplines. This in turn has limited
the capacity to get fact-based understanding of the patterns of city
                                Edward Glaeser and Abha Joshi-Ghani xlv


performance across the globe. That is why it is so important to collect
verifiable and comparable city-level data.
   Finally, there also is need for research on the institutions that shape
urban politics. We know relatively little about how institutions and
politics affect the economic life of the city—case studies and more
historically grounded work can provide more data in this area.

                                  ***
Perhaps the most hopeful aspect of urban life is that cities tend to
create their own solutions. London spread cholera, but also gave John
Snow the information he needed to understand the sources of the
disease. Urban connections are empowering communities through-
out the world to press for urban improvements. There is hope in the
future of cities, because cities have so often done miraculous things.
The cities of the West were once places of suffering, crime, and grime,
but now they are thriving centers of innovation, culture, and entre-
preneurship, and are far more pleasant and safe. Why? Because urban
leaders effected change, and that change will continue only with
better governance and stronger institutions.
    For most of human history, people lived on the edge of survival.
In the past two centuries, we have miraculously moved toward far
greater prosperity through transformations, above all, in cities.
Urbanization now has the potential of transforming the developing
world, and that’s why getting urban policies right is so important.
There is no future in rural poverty—the path to prosperity inevitably
runs through cities. The right approach is not to accept the urban
failures that often exist now, but to rethink cities and try to imagine
how to get to a brighter urban future.

Bibliography
Alonso, William. 1964. Location and Land Use: Toward a General Theory of
   Land Rent. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Angrist, Joshua D., Susan M. Dynarski, Thomas J. Kane, Parag A. Pathak,
   and Christopher R. Walters. 2010. “Who Benefits from KIPP?” NBER
   Working Paper 15740, Cambridge, MA.
Bleakley, Hoyt, and Jeffrey Lin. 2012. “Portage and Path Dependence.” The
   Quarterly Journal of Economics 127 (2): 587–644.
xlvi Rethinking Cities


Chatterji, Aaron, Edward L. Glaeser, and William R. Kerr. 2013. “Clusters
    of Entrepreneurship and Innovation.” NBER Working Paper 19013,
    Cambridge, MA.
Chauvin, Juan Pablo, Edward L. Glaeser, and Kristina Tobio. 2014. “Urban
    Economics in the U.S. and India and China.” Manuscript in progress,
    Harvard University.
Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, and Jonah E. Rockoff. 2011. “The Long-
    Term Impacts of Teachers: Teacher Value-Added and Student Outcomes
    in Adulthood.” NBER Working Paper 17699, Cambridge, MA.
Chinitz, Benjamin. J. 1961. “Contrasts in Agglomeration: New York and
    Pittsburgh.” American Economic Review 51: 279–89.
Combes, Pierre-Philippe, Thierry Mayer, and Jacques-François Thisse. 2008.
    Economic Geography: The Integration of Regions and Nations. Princeton,
    NJ: Princeton University Press.
Costa, Dora L., and Matthew E. Kahn. 2000. “Power Couples: Changes in
    the Locational Choice of the College Educated, 1940–1990.” Quarterly
    Journal of Economics 115 (4): 1287–315.
Duranton, Gilles, and Matthew Turner. 2011. “The Fundamental Law of
    Road Congestion: Evidence from the U.S.” American Economic Review
    101 (6): 2616–52.
Ellison, Glenn, Edward Glaeser, and William Kerr. 2007. “What Causes
    Industry Agglomeration? Evidence from Coagglomeration Patterns.”
    NBER Working Paper13068, Cambridge, MA.
Ghani, Ejaz, and Ravi Kanbur. 2013. “Urbanization and (In)Formalization.”
    Policy Research Working Paper 6374, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Ghani, Ejaz, William Kerr, and Stephen O’Connell. 2012. “What Makes
    Cities More Competitive? Spatial Determinants of Entrepreneurship
    in India.” Policy Research Working Paper Series 6198, World Bank,
    Washington, DC.
Glaeser, Edward, and Matthew E. Kahn. 2010. “The Greenness of Cities:
    Carbon Dioxide Emissions and Urban Development.” Journal of Urban
    Economics 67 (3): 404–18.
Glaeser, Edward, and David Mare. 2001. “Cities and Skills.” Journal of
    Labor Economics 19 (2): 316–42.
Glaeser, Edward L., and Joshua D. Gottlieb. 2009. “The Wealth of Cities:
    Agglomeration Economies and Spatial Equilibrium in the United States.”
    Journal of Economic Literature 47 (4): 983–1028.
Glaeser, Edward L., William R. Kerr, and Giacomo Ponzetto. 2009. “Clusters
    of Entrepreneurship.” NBER Working Paper 15377, Cambridge, MA.
                               Edward Glaeser and Abha Joshi-Ghani xlvii


Hoornweg, Daniel, Lorraine Sugar, and Claudia Lorena Trejos Gomez.
   2011. “Cities and Greenhouse Gas Emissions: Moving Forward.”
   Environment and Urbanization. http://eau.sagepub.com.
Jacobs, Jane. 1970. The Economy of Cities. New York: Vintage.
Kolko, Jed. 2010. “Urbanization, Agglomeration, and Coagglomeration
   of Service Industries.” In Agglomeration Economics, edited by Edward
   Glaeser. NBER Books.
Krugman, Paul. 1991. “Increasing Returns and Economic Geography.”
   Journal of Political Economy 99 (3): 483–99.
Marshall, Alfred. 1890. Principles of Economics. London: Macmillan.
McGranahan, Gordon, Deborah Balk, and Bridget Anderson. 2007.
   “The Rising Tide: Assessing the Risks of Climate Change and Human
   Settlements in Low Elevations Coastal Zones.” Environment &
   Urbanization 19 (1): 17–37.
Moretti, Enrico. 2004. “Human Capital Externalities in Cities.” In Handbook
   of Regional and Urban Economics, edited by J. Vernon Henderson and
   Jacques-François Thisse. North Holland: Elsevier.
Plato. 363 bce (reprinted 2012). The Republic. New York: Penguin Classics.
Rauch, James. 1993. “Productivity Gains from Geographic Concentration
   of Human Capital: Evidence from the Cities.” Journal of Urban Economics
   34 (3): 380–400.
Smith, Adam. 1776. An Inquiry into the Nature and Cause of the Wealth of
   Nations. London: W. Strahan and T. Cadell.
United Nations. 2001. “Urban Millennium: Urbanization Facts and
   Figures.” Special Session of the General Assembly for an Overall Review
   and Appraisal of the Implementation of the Habitat Agenda. http://
   www.un.org/ga/Istanbul+5/booklet4.pdf.
Weber, Adna. 1899. The Growth of Cities in Nineteenth Century America.
   New York: Macmillan.
1


Urbanization as Opportunity

Brandon Fuller and Paul Romer




Some 10,000 years ago, humans started reorganizing their social
and physical worlds, beginning what Shlomo Angel (2012) calls the
urbanization project. Like any project, it reflects human intention.
Building dense settlements was something we decided to do. Like
any project, it also has a beginning and an end. An almost incom-
prehensible amount of work remains; nevertheless, the end is near.
   Urbanization deserves urgent attention from policy makers, aca-
demics, entrepreneurs, and social reformers of all stripes. Nothing
else will create as many opportunities for rapid social and economic
progress. And although it is hard to comprehend how much work
remains, comprehending how quickly the work is now being done is
even harder. The unique opportunities created by rapid growth in the
urban population will soon pass.
   Human history seems to suggest that we have a lot of time. The
urbanization project got started in the 1,000 years after the transi-
tion from the Pleistocene to the milder and more stable Holocene
interglacial (Richerson et al. 2001). As the climate began to favor
sedentary agriculture, humans started building dense settlements. It
took until 2010 for the urban share of the world’s population to
reach 50 percent (3.5 billion people).
2 Urbanization as Opportunity


    Looking forward, the global population is likely to stabilize
between 10 billion and 11 billion. The limiting value of the urban
population is likely to exceed 8.5 billion. If it took 100 centuries to
get to 3.5 billion urban residents, is it not safe to assume that it will
take many centuries to make room for another 5 billion?
    Actually, no. The urban population is increasing at a pace that
has reached 60 million people a year and is still increasing. The
calculations that follow show that we could add more than 5 billion
new urban residents in the next 100 years. In all the centuries that
follow, we may add at most another billion.
    It is not just today’s incredible growth that challenges the imagi-
nation; it is also the rapid slowdown that is soon to follow. In our
lifetimes, we have to build urban accommodation faster than ever
before. We also have to prepare for near future with a stable urban
population in which it will be much more difficult to undertake
reform or change the configuration of the transit corridors and other
public spaces that define urban life.
    In developed countries, the urbanization project is basically com-
plete. The remaining urban growth will play out almost entirely in
developing countries. In 2010, the urban population in the regions
that the United Nations (UN) classifies as less developed stood at
2.6 billion. In 100 years, it is likely to be three times larger. Moreover,
as Angel (2012) shows, the historical pattern of urban growth
suggests that over this time horizon, urban population density in
developing cities could easily fall by half.
    The developing world can accommodate this urban population
growth and declining urban density in many ways. One is to have a
threefold increase in the average population of its existing cities and
a six-fold increase in their average built area. Another, which would
leave the built area of existing cities unchanged, would be to develop
625 new cities of 10 million people—500 new cities to accommodate
the net increase in the urban population and another 125 to accom-
modate the 1.25 billion people who would have to leave existing
cities as average density falls by half. These bracketing extremes, and
all the intermediate alternatives they suggest, have strikingly different
implications for the size distribution of cities and the possibilities for
social innovation and reform.
                                         Brandon Fuller and Paul Romer       3


   We know that a city can expand its built-up area dramatically and
successfully. During the 19th century, the built-up area of Manhattan
expanded sevenfold along a street grid established in 1811 (Angel
2012).
   We also know that new cities can grow dramatically and suc-
cessfully. Shenzhen, China, has grown from a tiny fishing village in
1980 to a metropolis of more than 10 million today. If it were a
city-state, it would show the fastest rate of growth of gross domestic
product (GDP) ever recorded (Zeng 2010). Because it was a new city
that started with new rules, Shenzhen pioneered a model based on
exports, market incentives, entry-level jobs in manufacturing, and
incoming direct foreign investment. After Shenzhen’s success, this
model spread across the country.
   These two large-scale projects show how influential human inten-
tion can be. In each case, a few people looked decades ahead and
made a plan. No invisible hand guided Manhattan toward rectangu-
lar blocks of private property embedded in a public grid of avenues
and streets. A real hand did—that of John Randel Jr., the engineer
hired by a state commission to survey the island (Ballon 2012).
   Nor did an invisible hand bring foreign firms into China. Deng
Xiaoping carried out a clear plan for reform designed to make it
socially acceptable for workers raised on Mao’s Little Red Book to
be hired by foreign “running dog capitalists.” The representatives of
official multilateral agencies that brought the Washington Consensus
to China still criticize his deviation from their orthodoxy. They were
certain that the best path for reform was to implement it uniformly
across the entire nation. Deng had a different, and arguably more
realistic model of how to undertake durable social reform in a society
that had just emerged from the convulsions of the Cultural Revolution:

  In the beginning opinions were divided about the reform and the
  open policy. That was normal… In carrying out the line, principles
  and policies adopted since the Third Plenary Session of the Eleventh
  Central Committee, we did not resort to compulsion or mass move-
  ments. People were allowed to follow the line on a voluntary basis,
  doing as much or as little as they wished. In this way, others gradually
  followed suit. It was my idea to discourage contention, so as to have
4 Urbanization as Opportunity


   more time for action. Once disputes begin, they complicate matters
   and waste a lot of time. As a result, nothing is accomplished. Don’t
   argue; try bold experiments and blaze new trails. That’s the way it was
   with rural reform, and that’s the way it should be with urban reform.
   (Deng 1992, 244)


   In creating an entirely new city, Deng’s strategy harnessed the same
start-up dynamic that brings new technology into many industries.
Of the four initial special economic zones in China, Shenzhen was
the only overwhelming success. For some reason, a 1-in-4-success
rate is viewed as a total failure for policy-startups but would be an
astounding success compared to the 1-in-10-success rate claimed for
business startups. The low success rate for start-up firms clearly does
not imply that it is a mistake to allow start-ups. No one claims that
because most startup firms fail, the only reliable way to raise produc-
tivity in industry is to aim only for across-the-board improvement
at all incumbent firms. As Deng showed with his famous southern
tour (which was the occasion for the speech quoted here), one very
visible success in Shenzhen was all it took to sustain the momentum
of reform after reactionaries counterattacked and the future of the
market reform process hung in the balance (Zhao 1993).
   The prospect of creating large new cities in coming decades pres-
ents the world with unprecedented opportunities for reforms of all
types. To cite just one example, at the new lower prices for natural gas
made possible by new techniques for oil and gas extraction, it would
be cost effective to use existing technology for gas-powered vehicles
and power generation to build new cities that use neither liquid fossil
fuels nor coal. For existing cities, switching costs would make this
strategy for reducing the enormous health costs imposed by air pollu-
tion more expensive. A switch will also be contentious because of the
inevitable disputes that will arise about who should bear the much
smaller cost of reducing existing levels of pollution. People living
in existing cities may be doomed to endure the long wait for local
governments to develop both a political consensus around reductions
in air pollution and the sophisticated capacity needed to regulate
emissions from plants that burn coal and large numbers of vehicles
that burn gasoline or diesel oil. In a new city, a government with little
administrative capacity could impose a limit on the allowed types
                                       Brandon Fuller and Paul Romer   5


of fuel before people move there and enforce this limit after they
arrive. By demonstrating the feasibility and benefits of clean air, a few
such cities might speed the development of a consensus for change
in existing cities much as success in Shenzhen spurred reform in the
rest of China.
   Many other policies such as transit and pricing systems that
enhance mobility without generating congestion will be less costly
and less contentious if they are implemented in the expansion area
for a growing city rather than in its existing core. When New York
City planned for expansion in 1811, it was already too late to fix
the street grid in lower Manhattan. It remains as it was then. It was,
nevertheless, entirely possible, at very low cost, to avoid the extension
of a dysfunctional grid to the rest of the island.
   We live in a time when humans can make realistic plans for urban
expansion that are as big and bold as the commissioners’ plan for
Manhattan in 1811 or for new cities that could be as influential
as Shenzhen. Hundreds of cities could expand as New York did or
emerge out of nowhere as Shenzhen did. But the window of oppor-
tunity will not stay open forever. In 100 years, it will be too late.
And because the spatial patterns in cities are so durable, the choices
we make through intention or inattention will have lasting conse-
quences. Countless generations will live with the layouts and policy
defaults that we leave for them in 2110.

The next 100 years

To estimate how long it will take to complete the urbanization proj-
ect, it makes no sense to base projections on the type of exponential
curve that we use for such measures as income per capita. To estimate
the dynamics of growth in the face of an upper bound, the logistic
is the natural alternative. A variable x that follows a logistic is con-
strained to lie between 0 and 1 and grows at the rate g*(1 − x). One
advantage of the logistic is that for two curves with similar initial
growth rates g, it is a simple matter to calculate the number of years
by which one lags behind the other.
    The UN publishes data on the total population and the urban
population for 1950–2010 (UNDESA 2012). It also groups the data
into two broad aggregates: more developed regions (MDRs) and
6 Urbanization as Opportunity


less developed regions (LDRs). For population, Figure 1.1 shows
the observed data as hollow points and a fitted logistic as a solid or
dashed line. The observation for a given year is the population in
each region as a fraction of the estimated terminal population for that
region. The logistic curves fitted here imply a terminal population of
1.35 billion (standard error 0.023 billion) for MDRs and 9.91 billion
(standard error 0.37 billion) for LDRs, roughly in line with the
medium fertility variant of the UN’s world population projections
to 2100.
   Appearances notwithstanding, there is nothing especially impres-
sive about the fit here. Many functional forms for distributions,
including a standard normal, could generate a good-looking fit. The
advantage of the logistic is that its three key parameters—the terminal
population, initial rate of growth, and lag between two curves—have
a natural interpretation.
   At conventional significance levels, the data easily accept the
restriction that the initial growth rate is the same for the two regions,
3.17 percent per year (standard error 0.08). The curve for the LDRs
lags by 63.5 years (standard error 3.3). This is consistent with other




Figure 1.1 Observed and projected normalized population for more developed
and less developed regions, 1700–2200
Source: Authors’ calculations based on UNDESA 2012.
                                          Brandon Fuller and Paul Romer   7


more granular data on health and demographics. For example,
today’s life expectancy in the low- and middle-income countries that
correspond to the LDRs is about the same as in 1960 in the high-
income countries that correspond to the MDRs (World Bank 2012).
   Figure 1.2 shows two pairs of logistic curves for the urban share
of the population in each region. For each pair, the model forces
the terminal share to be the same in the two regions. The data for the
LDRs alone do not pin down a precise value for the terminal share
so the constraint that the terminal shares are the same in the two
regions is easily accepted. Our preferred model also forces the initial
growth rate to be the same in the two regions. A less restrictive model
lets the two growth rates differ. If we assumed that the errors are i.i.d.
(independent and identically distributed) draws from a normal dis-
tribution, the data would reject the restriction that the growth rates
are the same, but Figure 1.3 suggests that the errors for the MRDs
are not i.i.d. Instead, they show an oscillation around the underlying
trend predicted by the logistic.




Figure 1.2 Observed and projected urban share of the population in more
developed and less developed regions, 1700–2200
Source: Authors’ calculations based on UNDESA 2012.
8 Urbanization as Opportunity




Figure 1.3 Observed and projected number of new urban residents in more
developed and less developed regions, 1900–2200 (million per year)
Source: Authors’ calculations based on UNDESA 2012.


    One should not put too much faith in any estimate of a limiting
value derived solely from a procedure that relies heavily on an ad
hoc functional form assumption. We prefer the estimates from the
restricted model, with its higher limiting share parameter of 0.87
(standard error, 0.01), mainly because the urban share continues
to increase in almost all countries and already exceeds this value
in a diverse group of countries that includes Argentina, Australia,
Belgium, Chile, Israel, Japan, and Lebanon. Also, for the period
when they overlap, its projections for the total urban population are
somewhat closer to the ones that result from the detailed country-
by-country forecasting procedure that the UN follows than the
projections from the unrestricted model. For 2050, the last year for
which the UN provides projections, our preferred model suggests a
slightly higher share for the LDRs (65.1 percent) than does the UN
projection (64.1 percent). The unconstrained estimate (62.6 percent)
undershoots to a larger extent.
    With the restriction that the growth rate g is the same in the
two regions, its estimated value is 2.46 percent per year (standard
                                          Brandon Fuller and Paul Romer    9


error 0.08). The urban share in the LDRs lags farther behind the
MDRs (80.0 years, standard error 1.6) than does the curve for total
population (63.5 years, standard error 3.3).
    The estimates for the two logistic curves imply values for the total
urban population in each region as well as annual increases. Figure 1.3
plots the annual increase in millions of new urban residents per year.
If Figures 1.1 and 1.2 are like plots of a fitted probability distribution
function, Figure 1.3 is like a plot of an implied probability density
function. As always, the deviations from the fitted curve, including
the oscillation they induce for the MDRs, are more evident using the
density than the distribution.
    By putting the two curves on a single axis, Figure 1.3 shows the
extent to which the remaining process of urbanization is overwhelm-
ingly a phenomenon of the LDRs, and overwhelmingly a phenom-
enon of this century. These projections based on the logistic imply
that the annual increase in the number of urban residents in the
LDRs must soon peak and begin to fall. We are already well past the
peak in the MDRs.
    Table 1.1 shows the effect of the cumulative influx of new urban
residents over 100-year time intervals marked by three years defined
relative to the milestone year of 2010: 1910, 2110, and 2210. In
each reference year, the table shows the urban population and total
population for each region. In the 100 years leading up to 2010, the
total worldwide urban population increased by 3.4 billion people.
In the next 100 years, the projected increase is 5.2 billion in the
LDRs and 0.2 billion in the MDRs. In the 100 years that follow, the
projected increase is a mere 800 million, all of it in the LDRs.

Table 1.1 Urban residents and population, 1910, 2010, 2110, and 2210
                                                                   Billions
Year                         Urban residents                   Population
            Less developed      More developed        World      world
1910              0.04                0.14             0.18         0.93
2010              2.60                0.96             3.60         6.90
2110              7.80                1.20             9.00        11.00
2210              8.60                1.20             9.80        11.30
Source: Authors’ calculations based on UNDESA 2012.
10   Urbanization as Opportunity


Interpreting the lags

The persistent lag in the dynamics of population growth and urban-
ization are a reflection of the puzzling result first noted in the empiri-
cal growth literature on growth in GDP per capita—an absence
of unconditional convergence between the MDRs and the LDRs
(see Barro 2012, for a recent overview of the evidence on conver-
gence.) For measures that are bounded, it makes more sense to base
any inference about unconditional convergence on estimates of
logistic curves than on the trend in the ratio of the values in the two
regions. This ratio can diminish even when the gap between the two
curves remains constant. For example, the ratio of life expectancy
in LDRs relative to the MDRs has been increasing (Bourguignon
and Morrison 2002), but this is precisely what we would expect
to observe for two variables that follow the same logistic and are
separated by a fixed time lag. Here, the ratio of the urbanization rate
in the LDRs relative to the MDRs increases from 0.32 to 0.59 yet the
estimated lag either remains constant (for the constrained estimates)
or increases (for the unconstrained estimates).
    These persistent lags are puzzling because LDRs today can use
technologies that already exist in the MDRs, so growth in the LDRs
is catch-up growth rather than growth at the technological frontier.
All else equal, the LDRs should grow faster at any stage of develop-
ment than the MDRs did at the same level of development, and
the lags associated with development should shrink. This has hap-
pened in many notable countries, but averaging across countries, the
lag for the LDRs shows no sign of falling. This is what one might
expect if the advantages presented by the potential for catch-up
growth based on MDR technology are offset by a limited capac-
ity for providing the government services that complement these
technologies.
    Under this interpretation, the relative magnitudes of these lags
are suggestive. If development were a one-factor process, we would
expect the lag in the behavior of demographics, urbanization, and
income per capita between the LDRs and the MDRs to all be the
same. Instead, we see that population in the LDRs lags by 63.5
years (standard error 3.3) and remains constant. Under the preferred
model, urbanization lags by 80.2 years (standard error 1.6) and
                                      Brandon Fuller and Paul Romer   11


remains constant. (Under the unconstrained model, the lag starts at
70 and grows.)
    A rough calculation based on Angus Maddison’s (2012) data sug-
gests that the lag in GDP per capita is longer still. To approximate
the UN definition of the MDRs, we created an aggregate consisting
of Western Europe, Western offshoots, and Japan. In 1870, GDP
per capita in our MDR aggregate was about $1,900 (measured in
Maddison’s unit, 1990 International Geary-Khamis dollars). In the
rest of the world, which corresponds roughly to the LDRs, GDP
per capita did not reach $1,900 until 1970—a lag of 100 years. In
1900, GDP per capita in the MDR aggregate was $2,950. The LDR
aggregate reached this level in 1995—a lag of 95 years. So, GDP
per capita lags even farther behind the demographic measures than
does urbanization.
    Assuming then that government capacity is the limiting factor in
the LDRs, the variation in the lags suggests that complementarity
with government services is strongest for the private activities that
generate rapid GDP growth through technological inflows, weaker
for the private activities that drive urbanization, and weakest for
the health technologies that influence demographics. People can
still urbanize, albeit less efficiently in slums and favelas, even if few
government services are available. When it comes to the spread of
health technologies that lengthen lives and reduce fertility, govern-
ment services may be even less relevant.
    This suggests that at the same level of urbanization, the LDRs will
have more access to technology but fewer government services than
did the MDRs.

Peak urbanization, weak capacity

These arguments suggest that urbanization is peaking in the
developing world at a time when the capacity to govern is still in
short supply. Despite all the lip service to capacity building in the
LDRs, there is little indication that government capacity will be able
to increase in time to manage urban life in anything like the way it is
managed in rich countries now. A quip attributed to Gordon Brown
suggests how far off the time scales might be: “In establishing the rule
of law, the first five centuries are always the hardest.”
12   Urbanization as Opportunity


   If governance is indeed the scarce factor, one response would
be to find ways to let more people move from places with weaker
governance to places with better governance (Clemens et al. 2008).
A parallel strategy would be to export government services from
places where the capacity for governance is well developed, to places
where it is not. The potential gains from either strategy are much
larger than those from further reducing trade barriers to flows of only
privately provided goods and services (Clemens 2011).
   Much of the finance and expertise needed to develop new cities
in the LDRs could come from the private sector in the MDRs, but
these private services depend on complementary government ser-
vices. For example, new cities might opt to outsource the provision
of utility regulation to jurisdictions with more experience in this area.
Both the private firms that could provide municipal water and the
consumers who could consume it might be better able to agree to
an arrangement that benefits both if an independent regulator can
prevent the dual risks of ex post monopoly pricing by the water com-
pany and the pressure for expropriation that unregulated monopoly
pricing can foment. A policy of outsourcing utility regulation might
be controversial if it were forced on the residents of an existing city,
but might not be a deterrent to migrants who consider moving to
a new city committed from the beginning to such an arrangement.
After all, if large numbers of migrants are willing to move to a city
in a developed country where the voters from the developed country
control utility regulation and the migrants have no say, it is possible
that large numbers of migrants might also be willing to move to a city
located somewhere else where voters from the same developed coun-
try control utility regulation. To be sure, it would be complicated to
set up this kind of arrangement, but perhaps no more complicated
than setting up yet another free trade area, and arguably with much
larger benefits.
   Building new cities ought therefore to be an important goal
alongside the inescapable need to expand existing cities because
new cities may offer the best opportunity for experimenting with
new solutions to the problem that holds back the potential implicit
in catch-up growth, insufficient capacity of local government. Yet
even with many new cities, most existing cities in the LDRs will also
need to expand by a very large factor. With even the most optimistic
                                      Brandon Fuller and Paul Romer   13


increase in international trade in government services, severe capacity
constraints will force the developing countries that are urbanizing
rapidly to prioritize as they manage this expansion. Governments will
therefore have to be narrow in the sense of not trying to do too many
things, but strong in the sense of doing those few things well.
   For most rapidly urbanizing cities, Manhattan’s 1811 plan is a
good starting point for a feasible model of strong but narrow urban
planning. The plan was narrow in that it did not designate densi-
ties, land uses, or locations for specific types of cultural, social, and
economic development—tasks that even high-capacity governments
have trouble getting right. It was also narrow in that it built and
financed the streets on a just-in-time basis that took nearly one hun-
dred years to complete.
   The plan was strong because the government used eminent
domain to take, from the beginning, the land that would eventually
be needed for those streets. It was strong because it forced landowners
to cover the costs of the road construction adjacent to their proper-
ties, road construction that increased the value of their land by much
more than the levies they paid. Crucially, it was strong in the sense
that public land designated for streets was protected for decades from
squatting and informal settlement.
   As Angel (2008) points out, governments in rapidly urbanizing
areas today have the capacity to do what Manhattan did in 1811.
These governments can focus first on setting aside the public space
for parklands and an arterial grid of dirt roads. Angel refers explicitly
to “dirt roads” to emphasize that public space can be taken and pro-
tected without the high spending necessary for building all the infra-
structure that this public space will eventually support. This spending
can take place as the city expands and new residents begin to demand
the many services that are delivered by the trunk infrastructure that
the arterial road network supports. Pilot programs for undertaking
this kind of planning in Ethiopia have already shown that planning
for this type of arterial grid is a manageable task for existing local
governments (Angel et al. 2013).
   An approach to planning that is strong in this sense could also be
narrow in the sense that it does not place any constraints on what
private developers can do inside a superblock defined by the arterial
grid. As long as there is some diversity in the private developers
14   Urbanization as Opportunity


working on superblocks, bad development practices in any one block
need not limit the city’s overall development. As land becomes more
valuable, any mistakes in the superblocks will eventually be torn down
and redeveloped. In contrast, because any adjustment to the arterial
grid would require coordinated change on a much larger scale, it
is unlikely that the grid itself will ever change. As a result, setting
aside the public space for the logistic and utility corridors that can
sew a city into a single market for labor and goods is a much higher
priority than enforcing building codes on structures, imposing limits
on density, or dictating the details of what private actors can do with
the superblocks.

A development goal for this century

Humans have done something unique in the animal kingdom. We
have shifted from one type of social structure—mobile bands with at
most a few hundred members—to a radically different social struc-
ture based on stationary urban nests of a complexity and scale that
not even the social insects can match. More striking still, these nests
have developed into a system of hubs linked by high-volume logis-
tic spokes. The urbanization project is building an integrated social
system in which 10 billion or 11 billion people, spread all across the
globe, can cooperate. In this system, cities are both locations that
facilitate local cooperation and nodes that channel the flows of goods
and people that facilitate global cooperation.
    Humans have made progress by discovering new technologies
that are non-rival, and hence can be shared with anyone else on the
planet. The potential for discovering new non-rival goods lies at the
heart of technological progress. It also explains why the gains that
come from increases in the extent of the market will continue until
everyone is part of a single cooperative network of the sort that we are
now building.
    Because cities are essential to development of this network, it is
critically important that people adopt the new social rules that are
required to structure the dense interactions of city life. Moreover,
it is not enough to strive for rules that are reasonably efficient now.
We must also create a dynamic that lets the rules evolve to keep
up with changes in our social and technological environment. In a
                                       Brandon Fuller and Paul Romer   15


small town, “go on green” is an efficient rule for managing traffic in
an intersection controlled by a stoplight. As the population in the
town increases, “go on green” can become very inefficient. It must be
supplemented with a new rule, “don’t block the box.”
   In this broad dynamic of new technologies and ever denser and
broader interactions structured by evolving sets of rules, it is typically
the rules hold us back. Rules that may once have been efficient can
become wildly inefficient yet still be frighteningly persistent.
   Because an unprecedented amount of urban area will be built dur-
ing the 21st century, we have two main ways to establish cities that
can work reasonably well for the foreseeable future. First, whenever
possible, as urbanization takes place, people should delineate the
public space of the logistics network, utility corridors, and parklands
before the surrounding private space is occupied. Because the social
rules for converting valuable private land into public space are so
inefficient after people have occupied the land, it pays to establish
the public space before large numbers of private claimants show up.
A government that protects a grid of public space in an area that can
accommodate large-scale urban expansion can then use the power of
the individual incentives to build the urban structures that people
will live in and work in. Even if the government does not, in its early
decades, have the capacity either to build out such basics as a munici-
pal water and sewage system or even to encourage private investors
to build such systems, these can be retrofitted later if the arteries are
available as utility corridors.
   Second, at least in this century, developing countries can develop
new cities that let people can opt into new systems of rules. A new
city like Shenzhen can help a society escape from rules that hold it
back. Using new cities to implement reform makes it easier to strike
the right balance between protecting the interests of the commu-
nity, which often requires changes in rules, and allowing individual
freedom, which can ensure that few people are forced to follow new
rules that they think are illegitimate. New cities that compete for
residents make it possible for a nation, a region, or the entire world
to let new political entities try different types of rules and subject
them to a market test based on the decision to opt in. This additional
dynamic in the space of rules, one based on entry and exit, can oper-
ate alongside the more familiar dynamic based on voice. Moreover,
16   Urbanization as Opportunity


exit and entry are as likely to reinforce the power of voice as they are
to undermine it.
   To be sure, some new cities will be disappointments, perhaps
even failures, just as some new firms are disappointments or failures.
Nevertheless, start-ups of both types still create value because the cost
of the failures is so small compared to the benefit of even one roaring
success.
   Together, New York and Shenzhen are models that show how
humans can achieve an increase in supply on the required scale, but
the market alone cannot replicate their success. Even in the early
stages of development, a city requires a local government that is
strong enough to protect the public space required for free mobility
of goods and people. Instead of hobbling governments out of a fear
that they might use even a modicum of strength in some counterpro-
ductive way, it would be far better to increase competition between
cities.
   If we take full advantage of the opportunity we now face and plan
both for new cities and dramatic expansions of existing cities, we can
break free from the admission of failure implicit in the Millennium
Development Goals—from the sad belief that the only hope for the
world’s poor is to shame governments into providing more services
out of a sense of charitable obligation. The best hope for achieving the
intention behind those goals is to shift focus to a single overarching
goal: Every family in the world should be able to choose between
several cities that compete to attract its members as permanent
residents.

Bibliography
Angel, Shlomo. 2008. “An Arterial Grid of Dirt Roads.” Cities 25: 146–62.
——–—. 2012. Planet of Cities. Cambridge, MA: Lincoln Institute of Land
   Policy.
Angel, Sholmo, David de Groot, Richard Martin, Yohannes Fisseha,
   Tsigereda Taffese, and Patrick Lamson-Hall. 2013. “The Ethiopia Urban
   Expansion Initiative: Interim Report 2.” NYU-Stern Urban Expansion
   Project Working Paper. http://urbanizationproject.org/uploads/blog/
   Ethiopia_Interim_Report.pdf.
Ballon, Hilary, ed. 2012. The Greatest Grid: The Master Plan of Manhattan,
   1811–2011. New York: Columbia University Press.
                                       Brandon Fuller and Paul Romer   17


Barro, Robert J. 2012. “Convergence and Modernization Revisited.”
   Working Paper 18295, NBER.
Bourguignon, Francois, and Christian Morrison. 2002. “Inequality among
   World Citizens: 1920–1992.”American Economic Review 92 (4): 727–44.
Clemens, Michael A. 2011. “Economics and Emigration: Trillion Dollar
   Bills on the Sidewalk?” The Journal of Economic Perspectives 25 (3):
   83–106.
Clemens, Michael A., Claudio E. Montenegro, and Lant Pritchett. 2008.
   “The Place Premium: Wage Differences for Identical Workers across
   the US Border.” Policy Research Working Paper 4671, World Bank,
   Washington, DC.
Deng, Xiaoping. 1992. “Excerpts from Talks Given in Wuchang, Shenzhen,
   and Shanghai.” The Selected Works of Deng Xiaoping, Vol. 3. http://www.
   archive.org/details/SelectedWorksOfDengXiaopingVol.3.
Maddison, Angus. 2012. “Statistics on World Population, GDP, and GDP
   per Capita.” http://www.ggdc.net/maddison/oriindex.htm.
Richerson, Peter J., Robert Boyd, and Robert L. Bettinger. 2001. “Was
   Agriculture Impossible during the Pleistocene but Mandatory during
   the Holocene? A Climate Change Hypothesis.” American Antiquity 66
   (3): 387–411.
United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs (UNDESA).
   2012. “World Population Prospects: The 2011 Revision.” http://esa.
   un.org/unpd/wpp/index.htm.
World Bank. 2012. World Development Indicators (database), Washington,
   DC. http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/world-development-
   indicators.
Zeng, Douglas Zhihua, ed. 2010. Building Engines for Growth and
   Competitiveness in China: Experience with Special Economic Zones and
   Industrial Clusters. Washington, DC: World Bank, International Bank
   for Reconstruction and Development.
Zhao, Suisheng. 1993. “Deng Xiaoping’s Southern Tour: Elite Politics in
   Post-Tiananmen China.” Asian Survey 33 (8): 739–56.
2


The Shifting Urban Economic
Landscape
What Does It Mean for Cities?


Richard Dobbs and Jaana Remes




Cities are the driving force of economic growth. According to the
United Nations, more than half the world’s people now live in urban
areas—in towns and in cities of all sizes. By 2025, the urban popula-
tion is expected to have grown by another billion people, a huge
majority of them in developing countries. At that point, 2.5 billion
people—more than half the world’s urban population—will likely
live in the burgeoning cities of Asia. China is expected to have more
than triple, and India double, the number of urbanites in the United
States today.
   Urbanization is not new. For centuries, people have packed up
and moved from their rural homes in search of better-paid urban
livelihoods. But today’s urban shift is unprecedented in scale and
speed. It is no hyperbole to say that we are amid the most significant
economic transformation the world has ever seen.1
                                         Richard Dobbs and Jaana Remes 19


The productivity advantage of cities

Densely populated centers—cities—enjoy powerful economies of
scale, and for centuries urbanization and per capita gross domestic
product (GDP) have moved in tandem (Figure 2.1).2 One reason for
cities’ economic advantage is their often disproportionate numbers
of skilled workers. Many cities have better education and training
systems that feed the talent pool and attract students from elsewhere,
many of whom stay. In India, higher education attainment is increas-
ing five times faster in urban households than in rural households.
And in China, many high school graduates come to Shanghai every
year to further their education. The city’s 60 institutions produce at
least 100,000 graduates every year, and more than a quarter of the
city’s labor force has had a college education.




Figure 2.1   Per capita GDP has risen in tandem with increases in urbanization
Source: Population Division of the United Nations; Angus Maddison via Timetrics;
Global Insight; Census reports of England and Wales; Honda in Steckel and Floud
1997; Bairoch 1975.
Notes: a. Definition of urbanization varies by country; pre-1950 figures for the
United Kingdom are estimated.
   b. Historical per capita GDP series expresses in 1990 Geary-Khamis dollars,
which reflect purchasing power parity (PPP).
20 The Shifting Urban Economic Landscape


    In large cities, businesses can access more customers and employees
and benefit from a broader supplier and service base. With a large
number of customers at their doorsteps, cities are instant markets
for many kinds of businesses—professional and personal services
and shops, restaurants, and entertainment venues. One example
is financial services. Just 24 cities account for nearly 95 percent of
global equity market capitalization (World Federation of Exchanges
n.d.). In Brazil, almost half of all deposits are in São Paulo and Rio
de Janeiro. And the world’s 27 megacities—with populations of
10 million or more today—generated 25 percent of worldwide
deposits in 2007 (Box 2.1).
    In emerging markets, large, well-known cities are on the strategic
radars of international companies far sooner than smaller, less known
cities. And the presence of companies reinforces a city’s popularity.
The more jobs available in an urban center, the more people flock
there in search of opportunity. As one university graduate told
the McKinsey Global Institute, “All of China’s graduates want to
go to Beijing or Shanghai for jobs. That is why there is such an
oversupply in these cities” (Woetzel et al. 2009). Cities also offer
the developed infrastructure that companies need to function—and
that workers need to be productive. Access to reliable utilities and
telecommunications matter for nearly all businesses today. And mass
transit systems ferry throngs of workers to their workplaces each
day—at speed.
    Once a critical mass of companies collects in a major metropolis,
more companies tend to cluster around them. Large cities often
become the center of a group of satellite cities with strong business
and transport links—creating powerful network effects. New York
and Los Angeles, the United States’ two megacities, are each at
the heart of a cluster of nearby cities that benefit from their large
neighbor. Bridgeport-Stamford, for instance, has built a successful
niche business in finance, leveraging its proximity to New York City.
Together, the “mother city” and its satellites benefit enormously from
agglomeration effects. This clustering is happening all over the world.
In China, for instance, the cluster around Shanghai on the Yangtze
River Delta is now a world-famous economic dynamo. Less well
known is the cluster of Guanzhou in the south, a rapidly growing
export-driven business center. In India, 14 urban clusters are home to
                                      Richard Dobbs and Jaana Remes 21



      Box 2.1     The McKinsey Global Institute’s Cityscope

The McKinsey Global Institute Cityscope, a database of more than
2,600 urban regions, makes it possible to understand the evolving
shape of global urban economies and extract city rankings and group-
ings by region, variable, and type of city.
    The cities in the database are defined by integrated metropolitan
areas rather than specific city jurisdictions, aggregating neighboring
cities into a single urban center where appropriate. Examples include
Rhein-Ruhr in Germany; Los Angeles, Long Beach, and Santa Ana
in California; and Mumbai and Thane in India. In this fairly broad
definition, which considers where people live and work regardless of
distance, the city center is a small fraction of the city—in both area
and population. Included in Cityscope are all metropolitan areas with
a 2010 population of at least 150,000 in developed countries and all
cities with a 2010 population of at least 200,000 in emerging regions.
    Demographic and economic variables are estimated by city
for 2010 and 2025: total population; population from birth to
age 14, ages 15–64, and ages 65 or older; total number of house-
holds and average household size; number of households in four
income brackets; and city GDP and per capita GDP in U.S. dol-
lars measured with three different exchange rates (market, real,
and PPP). Available economic data by city are limited and fragmented,
and no single source can provide data on all Cityscope cities for any
of the variables. For the base year 2010, we drew from a wide range
of sources to collect existing city-level data, assessed the data for con-
sistency across sources and variables before finalizing the metrics, and
used the data to identify patterns for estimating variables for cities
where data are not available. Despite best efforts, there remains room
to improve and sharpen the available data.
    For 2010 GDP, our data sources were the McKinsey Global Institute’s
India and China models for city-level GDP, national statistical offices,
and C-GIDD (Figure B2.1.1). We estimated city-specific GDP growth
rates from 2010 to 2025 using approaches that reflected whether the
city had past GDP growth data available.
    To estimate households and household size in 2010, we used
the McKinsey Global Institute’s India and China models, national
statistical offices, and C-GIDD. For 2025 we used our household size

                                                                 (contd.)
22 The Shifting Urban Economic Landscape



  Box 2.1 (contd.)




  Figure B2.1.1 The McKinsey Global Institute used four sources to gather
  city GDP figures for 2010
  Source: McKinsey Global Institute Cityscope 2.0.
  Note: a. The City 600 is a subset of the Cityscope database with the top
  600 cities ranked by absolute GDP growth for 2010–25.

  econometric model with birth rates, death rates, and regional dummies
  as drivers. We used the model to forecast the decline in cities’ household
  size, reflecting convergence to a regional minimum. Sources for
  estimates of the number of household by income bracket in 2010
  were the McKinsey Global Institute’s China model, national statistical
  offices, and C-GIDD. For 2025, we used our income distribution
  model and adjusted past patterns of changes with expected growth in
  per capita GDP.
                                     Richard Dobbs and Jaana Remes 23


approximately 17 percent of the country’s population but will likely
account for 40 percent of urban GDP in 2030 (Atsmon et al. 2011).
    The final element of urban economies of scale is the delivery of
services, including water, power, and telecommunications. Because
cities have so many customers in a confined area, service delivery is
cheaper. Delivering a liter of water to a city can cost as little as half
that of delivering the same liter to a small village, because in cities
suppliers can use common depots. McKinsey research found that in
large cities, delivering several other services can similarly cost up to
50 percent less than in small villages. Some types of infrastructure,
like international airports, are economically viable only when they
serve large cities. Indeed, according to McKinsey estimates, a city
of 5 million people needs about $5 million of investment per daily
flight. But for a city of 1 million, the necessary investment rises to
nearly $13 million. And once a city has an international airport, it
becomes more attractive to both people and businesses. With their
many productivity benefits, cities have historically offered two to
three times the countryside’s average standard of living (see, for
example, Maddison 1995; Morris 2010; Scheidel and Friesen 2009).

Regions vary in the maturity of their urbanization

Some regions are urbanizing faster than others. To understand the
economic weight of cities across the globe, we focus on the world’s
2,600 large cities, defined in developing regions as metropolitan areas
with at least 150,000 people and in developing regions as those with
at least 200,000 (see Box 2.1). Collectively, the 2,600 are home to
38 percent of the world’s population but 72 percent of global GDP.
Yet the role of large cities in the economy varies by country and region
(Figure 2.2). A major reason is that some regions urbanized centuries
ago while others still have a long way to go (Cadena et al. 2012).
   Europe—with Britain in the vanguard—and the United States
shifted from rural to urban living in the 18th and 19th centuries,
as industrial revolutions transformed their economies and vaulted
them to global economic and political power. Europe industrialized
and urbanized about 100 years before the United States, but today
the latter is the world’s most urban region. Around 80 percent of
the U.S. population lives in large metropolitan areas, which in 2010
24 The Shifting Urban Economic Landscape




Figure 2.2   The relative economic weight of large cities varies across regions
Source: McKinsey Global Institute Cityscope 2.0; McKinsey Global Institute
analysis.
Notes: a. Cityscope cities defined as having populations of at least 150,000 in 2010
in the United States and Western Europe. In China, Latin America, India, and
Africa, only cities with at least 200,000 inhabitants in 2010 are included. GDP
figures are in PPP dollars.
    b. The rest of the economy includes cities with fewer than 150,000 inhabitants,
as well as rural areas.


generated almost 85 percent of the nation’s GDP and nearly 20 per-
cent of world GDP.3 Between now and 2025, large U.S. cities are
expected to contribute more to global economic growth than the
355 large cities in all developed countries combined. The economic
clout of U.S. cities is largely due not to its megacities (New York and
Los Angeles) but to its broad swath of 257 middleweights—among
them Chicago, Dallas-Fort Worth, and San Francisco-Oakland—
home to 30 percent of the U.S. population and generating 37 per-
cent of U.S. GDP.
                                     Richard Dobbs and Jaana Remes 25


   Europe, despite its early start, is less urban than the United States,
with only about 55 percent of its population in large cities, accounting
for less than 65 percent of GDP. Traditionally, Europeans have been
less inclined to move within their home nations and to neighboring
countries than have the highly mobile U.S. population. One reason
Europeans tended to stay put in the past is that European authorities
provided generous unemployment benefits and other social transfers,
allowing people more time to look for a job locally rather than move
to where a suitable position is available.4 Whether this mobility gap
will remain, however, is an open question. While mobility in the
United States has been falling since 1990 and now stands at a 50-year
low, a likely decline in regional investment and employment support
in the European Union, together with more flexible cross-border
labor regulations, may lead to increasing mobility there.
   Latin America is also relatively mature in its urbanization, having
had large-scale urban growth in the second half of the 20th century.
Today, 289 cities in the Cityscope database are home to 55 percent
of the Latin American population and generate more than 75 percent
of the region’s GDP. As in the mature urban economy of the United
States, middleweight cities are taking up the baton of growth.
   During Latin America’s rapid growth over 1950–70, its megacities
may have been the unintended by-product of import-substitution
policies.5 Yet many of the region’s large cities were unable to provide
the infrastructure and services to keep up with their rapid expansion.
The urban scale benefits have been gradually turning into disecono-
mies. Today, many large cities struggle with traffic gridlock, urban
sprawl, slum housing, crime, and pollution—making them not only
less pleasant but also less productive. Long traffic jams on the daily
commute are sure to compromise a worker’s productivity.
   As a result, most of the region’s top 10 cities have had slower GDP
growth over the past two decades than their middleweight peers, and
we expect this trend to continue. Latin America’s middleweights are
expected to generate more than 65 percent of the region’s growth over
2010–25. Growth in the populations and per capita GDPs of these
middleweights is likely to outpace that of the region’s four megacities.
   China is right in the middle of its large-scale urban shift. Over
the past 10 years alone, the share of the population in towns and
26 The Shifting Urban Economic Landscape


cities has increased from 36 percent to 50 percent, and according to
the United Nations its urban population could expand from around
555 million in 2005 to 910 million in 2025 (UNDESA 2012). That
increase is larger than today’s entire U.S. population. Policies enabling
large-scale urban migration are part of why China’s share of urbanites
has expanded so rapidly,6 and large cities are now the cornerstone of
China’s economy. In 2010, more than 700 metropolitan areas with
200,000 or more inhabitants collectively accounted for 78 percent
of the nation’s GDP. Cities of all sizes continue to grow faster than
smaller towns and rural areas, and we expect large cities to generate
more than 90 percent of China’s GDP growth to 2025.
   India, while also urbanizing on a monumental scale, is still fairly
early in its transition to an urban economy. Only 30 percent of Indians
live in cities of all sizes. And fewer than one in five Indians live in
the country’s roughly 230 large cities—about a third the number in
China. State borders appear to limit mobility, and economic policies
favoring small-scale local production have encouraged people to stay
closer to home. Yet the number of people in India’s towns and cities
increased from 290 million in 2001 to an estimated 340 million in
2008—and could hit 590 million by 2030 (Sankhe et al. 2010). This
process is now accelerating. Indeed, the country took nearly 40 years
(1971–2008) to add 230 million people to its urban population but
could take only half that time to add the next 250 million. By 2030,
urban areas of all sizes could generate 70 percent of net new jobs in
India, contribute more than 70 percent of GDP, and drive a near
quadrupling of per capita income. Even this expansion is likely to
increase the share of urbanites from around 30 percent today to only
40 percent in 2030.
   Africa, the second-fastest growing region over the past decade, is
also still early in its urbanization, with 213 large cities generating
around $0.8 trillion in GDP, almost half the regional total. By 2025,
the GDP of these cities should almost triple to more than $2 trillion,
approaching a 60 percent share, and middleweight cities are expected
to outperform the region’s largest city, Lagos. Urbanization, along
with a young and growing labor force and an expanding consumer
class, will continue to propel the region’s rapid economic growth (see
Fine et al. 2012; Roxburgh et al. 2010).
                                    Richard Dobbs and Jaana Remes 27


Mass urbanization is shifting the global economic balance

The world economy’s center of gravity is shifting from the advanced
economies of the West to the emerging powerhouses of the East and
South—at a speed and scale like never before. Mass urbanization in
China, India, and other emerging nations is an enormous part of
this movement. This shifting of the globe’s economic tectonic plates
has profound economic consequences. In the short term, urbaniza-
tion is propelling incomes in the developing world, a bright spot in
an otherwise still fragile global economy; in the long term, it has the
potential to reshape the world for governments and businesses alike.
   Rapidly expanding consumer classes with income for discretion-
ary goods and services—previously devoted mainly to such basics as
food, shelter, and clothing—will create vibrant new markets. And
they have already triggered an investment boom. As cities try to keep
pace with their expansion and the demands of their armies of new
consumers, they will have to continue investing in buildings and the
infrastructure to deliver housing, water, and power and to transport
goods and people. The additional consumption and investment that
will have to accompany the new urban consumer classes has the
potential to inject an estimated $30 trillion of spending a year into
the world economy by 2025.

Today’s mass urbanization is unprecedented in speed
and scale
China is urbanizing on 100 times the scale of Britain in the 18th cen-
tury and at more than 10 times the speed. As a result, the global
balance—measured by the Earth’s economic center of gravity—is
shifting back to Asia at a speed never before seen (Map 2.1).7
   For centuries, most people lived on close to subsistence incomes,
population grew slowly, migration was limited, and the Earth’s
economic center of gravity was fairly stable. But industrialization
and urbanization, first in Europe and the United States and then in
developing countries, have driven rapid shifts in that center. Japan’s
post-war economic renaissance began the swing back to the East in
the 1980s, but the most recent decade has seen the fastest shift ever
28 The Shifting Urban Economic Landscape


               Evalution of the earth’s economic center of gravitya
                                  AD 1 to 2025




Map 2.1    The globe’s shifting economic center of gravity
Source: McKinsey Global Institute analysis.
Note: a. Economic center of gravity is calculated by weighting locations by GDP
in three dimensions and projecting to the nearest point on the Earth’s surface. The
surface projection of the center of gravity shifts north after 1950 as Japan industrial-
ized rapidly, reflecting the fact that in three-dimensional space North America and
Asia are not only “next” to each other but also “across from each other”.


in the world’s economic balance. Over 2000–10, the center of gravity
shifted about 140 kilometers a year—to the South and particularly
to the East. That is about a third faster than the post–World War II
movement away from Europe toward North America.
   In a short span of three years from 2007 to 2010, the swing in
economic balance away from the United States and toward China
was remarkable. Over that period, the GDP of large Chinese cities
rose from 20 percent of that of large U.S. cities to 37 percent. These
were unusual economic times. The United States was in recession or
growing only slowly, while China was continuing to grow rapidly.
In those three years alone, three more Chinese cities became mega-
cities—one new megacity a year. In more mature economies, where
urbanization is reaching a plateau, only Chicago is expected to hit
10 million people by 2025.
   The shift in economic balance is not bilateral between the United
States and China, or even from West to East. The balance is shifting
                                    Richard Dobbs and Jaana Remes 29


to the South, too. In 2007, the GDP of Latin America’s cities was
26 percent that of their European counterparts, but by 2010 that
share had risen to 37 percent.

Just 600 cities could generate two-thirds of global GDP
growth—and half that growth could come from 443 cities
in emerging economies
Urbanization is a global phenomenon with the broadest possible
impact on the way we live and on the balance of world economic
power. But the economic clout of cities is highly concentrated and
likely to remain so.
   The top 600 metropolises measured by their contribution to global
GDP growth—the “City 600”—are today home to just over one in
five of the world’s people, but their economic power far outweighs
their collective size. Together, they generated $34 trillion of GDP in
2010—or more than half the world total. We see them continuing to
be hugely important for the global economy—, between them con-
tributing an estimated $30 trillion of additional GDP (in expected
real exchange rates), or nearly 65 percent of world growth.8
   However, an even more important group within the City 600
will likely be the most powerful driver of the world economy—the
“Emerging 440,” or 443 cities that we expect to generate 47 percent
of global GDP growth over 2010–25 (Figure 2.3). Only 20 cities
in the Emerging 440 are megacities, including São Paulo, Moscow,
Mexico City, Istanbul, Lagos, and Dhaka.9 These 20 are set to gen-
erate almost $6 trillion in GDP growth by 2025—a 7.6 percent
compound annual growth rate, nearly twice the world economy’s
4 percent. The rest of the Emerging 440 comprises middleweights,
which are expected to grow even faster, at an 8 percent annual rate,
and to account for almost $18 trillion of GDP growth by 2025, or
35 percent of the total.
   The middleweights in the Emerging 440 are in 57 countries and
every continent except Oceania. China has 236 of them. One is
Haerbin in the northeast, whose growth took off early in the 20th cen-
tury when the Chinese Eastern Railway, a spur of the Trans-Siberian
Railroad, opened and ran through the town, and which has built a
strong industrial base leveraging its excellent transport connections.
Figure 2.3   The Emerging 440 is expected to generate 47 percent of global GDP growth to 2025
Source: McKinsey Global Institute Cityscope 2.0.
Notes: Numbers may not sum due to rounding.
   a. Small cities and rural areas.
   b. Other large cities not included in the City 600.
   c. Includes cities from China (Hong Kong SAR, China, and Macau SAR, China) and Taiwan, China.
   d. Includes cities from Afghanistan, Bangladesh, India, Pakistan, and Sri Lanka.
   e. Includes cities from Cambodia, Indonesia, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Myanmar, Papua New Guinea, the Philippines,
Singapore, Thailand, and Vietnam.
                                    Richard Dobbs and Jaana Remes 31


Today, Haerbin is an up-and-coming middleweight city of nearly 6
million people and the headquarters of Haerbin Electric Corporation,
which generates half of China’s hydro and thermal power. Haerbin is
also home to the world-famous International Ice and Snow Sculpture
Festival. Other Chinese cities in the Emerging 440 are the inland
transportation hub of Lanzhou, with 2.6 million people, and China’s
largest coal port of Qinhuangdao, with 1.2 million.
   Latin America is home to 53 middleweights in the Emerging 440.
Brazil’s third largest city of Belo Horizonte, the capital of Minas
Gerais state, has rich mining and agriculture resources. And the car
manufacturing city of Puebla is Mexico’s fourth largest urban center,
with more than 2.6 million inhabitants. India boasts 28 cities in the
group, including Bangalore, with 8 million inhabitants and globally
known as the center of the country’s information and technology
industry, and Pune, which specializes in the automotive and pharma-
ceutical industries. Africa and the Middle East together contribute
37 middleweights to the Emerging 440, including Angola’s capital
Luanda, the world’s third largest Portuguese-speaking city, Kumasi,
which produces almost half of Ghana’s timber, and Port Harcourt,
the center of Nigeria’s oil refining industry.
   The increasing power of the emerging urban world is compelling,
but it would be a mistake to write off the cities of developed econo-
mies as unimportant. Today, the GDPs of Tokyo, New York, and
London would at market exchange rates rank them the world’s 9th-,
14th-, and 17th-largest economies. And even after accounting for
expected changes in real exchange rates, Tokyo is on course to remain
the world’s largest city by GDP in 2025, followed by New York
in second place, Los Angeles fourth, and London sixth. Shanghai
and Beijing are set to be the only two emerging cities among the
top six in GDP. In fact, one of every five City 600 cities is in North
America or Western Europe, and we expect them to account for
about 14 percent of global growth to 2025.

Cities will be home to 1 billion new consumers

Urbanization and industrialization have hauled millions of people
out of rural poverty, but the world still faces a challenge to ensure
that urbanites do not now fall into the poverty trap.10 The urban shift
32 The Shifting Urban Economic Landscape


has been the decisive force behind a global rise in the consuming
classes—segments of the population with enough income to buy not
only basic necessities but also discretionary goods and services—that
will be a significant new force in the world economy (Box 2.2).
   The size of the world’s consuming class is on course to more than
triple between 1990 and 2025—to more than 4 billion people. Nearly
2 billion of the new consumers will be in emerging market cities,
and 1 billion of these urban consumers will enter the ranks of the
consuming classes between now and 2025. More than 600 million
of the new consumers will live in Emerging 440 cities. In 2010,
nearly 55 percent of the Emerging 440 population had incomes high



                  Box 2.2 The rising consumer class

  We define the consuming class as individuals with disposable income
  of more than $10 a day—or $3,600 a year—using constant 2005 PPP
  dollars. Our purpose is to focus on the population segment with enough
  income for discretionary spending on a range of consumer products.
  The threshold of $10 a day corresponds to the income at which the
  consumption of many consumer goods begins to grow rapidly.
      This definition is consistent with work by others, including Surjit
  Bhalla and Homi Kharas.11 Others have proposed different definitions
  for measuring the rise of living standards in emerging markets, com-
  monly characterized as the growing “middle class.” There are many
  ways to define the boundaries of the middle class. Martin Ravallion of
  the World Bank defines it as individuals earning between $2 and $13
  a day at 2005 PPP, highlighting the changing share of the segment of
  the population just above the poverty line. The Asian Development
  Bank uses consumption of PPP $2–20 a day (Asian Development Bank
  2010). Others, including William Easterly of New York University,
  define the middle class as the population between the first and fifth
  income quintiles in a country. This approach defines the middle class
  relative to each nation’s income distribution rather than using an abso-
  lute level of income or consumption.
  Note: The right solution depends on the purpose of the analysis. Our method
  reflects a focus on understanding rising consumer markets in emerging
  economies.
                                          Richard Dobbs and Jaana Remes 33


enough to make discretionary purchases; by 2025, we expect that
share to be 80 percent.
   In emerging cities, incomes are rising faster than ever—and at
twice the rate of growth in the number of households and individuals
in consuming classes (Figure 2.4). We estimate that incomes will grow
especially fast in households with disposable incomes of $20,000 or
more in PPP terms. Such households within the Emerging 440 could
see their incomes rise at a compound annual rate of 7.6 percent a year,
and by 2025 they are likely to account for more than 55 percent of all




Figure 2.4 Household income pools are poised to grow at twice the rate of the
number of households in the Emerging 440
Source: McKinsey Global Institute Cityscope 2.0.
Note: Numbers may not sum due to rounding.
   a. Total household income is the estimated average income in an income category
multiplied by that category’s households. Average incomes of categories are esti-
mated using an income distribution from a segment of 10 income brackets in 2010
and 2025.
34 The Shifting Urban Economic Landscape


households in this income bracket, up from 35 percent today. There
also will be more high-income consumers in the cities of emerging
markets, likely to be home to 60 percent of all urban households
with an income of more than PPP $70,000. Today, the Emerging
440 is home to just under 20 million such households, a tally likely
to triple by 2025. China could account for one in five new high-
income households, but other economies will have their share of the
new prosperous—India with 6 percent, Brazil with 4 percent, and
Mexico with 3 percent. These four economies alone will be home to
an additional 30 million high-income households.
    These new consuming classes will fuel rapid growth in demand for
a range of products and services. We expect that urban households
could be responsible for around $20 trillion of additional spending
in the period to 2025, more than $14 trillion of it in the large cities
of developing economies. In the cities of the Emerging 440 alone, the
rise in consumption is poised at about $10 trillion.12
    In fact, growth in demand for many products will be even faster
than the expansion of the consuming class—for two reasons. The first
is the one we have mentioned—that incomes are rising faster than
the number of consuming individuals and households, a testament
to the economic power that living in a city confers. Second, so many
people in the cities of emerging economies—particularly in China
and India—are moving into the income brackets where spending
on many goods and services tends to take off (Benshimol Severin et
al. 2011). In India, discretionary spending—say, on packaged food
and drinks, durable goods such as televisions or refrigerators, or din-
ing out in restaurants—rose from 35 percent of average household
spending in 1985 to 52 percent in 2005 and is expected to jump to
about 70 percent by 2025 (Ablett et al. 2007).
    The economic shift is not happening at a consistent speed or
with an identical pattern across regions because not all products see
spending accelerate at the same level of income. The first types of
products that tend to take off at fairly modest incomes are snack
foods and bottled soft drinks—items that have low unit costs. Beauty
products are slightly more expensive, and their consumption starts
to speed up at higher incomes. Then, for luxury products such as
fine wine or up-market fashion, the income threshold has to be
higher still. Demand for deposit services tends to take off at higher
                                   Richard Dobbs and Jaana Remes 35


incomes than many consumer goods—they start to rise at around
PPP $18,000 per capita income and continue to be concentrated in
the leading cities of each nation.13
    But spending patterns are about more than just income. Consumer
tastes vary from region to region—or from city to city—in the same
country. Cultural and religious preferences also play a part in what
products grow fastest, and where. Obvious examples include the fact
that alcohol sales are low in countries with a high share of Muslims,
and meat consumption in India, where many people are vegetarian,
is low by global standards. Demographic trends can also make a big
difference. One-third of the population of Nigerian cities is below
age 16, and sales of baby food are currently more than double the
global average (at similar incomes).

Growing cities in emerging markets need investment, capital,
and resources
Rising prosperity and integration into global markets means that
cities will need more connections to other urban centers. As ris-
ing prosperity translates into greater demand for many products,
demand for transportation services that get products to consumers
rises rapidly. Most consumer goods will be shipped in containers,
and supply-chain logistics are creating further demand for container
capacity. We estimate that by 2025 the urban world will need two-
and-a-half times today’s container capacity in ports. Substantial
investment is needed for the required expansion in capacity—likely
more than a cumulative $200 billion by 2025 according to our rough
estimates.14
    Many emerging cities, as they seek to absorb and serve their
expanding and ever more prosperous citizens, have already enjoyed
a boom in residential and commercial building and infrastructure.
To get a broad sense of the scale of the investment challenge, we
estimate that, to cater to future demand, cities might need to more
than double their physical capital investment—from nearly $10
trillion a year today to more than $20 trillion a year by 2025.15
    Demand for housing and offices is soaring, and we estimate
that cities will need to construct new floor space equal to around
85 percent of today’s stock of residential and commercial buildings
36 The Shifting Urban Economic Landscape


(including stock needed to replace aging buildings) to keep up—
that’s more than 80,000 square kilometers, or about the size of
Austria. China is likely to account for almost 40 percent of these
new buildings. For commercial buildings, North American cities will
be important sources of growth. The United States and China are
likely to contribute 60 percent of global construction of commercial
floor space. Globally, this urban building boom is likely to require
cumulative investment, including in replacement buildings, of close
to $80 trillion to 2025.16
    By 2025, urban residential demand for municipal water will be an
estimated 40 percent higher than it is today—an increase of nearly
80 billion cubic meters, or more than 20 times the consumption of
New York City.17 China will likely account for one-quarter of growth
in demand for municipal water. Africa and the Middle East will be
responsible for almost 14 percent of the global rise in municipal
water demand in large cities. Meeting demand not only for water
but also for the treatment of wastewater could require cumulative
investment in the range of $480 billion by 2025.
    This rising urban demand is already straining the world’s available
natural resources—energy, water, and metals such as steel includ-
ed—and available capital. The global investment rate jumped from
20.8 percent of world GDP in 2002 to 23.7 percent in 2008 (before
falling back somewhat during the global recession of 2009) (Dobbs
et  al. 2010). On the resource front, prices of energy, land, food,
and water have soared as strong demand—notably from developing
countries—coincided with a period in which many resources became
more expensive and less accessible. Indeed, due to waves of techno-
logical innovation that made using these resources more efficient,
the price rises over 2000–10 wiped out the price declines over the
previous 100 years.18
    With their dense populations, cities tend to use their resources
more productively than do sparsely populated areas. McKinsey Global
Institute research on China’s urbanization found that a concentrated
pattern of urbanization could have almost 10 percent higher energy
efficiency than a more dispersed pattern (Woetzel et al. 2009). The
reason is that the industries in large cities, including services and
electronics, tend to use less energy. Moreover, people tend to live and
work in smaller spaces, so there is less need for heating and lighting.
                                      Richard Dobbs and Jaana Remes 37


Insulation, too, is easier and less costly to install in larger buildings.
And mass public transportation—planned well—is more cost effec-
tive in large cities than across a number of smaller urban centers. The
higher the residential density of a city, the more the driving declines,
cutting petrol use (Farrell et al. 2008).
   How cities try to accommodate their rising populations is not
just relevant in the near term—cities need to plan and develop local
economies that can produce sustained productivity gains long after
exhausting the—arguably easy—gains of rural-to-urban migration.
For cities investing in new capacity, there is a golden opportunity to
lock in higher energy and resource efficiency for decades to come,
setting the groundwork for sustainable economic vigor beyond their
demographic growth spurt.

The shifting economic balance poses a range of
challenges for cities

Cities now underpin the world economy, and how they manage their
affairs will have a profound impact on the lives of more than half
the world’s people. How cities handle themselves could not be more
vital. As the world’s economic center of gravity shifts at speed from
the advanced economies of North America and Europe toward the
developing economies of the South and East, their challenges will
differ sharply.
    For leaders of cities in mature economies that have already reaped
most of the economic benefits of their urbanization, the challenge
is to sustain growth and manage shifting demands on city services
in a tighter fiscal environment. In the near term, U.S. and Western
European cities are struggling to emerge from recession and over-
come the dampening impact on growth of high unemployment
and deleveraging (Dobbs et al. 2012a; Manyika et al. 2012a,
2012b). Looking further ahead, most of them will face the pressures
of slower population growth, including aging, and of intensifying
global competition.
    Some cities will see the impact sooner. In Italy, the city of Trieste
will in 2025 need to grapple with the strain of having more than
30 percent of its population ages 65 or older, while in Naples the
same share is expected to be below 20 percent. A city’s first step
38 The Shifting Urban Economic Landscape


toward setting priorities for the years ahead is to understand its main
economic strengths and challenges and how demographic and other
trends are likely to shape its economy. Chicago, on course to become
a megacity but grappling with slowing growth in recent years, has
compiled a fact base as the platform for a new growth strategy. If
cities in mature economies are to sustain and improve their service
delivery, they will need to bake into their planning the principle of
“doing more with less.” Productivity and smart planning will be the
name of the game.
   The task for many city leaders in the developing world is just the
opposite: how to keep up with the needs of an influx of 4 million
people each month in search of work and higher standards of living.
To both manage periods of rapid expansion and establish a solid base
for sustained growth in the longer term, these cities must execute
a complex managerial task of planning for housing, infrastructure,
and transportation systems—ensuring that the city has the finance
to meet operational and capital spending needs, to build capabili-
ties to manage effectively the broad range of public services and city
operations, and, through smart regulation, to create a favorable
environment for businesses.19 The many facets of urban management
are explored in the rest of this book (see also World Bank 2012).
Yet the patterns of the changing urban world suggest that cities,
wherever they are, also have much in common—and share similar
imperatives.

Govern smartly

Cities are becoming more important to the economic fates of their
nations, placing more responsibility on those who govern them.
Getting governance right is not easy, and no single model works in
all contexts. Many of the world’s leading cities, in both the developed
and developing worlds, have chosen to put a powerful, politically
appointed mayor in charge—China’s major cities and New York are
examples—often supported by corporatized agencies that specialize
in managing the myriad services that cities are obliged to deliver and
reviewed rigorously against the results they achieve. In the city of
Wuhan in China, the party secretary sets targets for economic growth
and evaluates all city departments against them. South Africa con-
                                     Richard Dobbs and Jaana Remes 39


solidated the previously independent municipalities of Johannesburg
into a single metropolitan government under a mayor supported by a
non-political, professional city manager. Rio de Janeiro has a “deliv-
ery unit”—a small team that has developed and coached a group of
cross-functional staff charged with delivering on the city’s goals. A
focused mandate and strong political backing are helping the unit
break through the silos that prevent government departments from
collaborating.
   Many other cities have a fragmented governance structure that
splits responsibilities among city, county, state, and federal govern-
ments and among siloed authorities in charge of such services as
housing and transportation. In the Los Angeles metropolitan area,
about 40 agencies oversee transport decisions and operations. And
the San Francisco Bay Area consists of nine counties and more than
100 cities, making regional planning and coordination challenging.
Consolidating and sharing services among cities and between cities
and counties can free up funds, while a lack of coordination can be a
recipe for inefficiency and wasted resources.20
   New technologies can ease the urban managerial task. City man-
agers can, for instance, encourage the installation of broadband in
new housing developments, which costs much less than retrofitting
existing housing. The increasing use of sensors and digital devices
in physical objects and machinery is enabling the birth of “smart”
urban infrastructure (Chui et al. 2010). For example, smart grids and
sensors in water and sewage systems can help avoid system break-
downs, halving the number of leaks. Smart transport systems can
use sensors to monitor transportation flows to avoid congestion and
traffic delays. In Mumbai, traffic control that adapts to traffic condi-
tions has cut average travel time 12 percent. London’s congestion
pricing scheme has reduced bus delays 50 percent and increased the
average speed of all traffic 31 percent.

Nurture the middleweights

The middleweights’ increasing prominence, a pattern of the evolving
world, has already proven to be the cornerstone of U.S. economic
power and is now palpably changing the emerging urban landscapes
from China to Latin America (Manyika et al. 2012b). These up-and-
40 The Shifting Urban Economic Landscape


coming medium-size cities are likely to be home to the lion’s share
of economic growth—not only globally but in most large countries.
   Countries can foster an environment for the middleweights to
learn from experience and preempt the strains that have slowed the
growth of many of their very large urban cousins. There is no single
blueprint for cities to follow—indeed, it is precisely their diversity
that makes middleweight cities powerful.
   In Latin America, successful middleweight cities range broadly—
from entrepreneurial metropolises such as Monterrey in Northern
Mexico, home to a technology cluster around the Tecnológico de
Monterrey system that has stored a deeply rooted entrepreneurial
culture—to Belo Horizonte in Brazil, a center of information tech-
nology and biotechnology—to Medellin, with the first Colombian
business cluster, PPPs fostering growth in electricity generation,
textiles, fashion design, construction, and tourism—to resource-rich
cities such as oil-producing Campeche and Villahermosa in Mexico
or agroindustrial Rosario in Argentina—to manufacturing centers
such as Puebla, home to the Volkswagen and Hylsa plants in Central
Mexico—and to the cluster of machinery and equipment companies
in the Santa Catalina region of southeastern Brazil.
   In India, between 70 and 100 medium-size “specialist” cities
have grown on the back of an anchor sector—such as manufactur-
ing, resources, transportation, and tourism—or as destinations
for pilgrims, creating many more jobs and attracting more private
investment than other cities of similar size. Examples include Agra,
a magnet for tourism, and Bhilai, with its world-class steel facilities
(Sankhe et al. 2010).
   Some middleweight cities will fare better than others—history
shows that the growth of individual cities varies widely. Yet we expect
half of global GDP growth to come from emerging market middle-
weights, making their success critical for sustaining the growth of the
global economy.

Compete for people and investment

Cities already compete for people and investment on a local and
global stage. This competition is likely to intensify as more middle-
weight cities are integrated into the global economy. The capacity to
                                      Richard Dobbs and Jaana Remes 41


attract people has determined the growth of cities in the past and will
continue to do so in the future—and not only in rapidly urbanizing
developing regions. Among the U.S. cities, differences in population
growth explain most of the differences in GDP growth. Fast-growing
cities—those with GDP growth at least 25 percent higher than the
national average over 1978–2010—saw their populations grow two
and a half times the national average despite having nearly identical
per capita GDP growth (Manyika et al. 2012b). The same holds true
in Western Europe. Most cities that outperform their national peers
do so because of faster growth in population, not in per capita GDP.21
    Aging will only intensify the race for attracting migrants, par-
ticularly the young and educated. China has committed to gradually
extending social services to migrants to attract the labor its cities need.
Pittsburgh in the United States, in its post-industrial phase, diversi-
fied its economic base and attracted new, more educated migrants,
reinforcing its rebirth.
    Most leaders of large cities already are acutely aware of the compe-
tition for hosting growing businesses. Attracting investment has been
a central plank of government policy in Singapore and Ireland. Both
have dedicated agencies—the Singapore Economic Development
Board and the Irish Industrial Development Agency—that have
built high-performing sales forces with skilled staff equipped with
best practices from the private sector. And both identify prospec-
tive investors, tailor offerings to the specific needs of not only each
industry but also individual companies, and have the power “to make
things happen for multinational corporations,” as the Economic
Development Board’s motto proclaims (Alfaro et al. 2005).

Seize the power of networks

Clusters of cities with close economic and business relationships—
and transportation links—enjoy powerful network effects. Instead
of competing with each other, individual cities in a cluster can forge
relationships to create an economy greater than the sum of its parts.
But cities need to network on a global scale, too. Industry value
chains, increasingly complex and global, require business and logistic
connections between suppliers and customers in many countries or
cities. For cities in developed economies whose population and GDP
42 The Shifting Urban Economic Landscape


growth might be slowing, one route to revival is to build connections
with the fast-growing cities of emerging markets, whether through
air and port links or through business and personal relationships.
    For most nations, another area for change is foreign service. Many
countries are seeing commercial diplomacy and trade missions as
increasing priorities for their foreign-service corps, yet their person-
nel allocation across the globe has largely failed to catch up with
the growing importance of medium-size cities in emerging econo-
mies. For instance, Wuhan, China, is likely to deliver more than
10 times the GDP growth of Auckland, New Zealand, over the next
15 years—yet most countries will post many more diplomats to
Auckland than to Wuhan, if they have any diplomatic presence at
all. India’s Hyderabad will likely post five times the GDP growth of
Krakow in Poland, but the United States has about the same num-
ber of foreign-service staff in each. In short, commercial diplomacy
designed in the late 20th century now needs to take full note of the
cities shaping the 21st.
    Being connected also enables cities to learn from each other. Cities
the world over are experimenting with innovations in policy and
operations—rethinking the way they work. In transportation, for
instance, Curitiba in Brazil has introduced pioneering innovations
in its public transport system, including a network of bus-only lanes.
Colombia’s Bogotá now boasts its extensive TransMilenio bus rapid
transit system. And Mexico City has its Metrobus system. Also in
Colombia, Medellin has a gondola cable transportation system that
connects some of the lowest income neighborhoods in the hills on
the city’s outskirts with the metro network, a solution since adopted
in nearby Manizales and in Caracas, Rio de Janeiro, and other cities.
    Food security is another area for new approaches. In the early
1990s, Belo Horizonte made the right to food a policy priority and
created an agency that has subsidized food distribution through pop-
ular restaurants and food baskets, through farmers markets and direct
supply links to rural producers, and through nutrition assistance
to schools and food banks. These measures have had a significant
impact not only on urban nutrition but also on rural agriculture—
with spending less than 2 percent of the city budget.22
    Local government can make an enormous difference by adopting
smart regulation. Lima in Peru suffered from a paralyzing amount
                                        Richard Dobbs and Jaana Remes 43


of red tape. A decade ago, it took more than 100 days to register
a property. Today, the wait is just a week, the shortest of any capi-
tal city in Latin America. This illustrates how dramatic change can
occur through clever policies. Lima deliberately removed unnecessary
officialdom (such as by reducing the number of certified copies of
required documents) and sped up processes by allowing electronic
cross-checking of information across agencies. Instead of making
10 visits to municipal offices, applicants could obtain a license in
just 2. In 2006, the first lean process year, more than twice as many
operating licenses were issued than in the four previous years com-
bined (Sislen et al. 2007).
   Compiling a detailed fact base on cities, the economic environ-
ment in which they operate, and the lessons of success and failure
in their management are all vital if local policy makers are to meet
the urbanization challenge. And they can benefit from learning from
each other about both what works and what does not.
   The world’s cities already boast inspirational examples of how to
overcome challenges that may seem insurmountable—and how to
head off the problems that some of the globe’s largest metropolises
struggle with today. How cities, the center of gravity of the world
economy, cope with their expansion will shape the world for decades
to come. So, rethinking cities is a vital task for our age.

Notes
 1. The McKinsey Global Institute, McKinsey & Company’s business and
    economics research arm, has published extensively on urbanization.
    See Woetzel et al. (2009); Sankhe et al. (2010); Dobbs et al. (2011b);
    Cadena et al. (2011); Manyika et al. (2012b); and Dobbs et al. (2012b).
    All McKinsey Global Institute reports can be downloaded at www.
    mckinsey.com/mgi. Unless otherwise noted, the findings in this chapter
    are based on McKinsey Global Institute research.
 2. There is a large body of literature assessing the nature and size of urban
    economies of scale. See, for example, Glaeser and Gottlieb (2009);
    World Bank (2009); and Gill and Goh (2010).
 3. The 259 large U.S. metropolitan areas include the two megacities of
    Los Angeles and New York, each with 10 million or more people, and
    257 middleweight cities, each with between 150,000 and 10 million.
    See Manyika et al. (2012b).
44 The Shifting Urban Economic Landscape


 4. See Molloy et al. (2011). The authors find that U.S. mobility is about
    twice as large as mobility in most European countries outside of
    Northern Europe, based on a 2005 Eurobarometer survey that allows
    for comparisons with U.S. data (European Commission 2005). Data
    from the European Union Labor Force Survey generally confirm lower
    mobility rates in Europe than in the United States. Note that it is dif-
    ficult to compare mobility rates across countries because of conceptual
    difficulties in forming a common definition of internal mobility.
 5. For more on the link between Latin American industrial policies and
    the emergence of megacities, see Elizondo and Krugman (1992) and
    Cadena et al. (2011).
 6. China’s hukou, or household registration system, identifies a person as
    a resident of a particular area. Before 1980, this system was strictly
    enforced—people were required to stay in the neighborhood where
    they were born, and though they could travel the system did not permit
    them to move to seek employment, education opportunities, or better
    public services. After 1980, however, when China embarked on eco-
    nomic reform, hukou restrictions were relaxed.
 7. The McKinsey Global Institute’s center of gravity analysis is based on
    country-level historical estimates from Maddison (2008) and country-
    level growth rates from Cityscope 2.0 until 2025. We allocated each
    country’s GDP to its approximate center of landmass. The same center
    of each country was used throughout the entire timeframe. To calculate
    the global center of gravity, landmass radian coordinates were trans-
    formed into Cartesian coordinates with a tool from the UK Ordnance
    Survey that uses ED50/UTM data and projection (see www.ordnance-
    survey.co.uk/oswebsite/gps). We then transformed these coordinates
    into momentums and averaged them to a true economic center of
    gravity for each year, located within the sphere of the Earth. Last, we
    drew a line from the center of the Earth through this center of gravity to
    the surface; see Maddison (1995). Previous approaches to assessing the
    world’s shifting economic center of gravity include Grether and Mathys
    (2010); Kharas (2010); and Quah (2011).
 8. The GDP growth projections are based on the McKinsey Global Institute
    Cityscope 2.0 assumption that global GDP to 2025 will expand at an
    average compound annual rate of 4 percent. While projections for
    individual cities are subject to uncertainty, the broad patterns across
    types of cities or regions are directionally robust across a reasonable
    range of key assumptions. For more detail on the assumptions behind
    our forecasts and their sensitivity to changes in assumptions, see the
    methodology appendix of Dobbs et al. (2012b).
                                        Richard Dobbs and Jaana Remes 45


 9. The 20 megacities in the Emerging 440 are, from highest to lowest
    population, Shanghai, Mexico City, São Paulo, Beijing, Mumbai,
    Delhi, Chongqing, Dhaka, Kolkata, Karachi, Buenos Aires, Manila,
    Rio de Janeiro, Moscow, Tianjin, Guangzhou, Cairo, Istanbul, Lagos,
    and Shenzhen.
10. There is broad recognition that, despite rising poverty in many urban
    areas, urbanization has helped reduce the world’s absolute number of
    poor people, defined as people living on $1 or less a day. According
    to the World Bank, the number of poor in the world fell 100 million
    over 1993–2002. But while the number of rural inhabitants below the
    poverty line fell 150 million, the number of urban poor rose 50 million
    (Ravallion et al. 2007). So, despite lower absolute poverty numbers,
    there is much to do. The United Nations’ Millennium Declaration rec-
    ognized that addressing the needs of the rising numbers of urban poor
    would be necessary to halve the proportion of people living in extreme
    poverty by 2015 (UNFPA 2007).
11. Surjit Bhalla defined the threshold for entering the middle class as
    income of $10 per day, as cited in The Economist (2009). The $10 per
    day consumption figure was also used as the lower bound of middle
    class in Kharas (2010).
12. We estimate total household consumption across cities by applying
    the private consumption share of GDP per country, using the GDP
    composition in 2010, to our GDP estimates for 2010 and 2025. Our
    approach implicitly assumes that the private consumption share of
    GDP will remain constant through 2025. Given past evidence from
    developed economies, the share of private consumption may increase
    with income, leading to higher projected growth in consumption.
13. Our estimates of the concentration of deposits in 2007 draw from
    a large number of fragmented national and international statistical
    sources and use predicted values for deposits in cities with missing data.
    The McKinsey Global Institute relied on data on total national deposits
    from the International Monetary Fund, McKinsey’s Capital Markets
    database, and McKinsey’s Global Banking Pools database. We collected
    city-level data on deposits for 771 cities worldwide using publications
    from national central banks. To estimate missing data, we used a regres-
    sion model on the pooled city-level data with four components, each
    with functional form and coefficients estimated using pooled city-level
    data: population and GDP by city from Cityscope 2.0; a fixed factor
    indicating the largest city in each country; a fixed factor for cities with
    absolute per capita GDP above PPP $18,000; and a factor for adjusting
    the national deposit to reflect regulation and consumption preferences
46 The Shifting Urban Economic Landscape


      at the country level. For full details of our methodology on deposits,
      containers, residential and commercial buildings, and municipal water,
      see the appendix of Dobbs et al. (2012b).
14.   For our estimates on container shipping, we used data from the
      Containerization International database, Drewry Shipping Consultants,
      Global Insight, and Cityscope 2.0. To estimate the regional invest-
      ment required to meet expected demand growth, we first accounted
      for the use of current container capacity to ascertain how much more
      traffic could be absorbed by increasing efficiency (without building
      new capacity). We applied a global benchmark cost per twenty-foot-
      equivalent unit—the size of a standard container—of around $290 to
      the additional capacity required to meet demand by 2025. We did not
      make an assumption on the specific characteristics of newly built capac-
      ity (for example, greenfield or brownfield) or recognize that the actual
      cost may vary substantially across individual projects, driven by factors
      beyond the scope of our models.
15.   This rough estimate of investment need applies the fixed capital invest-
      ment share of GDP per country in 2010 to our city GDP estimates for
      2010 and 2025 (see Chapter 5).
16.   No global benchmark data are available for residential and commercial
      floor space. We therefore relied on a variety of sources, including the
      International Energy Agency, Global Insight, the Lawrence Berkeley
      National Laboratory, SEMPLA-DIPRO, Embraesp, Seade, the
      Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics, the United Nations
      Human Settlements Programme, and the Economist Intelligence
      Unit, to produce a region-specific floor-space consumption demand as
      a function of per capita GDP for residential buildings and of service
      industry value added per capita GDP for commercial buildings. We
      then estimated the growth rate of per capita floor-space demand to
      2025, using fitted 2010 values and expected per capita GDP and per
      capita services GDP in 2025. Finally, we estimated an aggregate range
      of investment needs across regions using data from Turner & Townsend
      and Riders Digest.
17.   To estimate future municipal demand by city, we used available city-
      level per capita municipal water consumption for 595 cities with
      data—from national statistical offices, McKinsey’s China Urban
      Sustainability Index, the World Bank’s International Benchmarking
      Network of Water and Sanitation Utilities database, the Growing Blue
      database, and Eurostat. For cities with no available data on per capita
      water consumption, we used two approaches: For the 1,260 cities for
      which we had partial city coverage within the same nation, we esti-
                                         Richard Dobbs and Jaana Remes 47


      mated their water consumption based on data for similar cities in the
      country; for the 802 cities with no data available, we predicted their
      per capita consumption using a regression model with per capita GDP
      as the independent variable. To project water demand in 2025, we pre-
      dicted the rise in per capita consumption based on the functional form
      identified for missing city data.
18.   Dobbs et al. 2011a; McKinsey & Company’s Sustainability and
      Resource Productivity Practice.
19.   McKinsey developed the Urban Performance Index, a benchmark-
      ing tool designed to provide a fact-based look at a city’s performance
      against its international counterparts on four critical criteria: economic
      performance, social conditions, sustainable resource use, and finance
      and governance. For the results of the Urban Performance Index bench-
      marking of Latin American cities, see Cadena et al. (2011).
20.   In the San Francisco Bay Area, the Bay Area Council Economic
      Institute estimates that most shared services result in average savings of
      5–10 percent. If finance and government and public safety and justice
      functions could be shared, as much as $600 million could be saved
      on a budget of $6.3 billion. See Bay Area Council Economic Institute
      (2012). Also see Cadena et al. (2011).
21.   The McKinsey Global Institute will detail its analysis on large European
      cities in a forthcoming report.
22.   Belo Horizonte’s food security program has been recognized by the
      World Future Council’s Future Policy Award. See Göpel (2009).

Bibliography
Ablett, Jonathan, Aadarsh Baijal, Eric Beinhocker, Anupam Bose, Diana
   Farrell, Ulrich Gersch, Ezra Greenberg, Shishir Gupta, and Sumit Gupta.
   2007. The ‘Bird of Gold:’ The Rise of India’s Consumer Market. McKinsey
   Global Institute, New York.
Alfaro, Laura, Stephen McIntyre, and Vinati Dev. 2005. “Foreign Direct
   Investment and Ireland’s Tiger Economy.” Case 9-707-007. Harvard
   Business School, Cambridge, MA.
Asian Development Bank. 2010. Key Indicators for Asia and the Pacific 2010.
   Manila.
Atsmon, Yuval, Ari Kertesz, and Ireena Vittal. 2011. “Is Your Emerging-
   Market Strategy Local Enough?” McKinsey Quarterly. http://www.
   mckinsey.com/insights/growth/is_your_emerging-market_strategy_
   local_enough
Bairoch, Paul. 1975. The Economic Development of the Third World since
   1900. London: Methuen. http://www.getcited.org/pub/101633784.
48 The Shifting Urban Economic Landscape


Bay Area Council Economic Institute. 2012. Innovation and Investment:
   Building Tomorrow’s Economy in the Bay Area. Bay Area Economic Profile,
   Eighth in a Series. San Francisco.
Benshimol Severin, Claudia, Rogerio Hirose, Udo Kopka, Subho Moulik,
   Taro Nordheider, and Fábio Stul. 2011. Global Growth Compass: Locating
   Consumer-Industry Growth Opportunities in Emerging Markets. McKinsey
   Global Institute, New York.
Cadena, Andrés, Richard Dobbs, and Jaana Remes. 2012. “The Growing
   Economic Power of Cities.” Journal of International Affairs 65 (2): 1–18.
Cadena, Andrés, Jaana Remes, James Manyika, Richard Dobbs, Charles
   Roxburgh, Heinz-Peter Elstrodt, Alberto Chaia, and Alejandra Restrepo.
   2011. Building Globally Competitive Cities: The Key to Latin American
   Growth. McKinsey Global Institute, New York.
Chui, Michael, Marcus Löffler, and Roger Roberts. 2010. “The Internet
   of Things.” McKinsey Quarterly. http://www.mckinsey.com/insights/
   high_tech_telecoms_internet/the_internet_of_things.
Dobbs, Richard, Susan Lund, Charles Roxburgh, James Manyika, Alex
   Kim, Andreas Schreiner, Riccardo Boin, Rohit Chopra, Sebastian Jauch,
   Hyun Kim, Megan McDonald, and John Piotrowski. 2010. Farewell to
   Cheap Capital? The Implications of Long-term Shifts in Global Investment
   and Saving. McKinsey Global Institute, New York.
Dobbs, Richard, Anu Madgavkar, Dominic Barton, Eric Labaye, James
   Manyika, Charles Roxburgh, Susan Lund, and Siddarth Madhav. 2012a.
   The World at Work: Jobs, Pay, and Skills for 3.5 Billion People. McKinsey
   Global Institute, New York.
Dobbs, Richard, Jeremy Oppenheim, Fraser Thompson, Marcel Brinkman,
   and Marc Zornes. 2011a. Resource Revolution: Meeting the World’s Energy,
   Materials, Food, and Water Needs. McKinsey Global Institute, New York.
Dobbs, Richard, Jaana Remes, James Manyika, Charles Roxburgh, Sven
   Smit, and Fabian Schaer. 2012b. Urban World: Cities and the Rise of the
   Consuming Class. McKinsey Global Institute, New York.
Dobbs, Richard, Sven Smit, Jaana Remes, James Manyika, Charles
   Roxburgh, and Alejandra Restrepo. 2011b. Urban World: Mapping the
   Economic Power of Cities. McKinsey Global Institute, New York.
The Economist. 2009. “Burgeoning Bourgeoisie.” February 12.
Elizondo, Raul Livas, and Paul Krugman. 1992. “Trade Policy and the Third
   World Metropolis.” Working Paper 4238, National Bureau of Economic
   Research, Cambridge, MA.
European Commission. 2005. Standard Eurobarometer 63. Brussels,
   Belgium. http://ec.europa.eu/public_opinion/archives/eb/eb63/eb63_
   en.htm.
                                      Richard Dobbs and Jaana Remes 49


Farrell, Diana, Jaana Remes, and Dominic Charles. 2008. Fueling
   Sustainable Development: The Energy Productivity Solution. McKinsey
   Global Institute, New York.
Fine, David, Arend van Wamelen, Susan Lund, Armando Cabral, Mourad
   Taoufiki, Norbert Dörr, Acha Leke, Charles Roxburgh, Jörg Schubert,
   and Paul Cook. 2012. Africa at Work: Job Creation and Inclusive Growth.
   McKinsey Global Institute, New York.
Gill, Indermit S., and Chor-Ching Goh. 2010. “Scale Economies and
   Cities.” World Bank Research Observer 25 (2) 235–62.
Glaeser, Edward L., and Joshua D. Gottlieb. 2009. “The Wealth of Cities:
   Agglomeration Economies and Spatial Equilibrium in the United
   States.” Working Paper 14806, National Bureau of Economic Research,
   Cambridge, MA.
Göpel, Maja. 2009. Celebrating the Belo Horizonte Food Security Programme:
   Food Policy Award 2009: Solutions for the Food Crisis. Hamburg,
   Germany: World Future Council. http://www.worldfuturecouncil.org/
   fileadmin/user_upload/PDF/Future_Policy_Award_brochure.pdf.
Grether, Jean Marie, and Nicole Mathys. 2010. “Is the World’s Economic
   Center of Gravity Already in Asia?” Area 42: 47–50.
Kharas, Homi. 2010. “The Emerging Middle Class in Developing
   Countries.” Development Centre Working Paper 285, Organisation for
   Economic Co-operation and Development, Paris.
Maddison, Angus. 1995. Monitoring the World Economy 1820–1992. Paris:
   OECD Publishing.
——–—. 2008. Historical Statistics for the World Economy: 1–2007 AD.
Manyika, James, Susan Lund, Byron Auguste, and Sreenivas Ramaswamy.
   2012a. Help Wanted: The Future of Work in Advanced Economies.
   McKinsey Global Institute, New York.
Manyika, James, Jaana Remes, Richard Dobbs, Javier Orellana, and
   Fabian Schaer. 2012b. Urban America: US Cities in the World Economy.
   McKinsey Global Institute, New York.
Molloy, Raven, Christopher L. Smith, and Abigail K. Wozniak. 2011.
   “Internal Migration in the United States.” Working Paper 17307,
   National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Morris, Ian. 2010. “Social Development.” http://www.ianmorris.org/
   socdev.html.
Quah, Danny. 2011. “The Global Economy’s Shifting Centre of Gravity.”
   Global Policy 2 (1): 3–9.
Ravallion, Martin, Shaohua Chen, and Prem Sangraula. 2007. “New
   Evidence on the Urbanization of Global Poverty.” Policy Research
   Working Paper 4199, World Bank, Washington, DC.
50 The Shifting Urban Economic Landscape


Roxburgh, Charles, Norbert Dörr, Acha Leke, Amine Tazi-Riffi, Arend van
    Wamelen, Susan Lund, Mutsa Chironga, Tarik Alatovik, Charles Atkins,
    Nadia Terfous, and Till Zeino-Mahmalat. 2010. “Lions on the Move:
    The Progress and Potential of African Economies.” McKinsey Global
    Institute, New York.
Sankhe, Shirish, Ireena Vittal, Richard Dobbs, Ajit Mohan, Ankur Gulati,
    Jonathan Ablett, Shishir Gupta, Alex Kim, Sudipto Paul, Aditya Sanghvi,
    and Gurpreet Sethy. 2010. India’s Urban Awakening: Building Inclusive
    Cities, Sustaining Economic Growth. McKinsey Global Institute, New
    York.
Scheidel, Walter, and Steven J. Friesen. 2009. “The Size of the Economy and
    the Distribution of Income in the Roman Empire: Version 2.0.” Journal
    of Roman Studies 99: 61–91.
Sislen, David, Taimur Samad, Sarah Anthony, Luke Haggarty, and
    Igor Artemiev. 2007. “Cutting Red Tape in Lima: How Municipal
    Simplification Improves Investment Climate.” World Bank En Breve
    99, World Bank, Washington, DC. http://siteresources.worldbank.org/
    INTENBREVE/Newsletters/21243488/Jan07_99_Lima_Red_Tape_
    EN_V6.pdf.
Steckel, Richard H., and Roderick Floud, eds. 1997. Health and Welfare
    during Industrialization. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs (UNDESA)
    2012. “World Urbanization Prospects, The 2011 Revision.” Population
    Division. New York. http://esa.un.org/unpd/wup/index.htm.
United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) 2007. “Urbanization: A
    Majority in Cities.” New York. http://www.unfpa.org/pds/urbanization.
    htm.
Woetzel, Jonathan, Lenny Mendonca, Janamitra Devan, Stefano Negri,
    Yangmel Hu, Luke Jordan, Xiujun Li, Alexander Maasry, Geoff Tsen,
    and Flora Yu. 2009. Preparing for China’s Urban Billion. McKinsey
    Global Institute, New York.
World Bank. 2009. World Development Report 2009: Reshaping Economic
    Geography. Washington, DC.
——–—. 2012. Planning, Connecting, and Financing Cities—Now.
    Washington, DC.
World Federation of Exchanges. n.d. WFE Database. http://www.world-
    exchanges.org/statistics/.
3


Urbanization and the Geography
of Development

J. Vernon Henderson




This chapter focuses on several interrelated key questions on the
geography of development. Although we herald cities with their
industrial bases as “engines of growth,” does industrialization in fact
drive urbanization? (World Bank 2009). What economic activities
do cities of different sizes undertake? Does this change as countries
develop? If so, what are the policy implications? Do development
policies have a big-city bias? If so, what does this imply for growth
and inequality, and what are appropriate place-based policies? Should
countries have policies concerning optimal city sizes or city-size
distributions?
   Urbanization is central to the development process. Employment
shifts out of agriculture into industry, and industrial production pro-
ceeds most effectively in cities, with their agglomeration economies.
Cities are thus viewed as engines of growth. While such relationships
appear in the data, the process is not straightforward. Among devel-
oping countries, changes in income or industrialization correlate
only weakly with changes in urbanization. This suggests that policy
52   Urbanization and the Geography of Development


and institutional factors may also influence the urbanization process,
weakening the link between industrialization and urbanization. The
relationship between industrialization and urbanization is absent in
Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA).
   Urban development involves a hierarchy: production patterns
vary across cities by specialization and differences between bigger
and smaller cities in manufacturing and service composition. What
cities of different sizes produce differs over the development process.
Two items are important. First, production patterns churn as cities
change the goods they specialize in and produce for export, implying
that cities need to be nimble in formulating policies that affect local
industry competitiveness. Second, as development proceeds, indus-
try decentralizes out of the biggest cities. Transport investment plays
a key role in industrial relocation and big-city transformation, as well
as in trade volumes and incomes of hinterland regions.
   In many developing countries, especially pre-democratization,
policy makers exhibit a big-city bias. Picking “winners” is part of
intelligent public infrastructure investment. Given limited resources,
policy makers need to decide, for example, where to place highways,
which will offer a competitive edge to at least nodal cities. One hopes
that such choices are based on market indicators, such as where
industry is starting to agglomerate and where there are clear needs.
Still, however, deciding which places to link and where to run high-
ways involves picking winners.
   Here we focus on more explicit biases. These include offering some
cities favorable access to and cost of credit in capital markets, favor-
able access to export licenses, better public schools, and the like. Such
favoritism seems focused on the biggest cities—national capitals or
homes of political elites. Favoritism tends to draw firms and migrants
to these cities. To try to avoid excessive in-migration and oversized,
congested cities, favored cities might adopt policies that make living
conditions for migrants more unpleasant. This can result in increased
inequality and social tension.
   Finally, we will look at city sizes and city-size distributions. Factors
determining both aspects are complex and poorly understood. It is
hard to be proscriptive about either individual city sizes or overall
city-size distributions. The best policies strengthen institutions in the
relevant markets so that market forces can move the economy toward
                                               J. Vernon Henderson 53


better outcomes. That said, the role of public-private interaction and
the details of what institutional reforms different situations require
are controversial.

Spatial transformation and cities as engines of growth

Urbanization is associated with economic growth and industrial-
ization. According to the classic two-sector models of Harris and
Todaro (1970) and Williamson (1986) and their more recent incar-
nations (Brueckner and Zenou 1999, for example), industrializa-
tion, perhaps export led, drives development. Such industrialization
requires urbanization, drawing labor out of a passive rural sector.
And such spatial reorganization of the population seems efficient:
both manufacturing and services benefit with increased productiv-
ity from agglomeration economies and dense urban environments.1
In an endogenous growth context, human capital accumulation and
rising effective technology levels can underlie this process as coun-
tries develop, releasing labor from agriculture into industry in cities
(Henderson and Wang 2005; Lucas 2004). Learning and knowledge
accumulation may also be more productive in cities (Baum-Snow
and Pavan 2012; Moretti 2004).
    This move of people out of agriculture into cities engaged in
industry and service production has played out historically. There are
no major developed, non-urbanized countries. And the dynamics of
development seem consistent with the ideas behind the two-sector
model. As urbanization proceeds, we expect countries to start with
a strong divergence between the urban and rural sectors. No matter
what triggers the industrialization process nationally, industrializing
cities with more modern technologies and better access to foreign
markets offer higher incomes than rural areas. This income gap starts
to draw migrants to cities, and countries go through an intergenera-
tional adjustment phase of young people moving from rural to urban
areas. Urbanization eventually improves conditions in rural areas
through better labor-to-land ratios and the agricultural moderniza-
tion that occurs with improved education and national exposure to
modern technologies and business methods. Urban-rural incomes
then start to converge. Urban-rural consumption differences start
high, but as urbanization proceeds, they disappear (Figure 3.1). At
54   Urbanization and the Geography of Development




Figure 3.1   Urban-rural divergence and then convergence as urbanization
proceeds
Source: World Bank 2009.



low levels of urbanization, the urban sector’s share of income can be
2–3 times its share of national population, while at high levels of
urbanization, the two shares are equal.
   Asia and SSA are the two major world regions yet to fully urban-
ize. Urbanization in Asia is following the traditional pattern discussed
above, but SSA differs. It has experienced substantial urbanization in
the face of modest income growth (Barrios et al. 2006; Collier and
Venables 2007; Fay and Opal 2000; World Bank 1999), with limited
industrialization (Johnson et al. 2009) and little technological prog-
ress in agriculture (Figure 3.2) (Binswanger and Townsend 2000).
   The graphs in Figure 3.2, for developing countries defined as hav-
ing less than the mean real income per capita in 1970, distinguish
SSA from the rest of the world (NSSA). Part (a) concerns a measure
of effective technology: the average years of high school and college of
the adult population. There, the urbanization level in 2010 strongly
correlates with effective technology, and SSA follows the same pattern
as the rest of the world. Part (b) reveals a strong relationship between
urbanization and income per capita for the rest of the world but not
a. Effective technology and urbanization level   b. Income and urbanization level




                                                                                    (contd.)
Figure 3.2 (contd.)


          c. Changes in technology and changes in urbanization                        d. Urbanization level and sector composition




Figure 3.2 Urbanization, income, technology, and sector change
Source: Work in progress by J. Vernon Henderson, Mark Roberts, and Adam Storeygard.
Note: SSA = Sub-Saharan Africa; NSSA = Non-SSA Developing.
                                                J. Vernon Henderson 57


for SSA. Part (c) shows the long difference from 1970 and 2010 for
changes in effective technology and urbanization. The change rela-
tionships are positive but weaker, and for income changes not shown,
they are insignificant. These three graphs together suggest two things.
First, effective technology levels correlate better with and potentially
lead urbanization. Second, while changes over time corroborate that
urbanization relates to development, many other factors influence
changes in urbanization. We will discuss some of these later.
   The biggest surprise concerns part (d). For the rest of the world,
urbanization is associated with a reduced role of agriculture and
increased role of industry (not shown). But for SSA, that is not the
case. Some African countries are 40–45 percent urban (about China’s
level of urbanization), with small shares in agriculture, and others are
at the same level of urbanization, with large shares. Most of SSA has
yet to develop modern industry. Cities are based on natural resource
development—in particular, agriculture. Pre-industry urbanization
seems associated with consumer cities rather than producer cities.
Cities provide retail, wholesale, and personal services, where resource
rents are spent. Box 3.1 offers evidence.

The emergent urban hierarchy

In this section, we cover three topics. First is the urban hierarchy
that emerges in fully urbanized economies and how and why the
hierarchy differs somewhat in developing countries. Second is the
role of a country’s largest cities. In developed countries, this role has
changed with time, and in developing countries today, that evolution
is playing out much faster. Third is the effect of transport infrastruc-
ture investments on the production patterns of the biggest cities and
on regional development.

Product and functional specialization

A number of studies of the United States covering 1950–70 note
a high degree of sector specialization (or product specialization) in
metropolitan areas, especially smaller and medium-size ones.2 In
a city, about 60–75 percent of employment is in non-traded good
activities (personal, trade, restaurant, housing, construction, and
58     Urbanization and the Geography of Development



        Box 3.1     Urbanization fostered by agricultural booms in
                            Sub-Saharan Africa

     Can growth in agriculture foster urban growth absent the development
     of manufacturing and tradable business and financial services? Can
     urbanization be driven by consumer cities rather than producer cities?
     Jedwab (2012) examines the relationship between cocoa booms in
     Ghana and Côte d’Ivoire and the development of cities. Sub-Saharan
     Africa (SSA) has yet to undergo a green revolution; fertilizer and
     irrigation use are low, and yields are low compared with other developing
     regions. Cocoa farmers in Ghana and Côte d’Ivoire operate on a
     25-year cycle. New cocoa production areas arise in recently deforested
     areas and last for about 25 years before depletion. Then farmers move
     production to the next forested frontier. In both countries, production
     has moved successively from east to west. Jedwab uses this staged
     movement with district-level data for Ghana (1891–2000) and Côte
     d’Ivoire (1948–98) to show at the frontier how cash-crop production
     accounts for 60–75 percent of urbanization. This urbanization is not
     accompanied by increased production of manufacturing and tradable
     services in the frontier areas. Urban growth comes from farmers
     spending their incomes in local towns, trading with each other, and
     spending on products imported from outside the region. Towns become
     wholesale and retail centers, as well as producers of personal and farm
     services. Surprisingly, prior urbanization in earlier frontier areas is
     maintained even after cocoa production moves on, and these areas face
     income losses.
         In an unpublished work, Henderson and Storeygard provide cor-
     roborating evidence suggesting the effects of increased agricultural
     incomes on nearby cities. For 541 cities in 18 SSA countries, they show
     that positive rainfall shocks in a city’s hinterland raise city income. The
     idea is that rainfall increases agricultural yields and leads to enhanced
     urban incomes as farmers spend their incomes in cities. A one standard
     deviation increase in rainfall increases the intensity of “night lights”
     14 percent. City lights are night lights measured daily for all points on
     the globe by U.S. satellites in the late evening (on the dark half of the
     lunar cycle for days without cloud cover). Henderson et al. (2012) show
     that changes in lights are a reasonable proxy for changes in income in
     places with weak or no income measures, and a 14 percent increase
     in lights suggests about a 4 percent increase in local gross domestic
     product (GDP).
                                                J. Vernon Henderson 59


utility services), and 25–40 percent is in the production of goods
for export (sold outside the city). Historically, exports were mostly
manufactured products. For example, using cluster analysis of simi-
larity in production patterns based on 299 industries and 243 metro
areas for the United States in 1970, Black and Henderson (2003)
grouped cities into 15 types. A typical cluster type is automobiles,
with 12 metropolitan areas in 1970 heavily engaged in producing
automobiles and their parts and components. The median city in the
group had 13 percent of its employment in automobile production,
with the highest (Flint, Michigan) having 36 percent. The analysis
also included cities engaged in textiles, apparel, aircraft, communica-
tion, pulp and paper, shipbuilding, steel, petrochemicals, industrial
machinery, and leather products. There were some specialized service
cities, though in 1970 they were mostly state-college and state-
capital cities (for example, Champaign-Urbana or Austin). Larger
cities, such as Chicago and Dallas, were still classified as “diverse
manufacturing.”
   These studies demonstrate that automobile and textile manufac-
turing have few colocation benefits: they do not learn from each other
or trade in intermediate inputs. So, to exploit within industry-scale
externalities and limit city sizes to reduce urban congestion and other
size disamenities, workers and firms partition into different types of
cities specializing in production, with city sizes tailored to the degree
of agglomeration benefits in their respective production types.
   Why then do we have big, diverse manufacturing cities? These
could be centers of experimentation in an urban product-cycle model.
According to Duranton and Puga (2001), while there are specialized
cities, there are also diversified cities where potential manufacturers
experiment with different technologies and products until they find
what they are best suited to produce. Then, they decentralize to a
specialized city. More generally, bigger cities are centers of research
and development and higher technology development, where diver-
sity and cross-sector fertilization in a Jacobs (1969) framework aids
innovation and new product development. Fujita et al. (2004), on
Japanese electronics firms, show an innovation and production hier-
archy. Branches of electronics firms doing research and development
and trial production are found in larger metropolitan areas, while
mass production of standard items is found in non-metropolitan
60   Urbanization and the Geography of Development


areas or offshore in developing countries. This pattern coincides
with the higher return to learning in larger cities observed in the
United States, even after accounting for the sorting of high-skill and
high-ability workers into larger cities (Baum-Snow and Pavan 2012;
Wang 2012).
   There are many complications to this paradigm. First are changes
in developed countries, such as the United States since 1970.
In a study based on 2000 data rather than 1970 data, Black and
Henderson (2003) show that U.S. deindustrialization has reduced
the share of manufacturing cities and resulted in the development
of many more service cities. These include health, entertainment,
transport services, insurance, and finance cities, in addition to the
traditional state-college and state-capital cities. A number of cities are
transitioning out of manufacturing, and former large, diverse manu-
facturing cities are now more market and service oriented. Duranton
and Puga (2005) show that, as cities have deindustrialized in recent
years, sector specialization has declined. And as Kolko (1999) shows,
the most industrialized parts of the United States are now rural (really
non-urbanized) areas and smaller cities.
   To some extent, larger cities now display what Duranton and Puga
(2005) call “functional specialization.” Larger firms now separate
production from administrative and service functions, including the
widespread development of sales office networks (Holmes 2005).
Firms now have multiple “headquarters,” mostly administrative offic-
es working in law, advertising, marketing, or finance. The authors
show that functional specialization, or concentration in cities, has
increased dramatically. This increased concentration of functions
occurs only in cities with more than 1.5 million people, and espe-
cially in the key market centers with more than 5 million. As Kolko
(1999) shows, tradable business and financial services in the United
States concentrate in the largest metropolitan areas, and their roles
decline sharply going down the urban hierarchy.
   Another feature is churning—the turnover of export production
activities of cities. As established in Eaton and Eckstein (1997) for
France and Japan and by Black and Henderson (1999) and Duranton
(2007) for the United States, there is little turbulence in city-size rank-
ing over periods of 100 years or more. Big cities stay big, even if their
economic bases change. This might be due partly to their immobile
                                                  J. Vernon Henderson 61


housing capital stocks, which help retain employment even in the face
of large negative economic shocks. Lower house prices keep people
in depressed locations (Glaeser and Gyourko 2005). Contributing
to the stability of city-size rankings may be the accumulated stock of
location-specific general knowledge (Rauch 1993). However, there
is enormous churning in cities’ industrial bases, as documented in
Black and Henderson (1999) and Duranton (2007). As an example,
Beardsell and Henderson (1999) examine the computer industry in
the United States, where, with the invention of the personal com-
puter, computer industry employment doubled over 1977–85. But
by 1992, the offshoring of production had caused employment to
fall back to 1977 levels. Apart from the dominant producer, San Jose,
there was widespread change in dominant cities, with big declines in
cities like Los Angeles, Minneapolis, and Poughkeepsie, New York
(IBM), and big gains in new producers like Austin and San Diego.
More generally, over a period of 30 years or so, many cities change
industrial bases. Over 1963–92, the dominant U.S. cities in comput-
ers, aircraft, instruments, and electronic components all changed.
    Duranton (2007) argues that churning is critical to innovation
and urban growth. With national and regional cross-fertilization of
ideas, a city producing an electronic auto component may invent a
process relevant to a different industry—say, communications equip-
ment. As that development takes hold and producers move to that
city to learn the new process, the city transforms from an auto com-
ponent city to a communications equipment city. For developing
countries, there is a critical lesson, based on related literature on firms
(Duranton 2012). Churning among firms whereby less productive,
stale producers go out of business and are replaced by higher produc-
tivity start-ups is key to an industry maintaining a competitive edge
(Foster et al. 2008). Policies that prop up stagnant state-owned firms
and industries retard growth, as do those that try to force or induce
non-competitive private firms to stay in business.
    The analogy to cities is clear. While cities need to be aware of
their industrial bases to properly serve them, policies that prop up or
subsidize growth of declining or stagnant local industries spell future
unemployment. Rather, cities need to be nimble, ready to change
public service and infrastructure provision to match the needs of
new producers, especially in countries with export-led growth. A
62   Urbanization and the Geography of Development


city specializing in the production of certain apparel items might
find that another, lower cost country is more competitive, that tastes
change, or that buyers experience economic downturns, reducing
demand. The city will lose its business, and its entrepreneurs will
need to focus on another set of products. The city may thus need
to alter the composition and level of services it provides to meet the
needs of the new producers.
   Cities in developing countries, even ones that are industrializing,
experience less product and functional specialization (Duranton
2012). The basis can be history, such as Maoist planning in China,
whereby major cities and provinces operated almost in autarky and,
by plan, produced all products. One can also apply the Duranton
and Puga (2001) product-cycle model to argue that a country’s
early industrialization stages of experimentation with products and
imported technologies proceed most effectively in diverse environ-
ments, especially larger cities. Also, as Donaldson (2010) points out,
high transport costs lead cities to produce some consumer products
inefficiently with backward technology rather than import them. As
developing countries invest in transport infrastructure, the decline
in transport costs makes trade cheaper. Cities can then specialize
more in products for which they have a comparative advantage and
import and stop producing items for which they have less advantage.
Specialization will thus increase with transport investments. In the
Republic of Korea, industry decentralized from the three largest cit-
ies to smaller cities and hinterland areas following massive transport
and communications infrastructure investments in the early 1980s
(Henderson et al. 2001). Specialization or spatial concentration of
employment across cities increased overall for manufacturing—and
especially in such key sectors as heavy industry and machinery.

The evolving role of the largest cities

The biggest cities in a developing country tend to start off as manu-
facturing centers. Box 3.2 traces New York City’s development as
a major manufacturing center in the 19th and early 20th centuries
to its role today as a deindustrialized major service producer and
exporter. Calcutta, Jakarta, Shanghai, and Seoul all started as major
manufacturing centers for their nations. Even in the mid-1990s,
                                                  J. Vernon Henderson 63



             Box 3.2 New York City’s transformation

New York is and has been throughout U.S. history America’s dominant
city. As detailed by Glaeser (2005), New York historically had consider-
able natural advantages over competitor cities. It has a superb natural
deepwater harbor better than Boston’s and is directly on the coast
unlike Philadelphia. It is centrally located along the Eastern seaboard
and historically was the center of a hub-and-spoke system including
water links to the Great Lakes. Its hinterland had fairly rich agricultural
land. New York grew initially as a shipping center, especially for cot-
ton and textiles and as part of trade with the West Indies. With its
harbor and central location, New York was also a main entry point for
European immigrants. Many of these immigrants settled in New York’s
ethnic neighborhoods, where people of like origin traded job and hous-
ing information in common cultural and linguistic neighborhoods.
    In the latter half of the 19th century, a rapidly growing New York
emerged as a manufacturing center. Its history of trade in textiles made
it natural for developing a garment industry. Its ties to the West Indies,
its natural harbor, and its central location made it the point for refining
and distributing that region’s unrefined sugar. Finally, New York was
the central importer of books from the United Kingdom and produced
pirated versions for distribution in the United States. Such focus on
manufacturing was not unique to New York. Kolko (1995) shows that,
in 1910, the four largest U.S. cities had 35 percent of their employment
in manufacturing, with shares moving down the urban hierarchy to
the rural sector (at 25 percent). Big cities were manufacturing engines
of growth.
    During this period, before rail commuting and cars and continu-
ous process production (on a single floor), New York’s manufacturing
developed in dense, five- and six-story buildings, and its population
lived in similarly dense neighborhoods. Over the last 60–70 years,
New York has deindustrialized and transformed into a service center.
In 2002, 24 percent of employment in Manhattan was in profes-
sional, scientific, or technical services or in security and commodity
contracts (Glaeser 2005). From a different perspective, in 1997, while
Manhattan had 1.8 percent of the nation’s total employment, it had
12 percent of national employment in financial headquarters, 12 percent
in financial services, and 8 percent in business services, with 15 percent

                                                                 (contd.)
64     Urbanization and the Geography of Development



     Box 3.2 (contd.)
     of advertising. Manhattan’s historical high density has been central to
     its role as a service center. Arzaghi and Henderson (2008) estimate the
     high productivity benefits of very close spatial proximity, or density, of
     producers trading information. Close spatial proximity seems to most
     benefit services like advertising, which then out-compete manufacturers
     for these locations with their expensive land and high-priced labor.



Shanghai remained a key heavy manufacturer in China. As noted
above, this might have occurred because these megacities are key
centers for importation and adaptation of knowledge, which are best
carried out in a large, diverse environment. But also, as we will dis-
cuss, public services, capital markets, and allocation of licenses may
be biased toward these major centers.
   As development proceeds, manufacturing decentralizes from these
large cities in two stages (as in the United States). First is decen-
tralization to peri-urban or suburban areas of these cities. Second is
decentralization from these metropolitan regions to hinterland areas,
small cities, and rural areas. Henderson (2010) presents this process
for Korea and Japan. World Bank (2012a) also looks at the Korean
example and links decentralization to the widespread transport and
communications infrastructure investments that Korea made in the
early 1980s.
   As another example here, I consider 108 Chinese metropolitan
areas for which there are good 1990 GDP data. For the first stage,
in 1990, the nine largest metropolitan areas had about 85 percent of
industrial GDP produced in their center cities as opposed to peri-
urban areas (the rest of the prefecture); by 2005, this share had fallen
to just over 60 percent, in a period during which the population
share of these center cities actually increased modestly. For the sec-
ond, now emerging stage, in 1990 the ratio of the share of industrial
GDP of the nine largest cities in all 108 cities to the share of total
GDP of the nine largest in all 108 was 1.05. By 2005, this figure
had fallen to about 0.87. That is, the nine largest are changing from
being more industrial than other cities to being substantially less
industrial.
                                                J. Vernon Henderson 65


   Box 3.3 considers recent decentralization in India and conse-
quently raises another issue. We have painted decentralization here
as a positive development. However, there may be premature decen-
tralization in India and a loss of agglomeration benefits. Firms are
driven from cities because of poor environments: poorly allocated
infrastructure investments, a lack of public utilities, and inappropri-
ate land market regulations. Bertaud and Brueckner (2005) discuss
how land market regulations (limiting floor-area ratios) in Mumbai
have led to sprawl and inefficiently low densities near the city center.
This may result in a costly lessening of agglomeration benefits (World
Bank 2012b).
   What drives this change in major cities from manufacturing lead-
ers to service leaders? Several forces are at work. First, imported and
adapted technologies learned in big cities become standardized, and
producers benefit less from big-city knowledge spillovers. They then
want to move production to less congested locations, with lower
land and labor costs, especially if big cities have costly land market
regulations and are poorly managed. Second, national production
of traded business and financial services grows more than other
sectors, as economies mature with more developed legal, financial,
and marketing sectors and with more functional specialization. Big
cities are more competitive for producing services and facilitating
functional specialization. Third, whether rationally (conservation of
resources) or due to big-city bias, big cities tend to start with bet-
ter public infrastructure provision, important for firms. When such
investments become more widespread nationally, decentralization
becomes possible. We illustrate next with the key investment—trans-
port infrastructure—and discuss location issues more generally.

Role of transport investments

Transport investments play two key roles in developing countries.
First, they reduce commuting costs and the costs of moving goods
within cities. That reduces the need to cluster activities in and around
the city center, allows city populations to spread out, and enables
industry to move out of the central business district. The second
is the role of intercity, interregional, and hinterland investment in
transport links. Since transport infrastructure investments are costly
66     Urbanization and the Geography of Development



                Box 3.3 Industrial decentralization in India

     Two studies look at recent patterns of production in Indian cities and
     how the patterns differ between the urban and rural sectors (Figure
     B3.3.1). Desmet et al. (2012) study manufacturing employment
     growth in districts where it is concentrated and in districts where it is
     not. They do the same for services. The time period is short, 2000–05,
     but the patterns are striking. The authors fit locally a trend with
     error bands, and as the data move to higher intensity districts with
     fewer observations, the error bands widen. For manufacturing, there
     is strong mean reversion, whereby districts with high concentrations
     in 2000 grow much more slowly over 2000–05 than districts with
     low concentration in 2000. In fact, on average, high-concentration
     districts have negative growth rates and lose employment. The pattern
     for services is quite different. High-concentration districts have higher
     average growth rates than at least the middle-concentration districts. At
     the upper end, growth rises with concentration. Overall, this suggests
     decentralization of manufacturing, which we explore below, with
     services concentrating even more in high-intensity districts, found in
     the biggest cities.




     Figure B3.3.1 Indian manufacturing density, 2000–05, and Indian ser-
     vices density, 2001–06
     Source: Desmet et al. 2012.
     Note: Lighter shades represent error bands.

        Ghani et al. (2012) look more specifically at manufacturing and
     document the move away from cities to the rural sector. In Figure
     B3.3.2, the first part shows the urban sector’s decline in share of
     industrial output over 1989–2005, though its share of employment
     stabilized after 1995. The second part shows data just for the organized
     sector, as opposed to the informal sector. For bigger firms that dominate
                                                       J. Vernon Henderson 67



  national output, the urban shares of plants, employment, and output
  of the organized sector all declined after 1995. The authors argue that
  the organized sector is ruralizing. But as World Bank (2012a) points
  out, a lot of this movement is really suburbanization—the first stage
  of decentralization in which firms move to rural areas on the outskirts
  of major metropolitan areas, with vastly cheaper land and somewhat
  cheaper labor. While the urban share of employment in the organized
  sector declined, the urban share of informal sector employment rose.
  The informal sector may contain smaller experimental firms, for which
  city location is important, as well as traditional parts suppliers, which
  may now face spatial mismatch as their buyers in the organized sector
  move away.




  Figure B3.3.2 India’s urban shares and urban shares in the organized sec-
  tor, 1989–2005
  Source: Ghani et al. 2012.
  Note: Figure plots urban shares of plants, employment and output for each year
  using survey data of plants from organized and unorganized sectors.




and make up a large portion of national budgets, understanding their
consequences is important for making better investment decisions.
   Baum-Snow et al. (2012) look at the effects of intracity transport
investment in China on the move of industry and population to
peri-urban areas. The authors econometrically estimate the impact
on decentralization of having more highway rays (radial rays going
out from the city center), more ring roads, and more railway rays.
They examine the growth of activities in the 1990 city center (urban
68   Urbanization and the Geography of Development


districts as of 1990) from 1990 to either 2005 or 2010 and find that
each additional highway ray causally displaced 4 percent of the city
center population to the suburbs over 1990–2010. They also find
that, in China, where until very recently there was little long-distance
highway shipping, rail rays play a central role in production decen-
tralization. Each additional rail ray leads to a 26 percent reduction in
city center industrial production, because suburban firms then have
better access to rail nodes and sidings. More speculatively, they find
that ring roads lead to major decentralization of both population and
industry. Ring roads for industry link to suburban rail sidings and
terminals and provide support for trucking as well.
    Clearly, transport investments within cities cause them to spread
out, perhaps leading to urban sprawl and a large ecological footprint
(Kahn 2006). This reflects market-reoriented spatial redistribution of
activities, generated by people’s demand for space and firms’ demand
for cheaper land and labor on the urban fringe. But sprawl can be
inefficient, especially if fuel is subsidized, encouraging more com-
muting, or if land is taken on the urban fringe at below-market prices
(as in China), encouraging excessive taking.
    The role of intercity transport investments is key but still poorly
understood. It helps to provide some context. Where does economic
activity—urban or rural—locate in a country? As Rappaport and
Sachs (2003) indicate, most economic activity occurs on a coast or
on navigable waterways, due to the important role of water trans-
port and water’s amenity value. However, many countries (India and
China, for example) developed with centers far from the coast and
huge interior hinterland populations. In countries with huge interior
populations, per capita income clearly declines moving away from
the coast (Naughton 2007). As Bosker et al. (2012) argue for China,
countries with large interior populations can sustain huge hinterland
cities not really served by a waterway. Still, access to domestic and
international markets has a big impact on the location of economic
activity and income produced by hinterland regions. Transport access
raises incomes and induces in-migration in the areas it serves. Thus,
there is a tradeoff of cost for maintenance of hinterland populations.
If a country wishes to maintain large hinterland populations, it must
invest in expensive transport infrastructure to keep these locations
competitive and connected to international and coastal markets.
                                                 J. Vernon Henderson 69


   Over the last few years, economists have produced several studies
that document the role of transport in these situations. Duranton
and Turner (2012) show that transport investments increase city
populations in the United States. Duranton et al. (2011) show
that, for the United States, improved transport networks facilitate
trade: cities today that are better connected to the national highway
system have larger trade flows and tend to produce heavier items.
In an impressive paper, Donaldson (2010) argues that improved
transport from British investment in railways in the 19th and early
20th centuries enabled Indian districts to stop producing the goods
they produced inefficiently and to import them instead. These
districts could then focus production on goods for which they had
a comparative advantage. Donaldson estimates that the advent of a
rail passing through a district raised its real income per unit of land
about 17 percent. In a differently conceived paper, Banerjee et al.
(2012) argue that better rail transport connections in China after the
mid-19th-century advent of treaty ports have had output effects on
counties that got rails similar to the output effects on those farther off
the grid. Rather than try to make inferences based on historical rails
in India or China, Box 3.4 looks at trucking costs in SSA.

Urban and big-city bias

Does bias exist?

Literature on urban bias argues that developing countries tend to
favor the urban sector with improved terms of trade and better access
to capital markets (Renaud 1981). However, the urban sector includes
a diverse set of large cities and small towns. A more refined argument
holds that the biggest cities—national capitals especially—receive the
most favoritism (Ades and Glaeser 1995). As noted, infrastructure
investments in transportation and communications are necessarily
spatially targeted, based as much as possible on evolving private mar-
ket demand for such investments. Placement of such investments
may or may not involve bias. Here we focus on bias from public
intervention in capital and export markets that favor certain loca-
tions—particularly the politically connected or very biggest cities.
Bias can also involve the quality of public services, such as schooling.
70     Urbanization and the Geography of Development



        Box 3.4     Hinterland income and the cost of transport in
                            Sub-Saharan Africa

     Storeygard (2012) examines SSA countries where the primary city
     is on the coast (Tanzania, Mozambique, Angola, Gabon, Nigeria,
     Cameroon, Benin, Togo, Ghana, Cote d’Ivoire, Liberia, Sierra Leone,
     Guinea, Senegal, and Mauritania). He traces the distance along the
     best road network connecting 287 interior cities to their respec-
     tive primary cities. Because data are not available to trace the time
     development of roads, he examines another dimension, the travel
     costs on those roads, inspired by two considerations. First, per-mile
     vehicle trucking costs have a high fuel component; the elasticity of
     vehicle travel costs per unit of distance with respect to fuel prices is
     0.35. Second, over 2002–08, the price of oil nearly quadrupled, from
     $25 a barrel to $97, with a commensurate rise in local diesel fuel
     prices.
         What is the impact of the rise in fuel prices on city incomes, as
     differentiated by distance? We expect places far from the coast to
     experience greater income losses, since their shipping costs per unit
     rise more. Unfortunately, we do not have measures of city income for
     SSA countries for any point in time, let alone as they vary over time.
     Storeygard measures income changes by changes in the intensity of city
     lights over 1992–2007. What does he find?
         As Table B3.4.1 shows, cities with greater road distance from the
     coastal primary city suffered greater income losses than those closer to
     the coast, with substantial effects. To interpret the magnitude of the
     estimated coefficients, we give an example. For maximum oil price
     change in the time period (from $25 a barrel to $97), a one standard
     deviation increase in distance from the primary city lowers city lights
     by 23 percent. That translates roughly into a 6 percent lower GDP.
     Storeygard shows that the effect on connections to the primary city is
     greater for cities (endogenously) served more by paved roads. Paving
     occurred for cities more likely to be better connected to international
     markets, so these cities are most sensitive to changes in cost of access
     to the coast. For cities served more by unpaved roads, access to a local
     regional center is more important.
                                                           J. Vernon Henderson 71



  Table B3.4.1 Log (night lights per city) annually, 1992–2008

  Coefficient: Road             −0.683***                  −0.520**
  distance to primary
  city X oil price
  Estimation method             Tobit; year and            ordinary least squares;
  and controls                  city fixed effects,        year and city fixed
                                linear city specific       effects, city-specific
                                time trend                 splines on growth
  n                             263                        263
  ***significant at 1 percent or better; ** significant at 5 percent or better.




Here, if intervention is based on correcting market failures, there
is little rationale for favoring big cities, as failure in the relevant
markets may be more pronounced in the rural sector than in big
cities. This section presumes bias is economically inefficient and
focuses on the unintended consequences of such bias for both effi-
ciency and equity.
    First, is there evidence of bias? Evidence is usually indirect, restrict-
ing lending or access to export licenses in hinterland areas, as argued
for Indonesia by Henderson and Kuncoro (1996). More tellingly,
Jefferson and Singh (1999) and Au and Henderson (2006a) estimate
that in China in the 1990s, the rate of return to capital in the rural
sector exceeded that in the urban sector (especially in bigger cities)
by at least 25 percent. Of course, some government capital market
programs may be geared toward the rural sector,3 so the assessment is
difficult. While Brazil had subsidized agricultural lending programs,
it likely strongly favored the biggest cities in capital markets in the
non-democratic era under state capitalism. Another issue is the
degree to which public service provision is slanted toward the biggest
cities, whether in showcase investments in Beijing and Shanghai or
in the gap in quality of education facilities between rural and urban
areas in Brazil or China.
    Favoritism may result from policies based on economic beliefs that
the biggest cities are the engines of economic growth, incorrectly sug-
72   Urbanization and the Geography of Development


gesting that government-influenced investments should be directed
to the biggest cities. Or it may have an element of nepotism and
corruption, whereby national leaders favor the city where they live
and where their family and friends have businesses.
   Davis and Henderson (2003) make two important points about
factors that can help offset bias. First is the role of transport invest-
ments in helping hinterland development. The authors show that the
degree of primacy—the share of the urban population in a country’s
largest city—is influenced by transport investments. They argue that,
conditional on population and land area, a larger national road net-
work and a larger waterway system lead to reduced primacy, as hinter-
land cities have better access to markets. Second, and very critically,
the ability to favor the biggest cities is constrained by institutions as
they develop. Conditional on population and land area, countries
that have a federal constitution show less primacy—a smaller share
of the urban population in the largest city of a country. Federalism
helps level the playing field across cities, giving smaller hinterland
cities greater freedom to finance and provide their own public ser-
vices and to have regional banks. Similarly, improvements in the
democratic environment lead to decreased primacy. Democratization
allows elected candidates to represent hinterland region interests in a
national legislature.
   Figure 3.3 shows how a more general measure of urban concentra-
tion is lower in more democratized states and declines as democra-
tization proceeds. Of course, institutions are endogenous, so causal
inference is tough. Shocks that affect urbanization may also affect
democratization. For example, Bruckner and Ciccone (2011) argue
that rainfall shocks in SSA affect trade and income, which in turn
affect the opportunity costs of conflict and hence democratization.
But rainfall directly affects urban-rural incomes and urbanization.

Why do we care about big-city bias?

Favoring big cities in national markets and public service provision
makes them attractive for firms—and hence for workers looking
for jobs. Favored cities thus face increased in-migration, potentially
leading to excessive city sizes, as in Bangkok, Jakarta, and Mexico
City. This relates to the aforementioned idea that favoritism leads to
(a) 1970 degree of democracy versus 2000 Gini                                    (b) Changes in democratization and the Gini, 1970–2000


Figure 3.3   The spatial Gini and political structures
Source: Henderson and Wang 2007.
Note: The graphs look at the partial relationship between democratization and a measure of urban concentration, the spatial Gini, after factoring out
national population, national income, and planned economic and federal structure influences. The spatial Gini is like an income Gini. Rank all cities in
a country from smallest to largest. The spatial Lorenz curve is the cumulative share of the national urban population as we move from the smallest city
to the largest. The Gini is the area between the Lorenz curve and the 45-degree line. On the 45-degree line, all cities would be of equal size in a graph of
size rank against cumulative share. Democratization is measured by the polity index. Graph (a) shows the relationship between 1970 democratization
and 2000 spatial concentration. Graph (b) shows the relationship between changes in democracy and changes in spatial concentration.
74   Urbanization and the Geography of Development


increased primacy and urban concentration and raises two questions.
First, should we be concerned about excessive city sizes? Second,
because excessive size increases congestion and lowers the quality of
city life, residents and elites of favored cities may try to limit in-
migration. Collectively, they would like to keep the favors without
the added population; of course, individual firms may want to hire
cheap migrant labor. What policies could residents or elites follow to
restrain in-migration?
    In urban models, modest increases in city size beyond an “optimal
level” do not necessarily lead to substantial decreases in resident
welfare. While there are increases in diseconomies, there are still scale
benefits, and the net losses may be quite low. However, Henderson’s
(2003) panel productivity study, the only study to look at this issue
closely, implements an econometric model whereby one can calculate
the best primacy level for each country (varying by country size). Best
primacy maximizes productivity growth, as reflected in growth in
real GDP per capita. A one standard deviation in primacy above its
best level reduces a country’s annual growth 1.4 percentage points, a
very large effect. Excessive size leads to wasted resources and reduced
growth.
    Cai’s (2006) description of Chinese policy on urbanization
addresses whether residents and local policy makers resist in-
migration. China had strong formal migration restrictions enforced
through the household registration (hukou) system, but they were
lifted in 2001. The Chinese were concerned that cities like Beijing
and Shanghai would be flooded with rural immigrants. Beijing and
Shanghai are certainly favored with massive infrastructure invest-
ments and in capital markets, as the role of state-owned enterprises
has increased over the past decade. The articulated policy for the
largest cities relative to the free-migration policy for small cities is to
“raise the doorsill” to stem in-migration. “Raise the doorsill” means
to provide migrants with poor living conditions and restricted access
to public services. Migrants live either in dorms or, in Beijing, in
about 300 urban villages scattered throughout the city and on the
urban fringe, with little or no access to the formal housing market.
Urban villages are still under rural governance, where the local rural
residents “farm the housing”—provide essentially slum housing for
migrants. These are units in which 4–6 migrants live in a single room
                                                J. Vernon Henderson 75


with all cooking, washing, and toilet facilities outside. Access to state
schools, despite many policy initiatives, remains severely restricted
for migrants. Most either leave their children back home or send
them to quasi-legal private schools that face repeated attempts to
close them and have unqualified teachers and very limited facilities
(Kwong 2004). Migrants are not part of social security systems in
cities and have no access to local health insurance. The policy debates
about the resulting increases in inequality between residents and
migrants are muted by the recognition that improving conditions
would only attract more migrants.
   Inspired by this articulated policy for China, Feler and Henderson
(2011) look at Brazil in the 1980s, before democratic reforms.
National zoning regulations on formal sector housing created sizes
potentially larger than what lower income residents wanted. The
result was the development of illegal (favelas) and quasi-legal (lotea-
mentos) settlements. Loteamentos were “illegal” developments built
on private land, violating national zoning laws. Cities were thus not
required to service them—in particular, with piped water—forcing
households to buy from expensive private vendors. Some cities were
more willing and had a lower cost for servicing these migrants than
others. City districts (the units largely responsible for providing
public piped water) that provided services had more growth in small
houses that migrants live in than did districts that denied services.
A one standard deviation reduction in small houses served in the
1980s led to a 15 percentage point decline in growth in numbers
of households in a district over 1991–2000, where average growth
was 40 percentage points. The data suggest that higher income and
already more populated districts are more likely to underservice small
houses.
   All this presents a dilemma. If national policy makers favor the
largest cities with subsidized access to capital markets and ineffi-
ciently high comparative public investments, these cities draw more
migrants, resulting in excessively large and crowded cities. But acting
to stem in-migration by either making living conditions very poor or
acquiescing to poor conditions increases inequality and potentially
social tension.
   Of course, favoritism is the heart of the problem: lack of a level
playing field across cities as they compete for resources. Leveling the
76   Urbanization and the Geography of Development


playing field means providing equal access to capital markets, fiscal
resources, and export permissions and other licenses. But interpreting
what equal access means is more difficult, as big cities have levels
of development and degrees of sophistication different from rural
areas. But markets can provide effective equal access. Banks may
employ different screening mechanisms, information requirements,
and repayment inducements in different areas. The issue is whether
in the end lending across areas is geared so that rates of return on
investments are equal.

City sizes and the city-size distribution

This section turns to two topics. First is the extent to which we expect
individual cities, given what they produce and where they are located,
to be of reasonably efficient size—and what policies that depends
on. Second is the overall size distribution of cities in their respective
countries and the relevant policy issues, if any.

City sizes

We have yet to talk about city-size determination, other than to
suggest there may be a big-city bias that tends to draw migrants to
favored cities. What institutions and market forces determine city
sizes in general, regardless of where cities are in the hierarchy? The
urban economic literature identifies two traditional settings, both
based on how new cities are likely to form. One is self-organization,
whereby individual firms and people mill about and cluster into set-
tlements in an undirected and uncoordinated fashion—no real estate
developers, no local governments investing to attract residents or
subsidize businesses, and no company towns. The other is a national
market in city land development, with the entrepreneurs being large
real estate developers or local governments. For example, town or
village governments may decide that they want to become a more
major urban center. As formulated in Henderson (1974), Helsley and
Strange (2012) detail how formation of cities by self-organization of
residents and firms without large-scale developers and institutions
leads to cities of very inefficient sizes. They also show that industrial
compositions may be very inefficient. Similarly, Behrens et al. (2012)
                                               J. Vernon Henderson 77


model significantly oversized cities under self-organization, though
Henderson and Venables (2009) show that with sophisticated
contracting and capital markets, in a dynamic context, cities will
tend to be efficient sizes under self-organization.
    Henderson and Becker (2000), building on Henderson (1974),
argue that the potential poor outcomes under self-organization
can be largely avoided with “free market” formation of new cities
or with conversion of towns to cities led by private developers that
can finance large-scale settlements. If existing cities become over-
sized or operate inefficiently, the threat of new, better-sized, more
efficient settlements maintains market discipline. To establish new
cities, small town governments must have the fiscal autonomy and
ability to finance expansionary public infrastructure, and large
land developers, in conjunction with private employers and hous-
ing providers, can effectively start new, large-scale settlements as
demand requires. Garreau’s (1991) book on the U.S. development
of “edge cities” details a large variety of partnerships between the
public and private sectors, as well as purely private sector develop-
ments. Behind all these mechanisms lies the need for good local
institutions—well-defined and enforceable private property rights
(without risk of expropriation) and disciplined access to capital
markets. Box 3.5 discusses aspects of the requirements as argued in
World Bank (2012a, 2012b).
    For developing countries, the issue is whether market formation
of new cities works well enough to ensure reasonable outcomes and,
if not, whether the national or regional governments can fill the gap
by planning new cities. In this context, there is the need not just for
existing cities to grow but for towns to expand into major urban
centers. Over 1960–2000, new city formation accounted for more
than 30 percent of urban population growth in developing countries
(Henderson and Wang 2007). National governments do not have a
great record in economic planning (hence the collapse of planned
economies), and the scant evidence on new planned cities suggests
that they do no better in planning city formation.
    World Bank (2012b) illustrates the Arab Republic of Egypt’s poor
performance in new city planning. For market formation of cities,
two issues emerge. First is the national government’s willingness
to allow local hinterland towns working with the private sector to
78     Urbanization and the Geography of Development



       Box 3.5 Essentials for timely city formation and expansion

     World Bank (2012a, 2012b) analyzes issues of new city formation and
     city expansion and discuss the history of “planned cities.” Two general
     issues are important for a reasonable process: how cities can finance
     urban infrastructure, and how real estate markets should be structured
     to encourage private real estate development of urban land for residen-
     tial or commercial use.
         When cities borrow, they offer no collateral for loans: private banks or
     bondholders cannot seize public property. Ensuring repayment requires
     a strongly regulatory and sophisticated credit rating system whereby
     each city borrower is subject to regulation that requires transparency
     and full accounting and assurance of repayment. For example, if a local
     government is failing to pay its debts, a higher level of government may
     be able to intercept monies coming into the local government and force
     repayment of the debts. In many countries, capital markets and regula-
     tory systems are not mature enough for the widespread issuance of local
     public debt. Instead, the national government can create substitutes.
         World Bank (2012b, spotlight 4) discusses the FINDETER initia-
     tive in Colombia. FINDETER is a quasi-public financial institution
     that intermediates between commercial banks and borrowing locali-
     ties. It offers subsidized loans to banks as an inducement to lend to
     localities and monitors and approves applications with an eye to the
     proposed venture’s quality. When the bank lends, it absorbs all the risk
     but has the right to intercept certain city revenues (in this case, inter-
     governmental transfers) in event of non-repayment. FINDETER has a
     AAA local credit rating from Duff & Phelps. Also discussed is an initia-
     tive in Tamil Nadu, India, through which a public-private financial
     intermediary issues its own bonds and lends to localities with creative
     ways to limit risk, involve the private sector, and ensure that projects
     are producing revenue to help repay loans. Its loan recovery rate is
     98 percent. Of course, in some countries like China, the national
     government intervenes to fund local city development directly. While
     people point to the creation of Shenzhen as a success, there are also
     spectacular failures, like Ordos.
         World Bank (2012a) analyzes property rights problems in India
     that inhibit large-scale developers. The country has limits on private
     assembly of land, and public taking (through eminent domain)
     is an opaque system tainted by years of corruption. More gener-
     ally, it has poorly defined property rights and a judiciary system that
                                                   J. Vernon Henderson 79



  operates too slowly to effectively enforce rights and decide disputes.
  This creates insecurity in tenure rights and increased risk to develop-
  ment projects. For eminent domain to work and for the local public
  sector to use property tax revenues, a proper system for land evaluation
  is needed. That requires trained appraisers, public assessments (to deter
  corruption), and transparency and consistency in evaluation (to get
  public acceptance). For large-scale developers and city land markets to
  work, India needs comprehensive reforms focused on well-defined and
  enforceable property rights and local governments that offer transpar-
  ency, expertise, and limited corruption.


develop, and thus compete with, say, the primary city. Henderson
and Wang (2007) suggest that this could be linked to democratiza-
tion. They show that a one standard deviation increase in the polity
measure of democracy noted above increases the growth in numbers
of cities in a country 37 percent more than the typical increase. The
effects are robust, linking growth in numbers of cities to democrati-
zation and implied regional representation.
    Second, even if national governments are willing to encourage the
development of hinterland cities, there is the needed timely devel-
opment of local fiscal autonomy and access to capital markets for
small towns ripe for expansion and development. Perhaps as critical,
land markets in developing countries are often largely informal and
with limited property rights, discouraging the evolution of large-scale
real estate developers. We know property rights are important on
a micro scale in house and labor markets (Field 2007; Galiani and
Schargrodsky 2010), but on a larger scale, there is no research on
their effects on timely city formation and the achievement of desir-
able sizes. Aspects of property rights issues are also noted in Box 3.5.
    To be clear, we have little idea what the optimal size of any type
of city should be. Not knowing optimal sizes, we also do not know
corresponding optimal numbers. Au and Henderson (2006b), using
a unique dataset and unusual context, look at the sizes of cities that
maximize GDP per employee in China in 1997, where this so-called
efficient size depends on place in the urban hierarchy.
    Why can we not use investigations like this to plan? First, it is not
clear nationally that all cities should be at the size that maximizes
80   Urbanization and the Geography of Development


GDP per worker. For example, at the sizes that maximize welfare
per worker, cities with better amenities can offer higher welfare per
worker than cities with poorer amenities. Basic welfare analysis tells
us that more attractive cities should expand beyond the size that
maximizes welfare per worker to accommodate more people than
their sister cities with poorer amenities. Second, the best sizes are
measured statistically with considerable error. Third, we believe that
these efficient sizes are increasing with technological advances, mean-
ing that what is efficient in 1997 is too small in 2007. In hybrid
outcomes of market and planned sizes, world city sizes more than
doubled over 1960–2000 (Henderson and Wang 2007). One wants
not to proscribe sizes but to provide environments for the market to
drive sizes toward efficient levels.

City-size distributions

In 2009, McKinsey issued a report on urbanization in China call-
ing for the development of an urban network housing up to 500
million people in cities with 20–40 million people each. That would
effectively mean placing most of the urban population in megacities,
as opposed to the typical worldwide fraction of well under 10 percent
for metropolitan areas of more than 12 million people. Our discus-
sion of the urban hierarchy suggests that the McKinsey report is mis-
guided. Most production is carried out efficiently in smaller, fairly
specialized cities, and the role for megacities is strictly limited, as they
specialize in high-profile items with limited national demand, such
as high-end advertising; theater; high-fashion apparel; and financial,
legal, and other business services. For example, the United States,
an already heavily service-oriented country, has only two megacities,
New York and Los Angeles.
   But there is a fascination with city-size distribution. Part of this
focuses on two empirical regularities. First, the city-size distribution
seems to closely follow a Pareto distribution; second, the relative size
distribution is remarkably stable over time. Black and Henderson
(2003) document this for the United States for 1910–2000. For the
world, Figure 3.4 illustrates both the Pareto shape and the stability
for 1960–2000 of the relative size distribution of metropolitan areas.
Given the radical changes in production patterns and the structure
                                                           J. Vernon Henderson 81




Figure 3.4    The world size distribution of cities
Source: Henderson and Wang 2007.
Note: There are 20 cells on the horizontal axis, each spaced apart by the same per-
centage increase in size. The vertical axis shows the share of each cell in the number
of world cities for the respective year. Sizes are normalized (as is the cutoff point) by
the mean size in each year to obtain a relative size distribution. The absolute size dis-
tribution is continually shifting right with technological improvements. The intent
of normalizing is to compare shapes of the relative size distributions over time. The
shapes are consistent with a Pareto distribution. Inspection reveals that the relative
size distribution in 1960 is the same as in 2000.


of the urban hierarchy in the United States over 1910–2000 or in
the world since 1960, how can the relative size distribution remain
the same? According to our notions of urban hierarchy, changes in
economic structure should bring changes in the size distribution;
indeed, as Henderson and Wang (2007) show, they do at the margin.
But we rarely see massive shifts in relative urban size structure within
countries over time. Why?
   A controversial paper by Gabaix (1999) sparked a round of
papers by Eeckhout (2004), Rossi-Hansberg and Wright (2007),
and Duranton (2007), among others. Gabaix formulates a stochas-
tic process whereby cities receive repeated draws (uncorrelated with
size) on overall productivity or quality of life. Cities that get repeated
82   Urbanization and the Geography of Development


good draws by luck emerge as big, others are more middling, and
the unlucky cities are small. Under certain conditions, a Pareto size
distribution theoretically emerges (“Zipf ’s Law”), at least in the upper
tail of the distribution. Rossi-Hansberg and Wright (2007) show that
this formulation can be applied to a specialized hierarchy model, and
Duranton (2007) shows it is consistent with ongoing urban innova-
tion and churning. One disconcerting feature is that these models
require cities to also churn in the long term, with cities moving up
and down the hierarchy of sizes, something we do not observe in the
data, at least among bigger cities. One can also formulate a simple,
non-stochastic model whereby city productivity depends on a per-
manent draw of a production amenity (like quality of access to water
transport). If those amenities are Pareto distributed, the city-size dis-
tribution will approximate a Pareto distribution as well (Henderson
and Venables 2009).
   All these exercises focus on a single dimension, a one-time or
repeated draw of a productivity parameter. Recent work by Desmet
and Rossi-Hansberg (2012) and Albouy (2008) emphasizes the com-
plex nature of the process. Cities get differential long-term draws on
production amenities (like access to natural resources) and consumer
amenities (like weather and natural recreation). They also get draws
on their “culture” or how well, at least in the medium term, their
public sector and institutions operate. Desmet and Rossi-Hansberg
(2012) argue that these differences in the draws across cities in China
profoundly influence productivity and population distribution,
while in the United States their impacts are more muted.
   What is the bottom line for policy? First is not to proscribe.
We simply do not know enough about what is most efficient and
how costly market inefficiency is compared with a bad policy error.
Instead, countries need to provide the institutions and decentralized
government structure to allow new cities to form in a timely manner
and to allow city industries to decline and emerge. They need to
facilitate local public investment to provide needed infrastructure
(World Bank 2009, 2012b). The size distribution that emerges will
reflect underlying market forces and more likely approximate a
reasonably efficient outcome than a proscriptive one.

                                  ***
                                                 J. Vernon Henderson 83


Urbanization is complex. The link in developing countries between
urbanization and income growth or industrialization is weaker than
might be expected, suggesting that many other factors influence a
country’s industrialization. In the urban hierarchy, there is ongo-
ing churning whereby cities gain and lose comparative advantage
in producing different items, perhaps because of innovation. Over
time, the biggest cities deindustrialize and become service centers.
Manufacturing moves to hinterland areas and smaller cities. It is dif-
ficult to evaluate whether individual cities are oversized or have the
right industrial composition—or whether the city-size distribution
in a country is relatively efficient. Theory provides limited direction,
and solid empirics with good verification are mostly absent.
   It seems that the best a country can do is create a level playing field
in capital and export markets and provide institutions to foster com-
petition and promote better outcomes. Creating a level playing field
means eliminating spatial biases in policies and not targeting specific
cities with favorable lending and market conditions. Providing insti-
tutions to foster competition and promote better outcomes requires
well-defined property rights for developers and reasonable and
structured access to capital markets for public infrastructure invest-
ments by local governments. But the development of institutions is
endogenous, promoted by human capital accumulation and political
events. As with firm technical efficiency, institutions advance and
mature as human capital accumulates. Market-determined urban
outcomes will thus improve with development.

Notes
 1. See Rosenthal and Strange (2004) and Puga (2010) for reviews of
    magnitudes.
 2. For example, Alexandersson (1959) and Henderson (1988); Henderson
    also looks at city types in Brazil.
 3. See Feler (2012) on Brazil.


Bibliography
Acemoglu, Daron, and James A. Robinson. 2010. “Why is Africa Poor?”
  Economic History of Developing Regions 25 (1): 21–50.
84   Urbanization and the Geography of Development


Ades, Alberto, and Edward Glaeser. 1995. “Trade and Circuses: Explaining
   Urban Giants.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 110 (1): 195–227.
Albouy, David. 2008. “Are Big Cities Bad Places to Live? Estimating Quality
   of Life across Metropolitan Areas.” Working Paper 14472, National
   Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Alexandersson, Gunnar. 1959. The Industrial Structure of American Cities.
   Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press.
Arzaghi, Mohammad, and J. Vernon Henderson. 2005. “Why Countries
   are Fiscally Decentralizing.” Journal of Public Economics 89 (7): 1157–89.
——–—. 2008. “Networking Off Madison Avenue.” Review of Economic
   Studies 75 (4): 1011–38.
Au, Chung-Chun, and J. Vernon Henderson. 2006a. “How Migration
   Restrictions Limit Agglomeration and Productivity in China.” Journal of
   Development Economics 80 (1): 350–88.
——–—. 2006b. “Are Chinese Cities Too Small?” Review of Economic
   Studies 73 (3): 549–76.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Ester Duflo, and Nancy Qian. 2012. “On the Road:
   Access to Transportation Infrastructure and Economic Growth in
   China.” Working Paper 17897, National Bureau of Economic Research,
   Cambridge, MA.
Barrios, Salvador, Luisito Bertinelli, and Eric Strobl. 2006. “Climatic
   Change and Rural-Urban Migration: The Case of Sub-Saharan Africa.”
   Journal of Urban Economics 60 (3): 357–71.
Baum-Snow, Nathaniel, Loren Brandt, J. Vernon Henderson,
   Matthew Turner, and Qinghua Zhang. 2012. “Roads, Railways and
   Decentralization of Chinese Cities.” http://www.econ.brown.edu/
   faculty/henderson/papers/china_transport_all.pdf.
Baum-Snow, Nathaniel, and Ronni Pavan. 2012. “Understanding the City
   Size Wage Gap.” Review of Economic Studies 79 (1): 88–127.
Beardsell, Mark, and J. Vernon Henderson. 1999. “The Spatial Evolution
   of the Computer Industry in the USA.” European Economic Review 43:
   431–56.
Behrens, Kristian, Gilles Duranton, and Frederic Robert-Nicoud. 2012.
   “Productive Cities: Sorting, Selection, and Agglomeration.” Processed,
   University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
Bertaud, Alain, and Jan Brueckner. 2005. “Analyzing Building Height
   Restrictions: Predicted Impacts and Welfare Costs.” Regional Science and
   Urban Economics 35: 109–25.
Binswanger, Hans, and Robert Townsend. 2000. “The Growth Performance
   of Agriculture in Subsaharan Africa.” American Journal of Agricultural
   Economics 82 (5): 1075–86.
                                                J. Vernon Henderson 85


Black, Duncan, and J. Vernon Henderson. 1999. “A Theory of Urban
   Growth.” Journal of Political Economy 107 (2): 252–84.
——–—. 2003. “Urban Evolution in the USA.” Journal of Economic
   Geography 3 (4): 343–72.
Bosker, Maarten, Steven Brakman, Harry Garretson, and Mark Schramm.
   2012. “Relaxing Hukou: Increased Labor Mobility and China’s Economic
   Geography.” Journal of Urban Economics 72 (2): 252–66.
Brückner, Markus, and Antonio Ciccone. 2011. “Rain and the Democratic
   Window of Opportunity.” Econometrica 79 (3): 923–47.
Brueckner, Jan, and Yves Zenou. 1999. “The Harris–Todaro Model with
   Land Markets.” Regional Science and Urban Economics 29: 317–39.
Cai, Fang. 2006. “Floating Population: Urbanization with Chinese
   Characteristics.” Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, Beijing.
Collier, Paul, and Anthony Venables. 2007. “Rethinking Trade Preferences:
   How Africa Can Diversify Its Exports.” World Economy 30 (8): 1326–45.
Davis, James, and J. Vernon Henderson. 2003. “Evidence on the Political
   Economy of the Urbanization Process.” Journal of Urban Economics 53
   (1): 98–125.
Desmet, Klaus, Ejaz Ghani, Stephen O’Connell, and Esteban Rossi-
   Hansberg. 2012. “The Spatial Development of India.” Policy Research
   Working Paper 6060, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Desmet, Klaus, and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. 2012. “Urban Accounting
   and Welfare.” http://www.princeton.edu/~erossi/UAW.pdf.
Donaldson, David. 2010. “Railways of the Raj: Estimating the Impact
   of Transport Infrastructure.” Processed, Massachusetts Institute of
   Technology, Cambridge, MA.
Duranton, Gilles. 2007. “Urban Evolutions: The Fast, the Slow, and the
   Still.” American Economic Review 97 (1): 197–221.
——–—. 2012. “Agglomeration and Jobs in Developing Countries.”
   Processed, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
Duranton Gilles, Peter Morrow, and Matthew Turner. 2011. “Roads and
   Trade: Evidence from the USA.” Mimeo. University of Toronto, Toronto,
   Canada.
Duranton, Gilles, and Diego Puga. 2001. “Nursery Cities.” American
   Economic Review 91 (5): 1454–63.
——–—. 2005. “From Sectoral to Functional Urban Specialization.”
   Journal of Urban Economics 57 (2): 343–70.
Duranton, Gilles, and Matthew Turner. 2012. “Urban Growth and
   Transportation.” Review of Economic Studies 79 (4): 1407–40.
Eaton, Jonathan, and Zvi Eckstein. 1997. “Cities and Growth: Theory and
   Evidence from France and Japan.” Regional Science and Urban Economics
   27 (4–5): 443–74.
86   Urbanization and the Geography of Development


Eeckhout, Jan. 2004. “Gibrat’s Law for (All) Cities.” American Economic
   Review 94 (5): 1429–51.
Fay, Marianne, and Charlotte Opal. 2000. “Urbanization without Growth:
   A Not-So-Uncommon Phenomenon.” Policy Research Working Paper
   2412, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Feler, Leo. 2012. “State Bank Privatization and Local Economic Activity.”
   Mimeo. Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD.
Feler, Leo, and J. Vernon Henderson. 2011. “Exclusionary Policies in Urban
   Development.” Journal of Urban Economics 69 (3): 253–72.
Field, Erica. 2007. “Entitled to Work: Urban Tenure Security and Labor
   Supply in Peru.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (4): 1561–602.
Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and C. J. Krizan. 2008. “Market Selection,
   Reallocation, and Restructuring in the U.S. Retail Trade Sector in the
   1990s.” Review of Economics and Statistics 88 (4): 748–58.
Fujita, Masahisa, J. Vernon Henderson, Yoshitsugu Kanemoto, and Tomoya
   Mori. 2004. “Spatial Distribution of Economic Activities in China and
   Japan.” In Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, vol. 4, edited by J.
   Vernon Henderson and J.-F. Thisse. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Gabaix, Xavier. 1999. “Zipf ’s Law for Cities.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
   114 (3): 739–67.
Galiani, Sebastian, and Ernesto Schargrodsky. 2010. “Property Rights
   for the Poor: Effects of Land Titling.” Journal of Public Economics 94:
   (9–10): 700–29.
Garreau, Joel. 1991. Edge City: Life on the New Frontier. New York: Random
   House.
Ghani, Ejaz, Arti G. Goswami, and William Kerr. 2012. “Is India’s
   Manufacturing Moving Away from Cities?” Working Paper 12-090,
   Harvard Business School, Cambridge, MA.
Glaeser, Edward L. 2005. “Urban Colossus: Why Is New York America’s
   Largest City?” Working Paper 2073, Harvard Institute of Economic
   Research, Cambridge, MA.
Glaeser, Edward L., and Joseph Gyourko. 2005. “Urban Decline and
   Durable Housing.” Journal of Political Economy 113 (2): 345–75.
Harris, John, and Michael P. Todaro. 1970. “Migration, Unemployment
   and Development: A Two-Sector Analysis.” American Economic Review
   60 (1): 126–42.
Helsley, Robert, and William Strange. 2012. “Coagglomeration and the
   Scale and Composition of Clusters.” http://haas.berkeley.edu/faculty/
   papers/coagglomeration.pdf.
Henderson, J. Vernon. 1974. “The Sizes and Types of Cities.” American
   Economic Review 64 (4): 640–56.
                                                   J. Vernon Henderson 87


Henderson, J. Vernon. 1988. Urban Development: Theory, Fact, and Illusion.
    New York: Oxford University Press.
——–—. 2003. “The Urbanization Process and Economic Growth: The
    So-What Question.” Journal of Economic Growth 8 (1): 47–71.
——–—. 2010. “Cities and Development.” Journal of Regional Science
    50 (1): 515–40.
Henderson, J. Vernon, and Randy Becker. 2000. “Political Economy of City
    Size and Formation.” Journal of Urban Economics 48 (3): 453–84.
Henderson, J. Vernon, and Ari Kuncoro. 1996. “Industrial Centralization
    in Indonesia.” World Bank Economic Review 10 (3): 513–40.
Henderson, J. Vernon, Todd Lee, and Yung Joon Lee. 2001. “Scale
    Externalities in Korea.” Journal of Urban Economics 49 (3): 479–504.
Henderson, J. Vernon, Adam Storeygard, and David Weil. 2012. “Measuring
    Economic Growth from Outer Space.” American Economic Review 102
    (2): 994–1028.
Henderson, J. Vernon, and Anthony Venables. 2009. “The Dynamics of
    City Formation.” Review of Economic Dynamics 12 (2): 233–54.
Henderson, J. Vernon, and Hyoung G. Wang. 2005. “Aspects of the Rural-
    Urban Transformation of Countries.” Journal of Economic Geography
    5 (1): 23–42.
——–—. 2007. “Urbanization and City Growth: The Role of Institutions.”
    Regional Science and Urban Economics 37 (3): 283–313.
Holmes, Thomas. 2005. “The Location of Sales Offices and the Attraction
    of Cities.” Journal of Political Economy 113 (3): 551–81.
Jacobs, Jane. 1969. The Economy of Cities. New York: Random House.
Jedwab, Rémi. 2012. “Why Is African Urbanization Different? Evidence
    from Resource Exports in Ghana and Ivory Coast.” http://home.gwu.
    edu/~jedwab/JEDWAB_JMP_14112011.pdf.
Jefferson, Gary H., and Inderjit Singh, eds. 1999. Innovation and Reform in
    China’s Industrial Enterprises. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Johnson, Simon, Jonathan Ostry, and Arvind Subramanian. 2009. “Prospects
    for Sustained Growth in Africa: Benchmarking the Constraints.” Working
    Paper 13120, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Kahn, Matthew E. 2006. Green Cities: Urban Growth and the Environment.
    Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Kolko, Jed. 1999. “Can I Get Some Service Here: Information Technology,
    Service Industries, and the Future of Cities.” Mimeo. Harvard University,
    Cambridge, MA.
Kwong, Julie. 2004. “Educating Migrant Children: Negotiations between
    the State and Civil Society.” China Quarterly 180: 1073–88.
88   Urbanization and the Geography of Development


Lucas, Robert E. 2004. “Life Earnings and Rural‐Urban Migration.” Journal
   of Political Economy 112 (1): 29–59.
McKinsey Global Institute. 2009. “Preparing for China’s Urban Billion.” New
   York. http://www.mckinsey.com/insights/mgi/research/urbanization/
   preparing_for_urban_billion_in_china.
Moretti, Enrico. 2004. “Workers’ Education, Spillovers, and Productivity:
   Evidence from Plant-Level Production Functions.” American Economic
   Review 94 (3): 656–90.
Naughton, Barry. 2007. The Chinese Economy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Puga, Diego. 2010. “The Magnitude and Causes of Agglomeration
   Economies.” Journal of Regional Science 50 (1): 203–19.
Rappaport, Jordan, and Jeffrey Sachs. 2003. “The United States as a Coastal
   Nation.” Journal of Economic Growth 8 (1): 5–46.
Rauch, James. 1993. “Does History Matter When It Only Matters A Little?
   The Case of City-Industry Location.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
   108: 843–67.
Renaud, Bertrand. 1981. Urbanization Policy in Developing Countries. New
   York: Oxford University Press.
Rosenthal, Stuart, and William Strange. 2004. “Evidence on the Nature
   and Sources of Agglomeration Economies.” In Handbook of Regional and
   Urban Economics, vol. 4, edited by J. Vernon Henderson and J.-F. Thisse.
   Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Rossi-Hansberg, Esteban, and Mark Wright. 2007. “Urban Structure and
   Growth.” Review of Economic Studies 74 (2): 597–624.
Sachs, Jeffrey, and Andrew M. Warner. 1997. “Sources of Slow Growth in
   African Economies.” Journal of African Economies 6 (3): 335–76.
Storeygard, Adam. 2012. Farther On Down the Road: Transport Costs, Trade
   and Urban Growth in Sub-Saharan Africa. Department of Economics
   Recruiting Seminar Series. Providence, RI: Brown University.
Wang, Zhi. 2012. “Smart City: Learning Effects and Labor Force Entry.”
   Processed, Brown University, Providence, RI.
Williamson, Jeffrey G. 1986. Migration and Urbanization in the Third World.
   Cambridge, MA: Harvard Institute for Economic Research.
World Bank. 1999. World Development Report 1999/2000: Entering the 21st
   Century. Washington, DC.
——–—. 2009. World Development Report 2009: Reshaping Economic
   Geography. Washington, DC.
——–—. 2012a. India: Urbanization beyond Municipal Boundaries.
   Urbanization Review Flagship Report, Washington, DC.
——–—. 2012b. Priorities for City Leaders. Urbanization Review Flagship
   Report, Washington, DC.
4


Analyzing Urban Systems
Have Megacities Become Too Large?*


Klaus Desmet and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg




The trend toward ever greater urbanization continues unabated
across the globe. According to the United Nations, by 2025 close
to 5 billion people will live in urban areas. Many cities, especially in
the developing world, are set to explode in size. Over the next decade
and a half, Lagos is expected to increase its population 50 percent, to
nearly 16 million (UN-Habitat 2010). Naturally, there is an active
debate on whether restricting the growth of megacities is desirable
and whether doing so can make residents of those cities and their
countries better off.
   This debate is not so much about urbanization per se—whether
people should move to cities or stay in the countryside—but about
whether (some of the world’s) megacities are creating megaproblems
that could be avoided with suitable policies. People flock to cities
in search of higher paying jobs and better amenities. Many of the

   * We acknowledge the support of the International Growth Centre at LSE
(Grant RA-2009-11-015).
90 Analyzing Urban Systems


world’s large metropolises, such as Los Angeles and Mumbai, are
highly productive and located on large bodies of water. As cities grow,
however, they start suffering from congestion, higher crime rates, and
air pollution. How fast the benefits of efficiency and amenities erode
with increasing congestion depends on the quality of governance,
responsible for providing road infrastructure, sewerage systems, clean
water, and security. Cities differ in their efficiency, amenities, and
quality of governance, so they have no single optimal size. We need
analytical tools that can help us evaluate the desirability of policies
that hinder or promote the growth of cities of different sizes. This will
allow us to assess urban policies that depend on the size of the cities
where they are implemented (scale-dependent policies).
   When analyzing whether megacities have become too large, policy
makers often analyze a single city in depth. But no city is an island:1
improving urban infrastructure in one city might attract migrants,
and a negative shock in one location can be mitigated because people
can move to another. Considering the general equilibrium effects of
any such urban policy is thus key. That is, when deciding whether
to make medium-size cities more attractive, policy makers need to
understand how cities of all sizes will be affected.2
   There is thus a need for quantitative models of systems of cities
that are complex enough to account for the general equilibrium but
simple enough in structure and data requirements to make them
usable for policy makers. In Desmet and Rossi-Hansberg (2012), we
develop such a framework. And in this chapter, we start by briefly
sketching the main forces in that model and later discuss which data
are needed for policy analysis. (For the interested policy maker, an
online technical appendix provides a more detailed, step-by-step,
practical guide on how to implement the methodology.)3 It then
shows how the framework can be used to quantitatively analyze some
important questions. Would there be any welfare gains from shrink-
ing megacities and expanding medium-size cities? Is there any sense
to implementing policies that make cities more equal in efficiency
and amenities? How will growth in developing countries affect their
city-size distributions? Are cities in developing countries really too
large? Should policy favor smaller cities or medium–large cities? The
answers to these questions will be country-specific. Countries are at
different levels of development and have different geographies and
                           Klaus Desmet and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg    91


histories. We will therefore compare the urban systems of three coun-
tries: the United States, which as the world’s most advanced economy
will serve as a benchmark; China, Asia’s largest economy and one of
the world’s fastest growing; and Mexico, one of Latin America’s most
important middle-income economies.
    A first policy question is how reducing spatial differences in city
characteristics affects the city-size distribution. Many countries favor
balanced spatial growth and try to reduce uneven development.
Spatial concentration is often viewed with suspicious eyes, and
many countries implement policies aimed at mitigating spatial differ-
ences, with the goal of creating a less dispersed city-size distribution.
When reducing productivity differences across cities, our quantitative
analysis shows that responses vary by country. In the United States,
the city-size distribution would become slightly less dispersed, with
the larger cities shrinking and the smaller cities growing. In Mexico,
something similar happens: Mexico City declines, but no city takes
its place. By contrast, China’s city-size distribution becomes more
dispersed, implying larger megacities. Although one would intuit that
reducing spatial differences would lead to a less dispersed city-size
distribution, the opposite result in China illustrates the importance
of model-based analysis. Without this analysis, policies might have
unintended consequences: a policy aimed at reducing the dispersion
in city sizes might actually increase it.
    When mitigating spatial differences in city characteristics, we find
limited welfare effects in Mexico and the United States but very large
effects in China. Reflecting China’s important spatial disparities in
productivity and the mobility restrictions under the hukou system,
this suggests that as China develops further, it will reap huge benefits
from the spatial reallocation of people and economic activity. We do
not find the same effects in Mexico, probably because it has much
more history as a developing market economy and thus suffers from
fewer spatial distortions.
    A second policy question is whether policies that target lagging
cities are more effective than policies that target cities of different
sizes. Governments may choose to improve road infrastructure in
remote areas or give firms incentives to move to particular locations.
The United States federal policy of the 1960s to assist the declining
Appalachia region is a good example (Glaeser and Gottlieb 2008).
92 Analyzing Urban Systems


The European Union structural funds that subsidize investments in
infrastructure and human capital in regions with an income per capita
below a certain threshold are another. Other policies favor cities of
particular sizes. For example, China’s urbanization policies in the
1980s and 1990s had a strong small-city bias based on “controlling
the big cities, moderating the development of medium-size cities,
and encouraging growth of small cities” (Kamal-Chaoui et al. 2009,
9). Our results suggest that policies targeting small cities are less
effective than those targeting lagging cities. Encouraging the growth
of small cities, as China once did, might thus be unwarranted. Of
course, to target lagging cities, a methodology is needed to rank
cities by different characteristics. Our model provides a framework
to do so.
   We also analyze the spatial impact of country-wide shocks. As an
example, we evaluate the effect of Mexico’s 1994 economic crisis.
Our results show that productivity differences across cities increased
during this episode, suggesting that the country’s largest cities, like
Mexico City, suffered less than smaller cities. So, larger cities seem
better at absorbing economy-wide shocks.
   The next section briefly summarizes the theoretical framework
and discusses which data are needed. The third section implements
the methodology for the benchmark case of the United States. The
fourth section does the same for China and Mexico and compares the
findings. And the last section concludes. A technical online appendix
guides the reader through a practical, step-by-step discussion of how
to do the analysis.4

A simple framework for a system of cities

To analyze how policies affect a country’s city-size distribution, we
need a framework recognizing that each city is part of a system—
and that a shock to one city will affect the others. For example, a
national policy that improves the amenities in medium-size cities will
not only make those cities more attractive but also affect its larger
cities. The framework should capture that a city’s size depends on
multiple determinants, such as efficiency, amenities, and governance.
These determinants are interrelated, so improving one might not
have the expected effect if the others are ignored. In Desmet and
                            Klaus Desmet and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg    93


Rossi-Hansberg (2012), we develop such a model of a system of cities.
In what follows, we provide a brief overview of the forces at work in
the model.
    In Desmet and Rossi-Hansberg’s (2012) framework, a country has
a given number of cities. So the model is not suited to study city
creation or destruction. Each city has three characteristics that affect
its size:

• Efficiency . Productivity is the efficiency with which a city can
  produce. One can consider a city’s productivity to be exogenous
  or can assume that it depends, at least partly, on its size, because
  of agglomeration economies. In other words, larger cities may be
  larger because they are more productive, but they may also be
  more productive because they are larger.
• Amenities. Amenities are anything (positive or negative) that affects
  a city’s attractiveness as a place to reside, without directly affect-
  ing its productivity or distorting its labor market. This includes
  weather, geography (being close to water), pollution, crime, cul-
  tural and sports activities, and anything else that influences a city’s
  quality of life.
• Excessive frictions. Excessive frictions are the distortions over and
  above what we would expect given the city’s actual size. As cities
  become larger, they become more congested, limiting a city’s
  population. But even among cities of the same size, not all are
  equal. Some cities are less efficient than others in dealing with
  congestion, perhaps reflecting that some city governments do not
  provide congestion-alleviating infrastructure as well as others. This
  would translate into higher local tax rates or other distortions.

    Cities will be larger if they are more efficient, provide better ame-
nities, or have lower excessive frictions. Of course, what matters for
an individual city is not just its own characteristics; it is also how its
characteristics compare with those of other cities. A highly produc-
tive city will have a smaller population if there are many others like
it. A system of cities is in equilibrium if no one wants to (or can)
move. This is not to suggest that wages should be equal across cities.
Even if people can move at no cost, an individual might be willing to
accept a lower wage in a city with better amenities. Many countries,
94 Analyzing Urban Systems


like China, have internal migration restrictions. In our model, a city
that restricts entry will be seen as having worse amenities. We
will return to the mobility question when we discuss our findings
for China.
   An important advantage of the Desmet and Rossi-Hansberg
(2012) framework is that it can be implemented and used for policy
analysis with few data requirements. To identify efficiency, we use
information on income, hours worked, and possibly (but not neces-
sarily) capital. By using data on income, consumption, and hours
worked, we can estimate a city’s distortions. By comparing a city’s
actual distortions with those it would be expected to have given its
size, we can identify a city’s excessive frictions. Finally, by using data
on population and matching a city’s actual size to the one generated
by the model, we can identify a city’s amenities.
   The bottom line is that having data on population, income,
consumption, hours worked, and possibly capital at the city level
is enough to identify the determinants of the city-size distribution.
Collecting such data is fairly straightforward. Table 4.1 briefly sum-
marizes how we did this for the United States, China, and Mexico.
Some metropolitan data, such as gross domestic product (GDP) for
the United States and population for China and Mexico, are pro-
vided directly by national statistical offices. Other metropolitan data,
such as hours worked in the United States and Mexico, need to be
constructed from microdata. Even when not using microsurveys, we
often need to aggregate data up to the metropolitan level. In the
United States, for example, a large amount of data are provided at the
county level (metropolitan statistical areas are a collection of coun-
ties), and in Mexico most variables are available at the municipal level
(metropolitan areas are a collection of municipalities).
   To make reasonable cross-country comparisons, another relevant
point is to use comparable geographic units. In the United States,
metropolitan statistical areas should capture meaningful economic
geographies, making them preferable to using counties or other
localities. In China, prefecture-level cities cover the entire country
and should thus be understood as metropolitan areas with their
rural hinterlands, making them hard to compare with metropolitan
statistical areas in the United States. That is why we rely instead on
the districts under prefecture-level cities, which capture the urban
                            Klaus Desmet and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg   95


Table 4.1 Variables and sources
Variable                Source
United States
Unit of observations    Metropolitan statistical areas, 2005–08
Population              Bureau of Economic Analysis
Income                  Bureau of Economic Analysis
Consumption             Bureau of Economic Analysis, American
                        Community Survey (constructed, Desmet and
                        Rossi-Hansberg 2012)
Hours worked            Current Population Survey (constructed, Desmet
                        and Rossi-Hansberg 2012)
Capital                 Bureau of Economic Analysis, American
                        Community Survey (constructed, Desmet and
                        Rossi-Hansberg 2012)
China
Unit of observations    Districts under prefecture-level cities 2005
Population              China city statistics
Income                  China city statistics
Consumption             China city statistics (constructed, Desmet and
                        Rossi-Hansberg 2012)
Hours worked            2005 One Percent Population Survey
                        (constructed, Desmet and Rossi-Hansberg 2012)
Mexico
Unit of observations    Metropolitan areas, 1989, 1994, 2000, and 2005
Population              Mexican census
Income                  Encuesta Nacional de Ingresos y Gastos de los
                        Hogares (microdata, constructed)
Consumption             Encuesta Nacional de Ingresos y Gastos de los
                        Hogares (microdata, constructed)
Hours worked            Encuesta Nacional de Ingresos y Gastos de los
                        Hogares (microdata, constructed)
Source: Authors.


part of the country and thus make them comparable to metropolitan
statistical areas. In Mexico, we also use metropolitan areas, as defined
by the country’s national statistical institute.
   Once we have measures of these three determinants for each city in
a country, we can do counterfactual policy exercises. For example, we
96 Analyzing Urban Systems


ask what would happen if efficiency differences across Chinese
cities fell to the U.S. level. Would this shrink China’s megacities
or expand them? Would this improve the well-being of Chinese
citizens? Which cities would gain and which would lose? Given that
technology diffusion is likely to mitigate spatial differences in China’s
productivity over the next decades, these are relevant questions for
policy makers.

The United States as benchmark

Large cities must be highly productive, have attractive amenities, or
be governed well. Otherwise, they would never have grown as large
as they are. But because congestion costs accompany city growth,
policy often aims to reduce heterogeneity across cities by revamping
backward locations. Backward locations can be revamped by making
productive investments (increasing efficiency), improving attractive-
ness as a place to live (improving amenities), or strengthening local
governance (lowering excessive frictions). Like business cycle poli-
cies, which aim to smooth shocks over time, regional policies aim to
smooth differences across space.
   To analyze the impacts of regional policies, we start by presenting
results for the United States. This example will also provide a useful
benchmark for comparing against China and Mexico. To present
an upper bound of the potential effects of spatial smoothing, our
counterfactual policy analysis consists of completely shutting down
spatial differences in the city characteristics (efficiency, amenities,
and excessive frictions) by setting their values to the population-
weighted average. That is, we want to see what happens to the city-
size distribution, to the fate of individual cities, and to overall welfare
when we completely eliminate spatial differences in each dimension.
While it is unlikely that any policy can completely smooth differences
across space, this analysis provides a useful upper bound to what
policy could actually achieve.
   Figure 4.1 shows the results. The upper-left panel shows the actual
city-size distribution. Each of the other three panels presents the
actual and the counterfactual distributions of city sizes when we shut
down the spatial variation in one of the city characteristics. In each
panel, the horizontal axis shows the log of population size and the
                            Klaus Desmet and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg     97


vertical axis the log of the probability of cities being larger than that
size. For a given city size on the horizontal axis, the vertical axis shows
the share of cities that are larger than that size. A steeper slope implies
a less-dispersed city-size distribution, with the smaller cities being
larger and the larger cities being smaller. This is a common way of
depicting city-size distributions, because it emphasizes the upper tail
of the distribution and, perhaps more important, because a distribu-
tion exhibiting Zipf ’s law would show up as a straight line with a




Figure 4.1 Counterfactuals without differences in one city characteristic
(United States)
Source: Authors.
98 Analyzing Urban Systems


slope of –1 (similar to the one for the United States in the upper-left
corner of Figure 4.1).
    By comparing the actual distribution with the counterfactual
distributions, we notice that efficiency and amenity differences have
a limited effect on the city-size distribution, whereas differences in
excessive frictions play a much larger role. Indeed, the counterfactual
distributions when differences in efficiency or amenities are elimi-
nated hardly change the city-size distribution. That is, if all cities had
the same level of efficiency or amenities, the city-size distribution
would not change much (except for some cities becoming extremely
small). By contrast, if all cities had the same level of excessive fric-
tions, the dispersion in city sizes would become much smaller,
making cities much more similar in size than in reality. In the same
way that growth accounting decomposes the relative role played
by different growth determinants, this exercise of urban accounting
can be interpreted as decomposing the relative role played by differ-
ent city characteristics. This decomposition shows that the United
States city-size distribution is due mostly to differences in excessive
frictions.
    Eliminating differences in city characteristics amounts to smooth-
ing differences across space. In the same way that the business cycle
literature analyzes the welfare benefits of smoothing temporal shocks,
we can analyze the welfare effects of smoothing spatial shocks. As the
numbers at the top of the panels in Figure 4.1 indicate, the welfare
effects are modest, with increases of 1.2 percent if all cities had the
same efficiency, 0.2 percent if all cities had the same amenities, and
0.9 percent if all cities had the same excessive frictions. In terms
of consumption equivalence, the corresponding figures would be
12 percent, 2 percent, and 9 percent. Finding positive welfare effects,
though modest, is not surprising. Eliminating spatial differences
tends to spread people more equally across locations. Congestion
costs rise with size in a convex way, leading to welfare gains. As
mentioned, the modest welfare gains are, if anything, upper bounds.
Indeed, completely eliminating differences is probably impossible,
given that some of a city’s characteristics might be given by nature
or geography and thus difficult to change. In addition, our coun-
terfactual exercises assume that people can move across locations at
no cost.
                           Klaus Desmet and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg   99


    Because city characteristics can be correlated with size, spatial
smoothing can often be reinterpreted as a size-dependent policy,
affecting megacities differently from small and medium-size cities.
For example, Figure 4.1 shows that equalizing efficiency makes
the city-size distribution slightly less dispersed: the larger cities
become smaller and the smaller cities larger. Los Angeles would
lose 29 percent of its population, Chicago would lose 46 percent,
and New York 77 percent. In this sense, a policy that smooths
efficiency differences amounts to a size-dependent policy that favors
smaller cities over larger cities. The same size-dependency is present
when equalizing differences in excessive frictions. But, by contrast,
amenities are correlated less strongly with size. When equalizing
amenities across locations, some larger cities would lose some of their
populations—for example, Los Angeles (8 percent) and San Diego
(42 percent)—whereas others would add to their populations—for
example, New York (44 percent) and Philadelphia (39 percent).
    Although smoothing differences in efficiency and amenities has a
limited effect on the city-size distribution—the counterfactual distri-
bution and the actual distribution do not look all that different—the
individual cities mentioned above illustrate that the ordering of cities
changes substantially. For instance, when equalizing efficiency across
all cities, New York is no longer the country’s largest city, overtaken
by Riverside (California), Los Angeles, Chicago, and Phoenix. The
country’s largest city would be Riverside, with a population simi-
lar to New York’s actual population. This reordering implies that
behind the veil of an apparently stable city-size distribution, there
would be a substantial reallocation of population. When calculating
reallocation following the methodology of Davis and Haltiwanger
(1992)—adding the number of new workers in expanding cities as a
proportion of total population—we find reallocations of 37 percent
when eliminating differences in efficiency, 20 percent when elimi-
nating differences in amenities, and 44 percent when eliminating
differences in excessive frictions.
    Once again, the welfare differences from smoothing are computed
under the assumption of free mobility. If one were to consider the
costs of moving and the magnitude of reallocation, any modest posi-
tive welfare gain from smoothing would likely vanish and become
negative. Indeed, many cities would undergo large shocks, giving
100 Analyzing Urban Systems


people an incentive to move, despite the costs. This could easily turn
the small welfare gains into large welfare losses. From that point of
view, regional policies aimed at reducing spatial differences might be
counterproductive. They would force many people to move, perhaps
with important welfare costs.

Comparing with China and Mexico

China

Reducing spatial dispersion to the United States level. In the United
States, we found that even if we were able to eliminate all spatial
differences in efficiency (or any other determinant of city sizes),
the gains in well-being would be limited. We now turn to China,
a country rapidly urbanizing over the last couple of decades. China
has much larger spatial differences than the United States. In China,
city productivity at the 80th percentile is 71 percent higher than
at the 20th percentile; for the United States, that figure drops to
32 percent. As China continues to grow and develop, these spatial
differences will likely converge to those in more mature economies,
such as the United States. For policy makers that need to make
long-term decisions about, for instance, how much to invest in infra-
structure and where, understanding how China’s future growth will
affect the spatial distribution of its people and economy is essential.
Therefore, instead of analyzing what would happen if we completely
smoothed China’s spatial differences, it might be more relevant to
ask how the Chinese city-size distribution would change if it had the
same dispersion in the city characteristics as the United States.
   Figure 4.2 shows the results. In the top-right panel, we lower the
dispersion in efficiency across Chinese cities to the United States
level without changing the population-weighted average efficiency.
In the bottom panels, we follow the same procedure for amenities
and excessive frictions. The welfare effects from reducing spatial
differences are huge. If the dispersion in efficiency across Chinese
cities were reduced to that in the United States, welfare would increase
17.7 percent, and similarly, if the dispersion in amenities dropped
to that in the United States, welfare would increase 22.6 percent
of the numbers would be large for consumption equivalence.
                           Klaus Desmet and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg     101




Figure 4.2 Counterfactuals changing dispersion in characteristics to United
States levels (China)
Source: Authors.


In contrast with the United States, these figures suggest that reducing
spatial differences could have enormous positive effects on China’s
well-being. This is all the more striking given that for the United
States we completely eliminated spatial differences, whereas for
China we only reduced spatial differences to the United States level.
If we had completely smoothed spatial differences in China, as we
did in our counterfactual exercise for the United States, the welfare
102 Analyzing Urban Systems


effects would have been even larger. In the case of efficiency, for
example, welfare would increase an astounding 55 percent in China
but a meager 1.2 percent in the United States.
    Looking at how reducing spatial differences in efficiency to the
United States level affects China’s largest cities, we find that Beijing
would lose 87 percent of its population and Shanghai a similar 88
percent. Most of China’s other large cities would also lose people,
except for Chongqing, whose population would grow 46 percent.
Does this imply that the future will bring the demise of China’s
megacities as technology spreads more equally across the country?
Not necessarily. In fact, Figure 4.2 suggests the contrary: reducing
differences in efficiency would make the city-size distribution more
dispersed, implying that China’s largest cities would become larger
and China’s smallest cities would become smaller. Hence, in contrast
with the United States, where smoothing efficiency made cities more
equal in size, the opposite happened in China. This unexpected result
illustrates the need to analyze policies in a model of a system of cities
with multiple determinants of city sizes. Not doing so could lead
to unintended consequences: a policy aimed at reducing dispersion
across cities might actually increase it.
    Given the huge decline in Beijing and Shanghai, an increasing
dispersion in city size seems counter-intuitive. Some of the medium-
size cities with attractive amenities and low efficiency now become
the new megacities, and they become larger than Beijing and
Shanghai today. The country’s three largest cities become Liuan in
Anhui Province (predicted population 16 million) and Chongqing
(15 million) and Bazhong (13 million) in Sichuan Province.
Chongqing is already a megacity, and Liuan and Bazhong are
medium-large cities with populations of 1–2 million. But because
they have above-average amenities and below-average productivity,
improving their efficiency transforms them into huge cities.
    Reducing the spatial differences in amenities to the United States
level also leads to greater dispersion in China’s city-size distribution,
because many larger cities in China have poor amenities. Formal and
informal mobility restrictions are one possible reason for this. Indeed,
if large cities are kept artificially small through mobility restrictions,
our model will show them as having low amenities. Consider a highly
efficient city with a predicted city size larger than in reality. In that
                          Klaus Desmet and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg    103


case, some other force in our model must keep it from reaching that
larger size. That counteracting force will be poorer amenities. As a
result, many of the highly efficient eastern coastal cities have low
amenities. Giving them better amenities would grow them tremen-
dously. This is the case, for example, of several cities in Guangdong
Province, which included some of the first special economic zones
under Deng Xiaoping’s Open Door Policy. Shenzhen would grow to a
population of 27 million, and Guangzhou would increase its popula-
tion 64 percent. This finding is in line with Au and Henderson (2006),
who argue that China’s megacities are too small. Mobility restrictions
are not applied always and everywhere in China. Chongqing and
Chengdu are pursuing “an unabashedly urbanization-based growth
strategy” (World Bank 2009, 221). If those cities are benefitting
from government policies promoting rural-urban migration, it
should be reflected in our model as high amenities. Consistent with
this, reducing the dispersion in amenities across cities would reduce
Chongqing’s population 83 percent and Chengdu a more modest
but still high 46 percent.
    Although mobility restrictions often stem from government
policy through the hukou system, not all such restrictions are based
on policy. Cities need time to grow, and housing and other urban
infrastructure needs to be built. This “time to build” implies that
Chinese cities can converge only gradually to their steady-state
population level. Shenzhen is telling in this context. While the model
predicts that it might be too small, it is unclear which part is due to
policy restrictions and which part to the “time to build” constraint.
As Shenzhen has been China’s fastest growing city since 1979 (World
Bank 2009), it probably could not have grown much faster, even
if people had been free to move. Other urban problems that afflict
megacities, but more so in China than in the United States, include
severe air pollution. Again, in our model air pollution will show up
as a negative amenity, making cities like Beijing less desirable. In that
sense, the low amenities of the larger Chinese cities might also be due
to environmental problems.
    Overall, we find that lowering the spatial dispersion of amenities or
efficiency would lead to larger cities and huge welfare gains. Greater
mobility would surely narrow the dispersion in amenities, allowing
the larger cities to grow even more. Differences in efficiency are also
104 Analyzing Urban Systems


bound to narrow over time, as technology and efficient management
practices diffuse spatially. Therefore, as China continues to develop
and mature, it will likely see larger megacities—and more of them.
    Urban policies. While the previous section focused on the likely
spatial evolution of the Chinese economy as it further matures, we
now analyze the effects of specific urban policies. One common
policy is to improve lagging locations. Cities are selected by their low
productivity, bad amenities, or poor governance. Examples include
the European Union’s structural funds, which subsidize local infra-
structure and human capital formation in regions with an income
per capita below a certain threshold, and China’s attempts to spread
development from the highly productive coast to the less produc-
tive inland. Another common policy is to favor growth in cities of
certain sizes. In that case, cities get selected by their size. For example,
China’s urbanization policy in the 1980s and 1990s was based on
“controlling the big cities, moderating the development of medium-
size cities, and encouraging growth of small cities,” though in more
recent years this policy has gradually been phased out (Kamal-Chaoui
et al. 2009).
    In what follows, we analyze the effects of the two types of policies
mentioned above—those that benefit lagging cities and those that
benefit cities of different sizes. Table 4.2 reports the results. The
first row estimates the effect of a policy that improves conditions in
backward cities. If we increase efficiency 20 percent in the bottom
quartile of cities ranked by efficiency, the model predicts a 4.9 percent

Table 4.2 Urban policies in China
Urban policies                                 Welfare differences (percent)
                                          Efficiency Amenities Excessive
                                                                      frictions
Improve in worst cities by 20 percent        4.9          13.7          0.2
Improve in smallest cities by                2.0           4.5          0.1
  20 percent
Improve in medium-large cities by            5.2            8.9         0.1
  20 percent
Improve in largest cities by 20 percent     12.1          22.0          0.4
Source: Authors.
                           Klaus Desmet and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg     105


increase in welfare. Corresponding policies that increase amenities
and lower excessive frictions would also have positive welfare effects,
of 13.7 percent and 0.2 percent, respectively. The next rows estimate
the effects of size-based policies that improve conditions in the
smallest cities (bottom quartile), the medium–large cities (second
quartile), and the largest cities (top quartile). Two results stand out.
First, targeting the worst cities is more effective than targeting the
smallest cities. For example, improving amenities 20 percent in
the smallest cities increases welfare 4.5 percent, less than a third the
13.7 percent if the policy focuses on the cities with worst amenities.
Second, when comparing the size-based policies, the welfare effects
are greater, the larger the cities that are targeted. This is of course not
surprising. Improving efficiency (or any of the other characteristics)
in the largest cities benefits many more people than the same policy
applied to the smallest cities. For example, when increasing efficiency
20 percent in the largest cities, with populations above 1.4 million,
welfare rises 12.1 percent, more than six times the 2.0 percent when
applying the same policy in the smallest cities (populations of less
than 500,000).
   From the point of view of expected benefits, this suggests that
policy makers should concentrate their efforts on the country’s larg-
est cities. But there is of course also a cost of implementing these
policies, and this cost may well differ by city. Therefore, only with a
cost constant across cities can we conclude that targeting the largest
cities is better. For example, if we had to choose one of two isolated
cities to connect by highway to the rest of the country, we would
connect the larger one. But many other policies will likely have a cost
increasing in the number of people. For example, building urban
infrastructure or improving local schools will cost more the larger a
city’s population. Enhancing efficiency in the largest cities will there-
fore require more resources than in the smallest cities.
   To remove the effect that certain policies benefit more people
than others (and are therefore likely to cost more than others to
implement), Table 4.3 analyzes the same urban policies as before, but
now keeps the ex-ante population-weighted characteristics constant.
In other words, we leave ex-ante aggregate efficiency unchanged but
change the distribution of efficiency across cities, benefiting some
cities at the cost of others.5 We apply the same methodology to
106 Analyzing Urban Systems


Table 4.3 Urban policies in China for constant population-weighted
characteristics
Urban policies                                 Welfare differences (percent)
                                          Efficiency Amenities Excessive
                                                                      frictions
Improve in worst cities by 20 percent        2.7            8.2         0.0
Improve in smallest cities by                0.8            2.2         0.0
  20 percent
Improve in medium-large cities by            1.9            1.3         0.0
  20 percent
Improve in largest cities by 20 percent      0.0            2.0         0.1
Source: Authors.

amenities and excessive frictions. Policies that target cities by their
characteristics rather than their size seem much more effective.
Implementing such policies requires a methodology to rank cities by
their characteristics. Our model provides a framework to do so. Note
that within the class of size-based policies, no clear picture emerges of
which size should be targeted. For example, focusing on the smallest
cities is more effective for amenities, whereas improving conditions
in medium-size cities has a greater impact for efficiency. Which type
of city benefits the most depends on the distribution of the different
characteristics across cities of different sizes.
    Beyond their effects on welfare, these policies also affect city-size
distributions. Figure 4.3 shows the counterfactual city-size distribu-
tions when improving efficiency. These correspond to the urban
policies in Table 4.2. All policies, except for the one that targets the
largest cities, tend to shrink the largest cities. For example, when
increasing efficiency 20 percent in the bottom quartile of efficient cit-
ies (top-right panel), the country’s largest city remains Shanghai, but
its population drops 21 percent. The next two largest cities, Beijing
and Chongqing, would also see their populations fall, by 22 percent
and 6 percent, respectively.

Mexico

Reducing spatial dispersion to the United States level. After analyzing
the United States and China, we now look at Mexico, Latin America’s
                             Klaus Desmet and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg   107




Figure 4.3   Counterfactuals different urban policies (China)
Source: Authors.


second-largest economy. How would Mexico’s city-size distribution
look like if it had the same dispersion in city characteristics as the
United States? Figure 4.4 shows the results. The welfare effects for
Mexico are far smaller than for China. If the dispersion in efficiency
across Mexican cities were the same as in the United States, welfare
would increase a mere 0.1 percent, compared with 17.7 percent in
China. For amenities, the effect would be a larger 0.8 percent but still
much smaller than China’s 22.6 percent.
108 Analyzing Urban Systems




Figure 4.4 Counterfactuals changing dispersion in characteristics to United
States levels (Mexico)
Source: Authors.


   The main reason for the smaller effect is that Mexico looks more
like the United States than China, especially in efficiency. In Mexico,
the productivity of the city at the 80th percentile is 43 percent
higher than the city at the 20th percentile. For China, that figure
is 71 percent; for the United States, 32 percent. This suggests that
the diffusion of technology has been greater in Mexico, reducing
spatial differences. For amenities, the smaller welfare effects suggest
                          Klaus Desmet and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg   109


that Mexico suffers less from mobility restrictions than China. The
finding that Mexico’s spatial structure is closer to the United States’
than to China’s is further reinforced when we compare the effects of
completely smoothing spatial differences in the city characteristics.
In efficiency, for example, this would lead to a welfare increase of
0.7 percent in Mexico, 1.2 percent in the United States, and 55 per-
cent in China.
    Another relevant question is how reducing spatial differences
affects megacities relative to medium-size and smaller cities. In effi-
ciency, we found that reducing differences to the United States level
made the city-size distribution in China more disperse. This is not
the case in Mexico: the country’s megacity, Mexico City, loses 17 per-
cent of its population, dropping from 19.2 million to 16.0 million.
The situation is similar in the United States, where spatial smooth-
ing also reduced the size of the country’s largest city, New York.
However, despite some of the country’s medium-size cities becom-
ing much larger, none reaches the dimensions of Mexico City. In
Leon, for example, the population increases from 1.4 million to
2.3 million. Other cases of medium-size cities gaining population
include Puebla (16.5 percent), Aguascalientes (34.2 percent), and
Acapulco (115.6 percent). Acapulco’s staggering growth can be
explained by its having one of the country’s highest levels of ameni-
ties, so that once it improves its efficiency, it grows tremendously.
    When reducing the dispersion in amenities across cities, the
effect is quite different. Many of the larger cities lose population,
such as Guadalajara (56 percent), but Mexico City, which grows
from 19.2 million to 27.4 million, and Tijuana, which grows from
1.5 million to 6.3 million, do not. This reflects Mexico City and
Tijuana having bad amenities. Once again, what we call amenities
should be interpreted broadly. Any feature that holds back city
growth but that does not distort the labor supply is a bad amenity in
our model. For example, if pollution and a complex geography stunt
Mexico City’s growth, our model will show it as a negative amenity.
    Urban policies. As in China, we now analyze the effect of two types
of policies—those that benefit lagging cities and those that benefit
cities of different sizes. Table 4.4 shows the results. If we improve
efficiency 20 percent in the bottom quartile of efficient cities, the
model predicts that welfare in Mexico will increase 0.4 percent.
110 Analyzing Urban Systems


Similar policies that improve amenities would have a positive welfare
effect of 0.7 percent, whereas policies that lower excessive frictions
would have no noticeable effect. As for the scale-dependent policies,
improving conditions 20 percent in the smallest cities would have a
very small effect, in no case improving welfare more than 0.1 percent.
Doing the same in larger cities has, as expected, a greater effect. One
important difference with China is that the welfare effects of any of
these policies are much smaller.

Table 4.4 Urban policies in Mexico

Urban policies                                 Welfare differences (percent)
                                          Efficiency   Amenities     Excessive
                                                                     frictions
Improve in worst cities by 20 percent        0.4            0.7         0.0
Improve in smallest cities by                0.1            0.1         0.0
  20 percent
Improve in medium-large cities by            0.5            0.3         0.1
  20 percent
Improve in largest cities by 20 percent      2.1            1.1         0.5
Source: Authors.

   Once again, the finding that targeting the largest cities has a
greater impact is not surprising. As in China, if we were to control
for the fact that improving conditions in larger cities benefits more
people, we would find that the best policy targets the most lagging
cities. Table 4.5 reports the results. Improving efficiency in the
most backward cities improves welfare 0.2 percent, compared with
0.1 percent or less when targeting cities of different sizes.
   Mexico’s changing city-size distribution. Until now we have com-
pared urban systems across countries, but our methodology can also
compare urban systems over time. When reducing spatial efficiency
differences to the United States level, welfare gains in Mexico rise, from
0.2 percent in 1989 to 0.6 percent in 1994, and then drop again, to
0.3 percent in 2000 and 0.0 percent in 2005.6
   We now interpret this finding in light of the severe economic crisis
that hit Mexico in 1994, which had profound effects on efficiency
(Meza and Quintin 2007). As argued, equalizing efficiency across
                            Klaus Desmet and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg        111


Table 4.5 Urban policies in Mexico for constant population-weighted
characteristics

Urban policies                                 Welfare differences (percent)
                                          Efficiency   Amenities     Excessive
                                                                     frictions
Improve in worst cities by 20 percent        0.2            0.1         0.0
Improve in smallest cities by                0.0            0.0         0.0
  20 percent
Improve in medium-large cities by            0.1            0.1         0.1
  20 percent
Improve in largest cities by 20 percent      0.1            0.1         0.2
Source: Authors.


locations tends to help medium-size cities at the expense of larger
once. We would therefore expect the positive effect on welfare to
be larger, the greater the dispersion in efficiency. If so, the temporal
pattern suggests that the dispersion in efficiency must have widened
during the economic crisis—that is, the smaller cities are likely to
have been hit harder than the larger ones. The data bear out these
intuitions. The standard deviation of the log of efficiency increased
from 0.27 in 1989 to 0.32 in 1994 and then declined to 0.23 in
2000 and 0.16 in 2005. Further, the correlation between changes in
efficiency over time and city size in Mexico is always negative, except
for 1989–94 when it was positive, indicating that larger cities suffered
less than smaller cities. This is reflected by the counterfactual predic-
tions for Mexico City. We know that reducing spatial differences in
efficiency to the United States level will have a negative effect on
the country’s capital, but the effect was much larger in 1994. While
the predicted change in Mexico City’s population is –11 percent in
1989 and 4 percent in 2005, the predicted change is a much larger
–53 percent in 1994, the crisis year.
    In addition to analyzing the spatial impact of the crisis, our results
shed light on the long-run spatial development of Mexico’s urban
system. The drop in the dispersion of efficiency suggests a tendency
toward the spatial convergence of efficiency over time. In fact, by
2005 Mexico’s spatial dispersion of efficiency had converged to the
United States’. Another long-term trend is the worsening in Mexico
112 Analyzing Urban Systems


City’s amenities. If the country’s capital had the country’s average
level of amenities, its population would have dropped 41.7 percent in
1989. By 2005, the situation was completely reversed: with average
amenities, the city’s population would rise 40.0 percent.

Some policy conclusions

We have applied a simple model of a system of cities to do policy
analysis. Our focus has been on the United States and two large
emerging economies, China and Mexico. Our findings allow us to
state six relevant policy conclusions:

• Reducing spatial differences across cities does not necessarily imply
  larger cities becoming smaller. If efficiency were spread more equally
  across space, megacities would lose people in Mexico but gain in
  China. The finding that megacity populations may not always
  decline has to do with the multiple determinants of the city-size
  distribution and how they relate to each other. Many medium-size
  cities in China have great amenities but low efficiency. Improving
  their efficiency gives them a huge boost, allowing them to become
  larger than the country’s megacities today. In other words,
  Shanghai and Beijing would lose people, but other cities would
  take their place and outpace them. By contrast, Mexico City
  would lose people but remain Mexico’s largest city.
• In a mature economy like the United States, the welfare effects of
  completely smoothing out spatial differences are small. Because policy
  is unlikely to completely eliminate differences across cities, these
  already-small effects should be interpreted as upper bounds. If, in
  addition, one were to account for the reallocation costs of people
  implied by policies that reduce spatial differences, these small
  positive welfare effects would likely become negative, suggesting
  there is little room for policies that focus on lowering differences
  across United States cities.
• Emerging economies are typically characterized by larger spatial differ-
  ences than are developed economies, so the welfare effects of smoothing
  out spatial differences are likely to be larger. As China and Mexico
  continue to grow and develop, their spatial differences will likely
  converge to those in more mature economies, such as the United
                          Klaus Desmet and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg    113


  States. Reducing spatial differences in efficiency to the United States
  level would improve China’s welfare 17.7 percent and Mexico’s a
  much smaller 0.1 percent. The huge welfare effects in China can
  be explained by the large spatial dispersion in efficiency across
  its cities, a situation virtually absent in Mexico. A similar policy
  that lowers spatial differences in amenities would increase China’s
  welfare 22.6 percent and Mexico’s 0.8 percent. China’s much larger
  effect is likely related to its mobility restrictions under the hukou
  system. Taken together, our findings suggest that China stands
  much to gain from the spatial reallocation of people and economic
  activity, as technologies diffuse across space and mobility restric-
  tions are lifted. The effects in Mexico are substantially lower, prob-
  ably reflecting the country’s longer history as a developing market
  economy and its lack of formal mobility restrictions.
• Urban policies that target lagging cities are more effective than those
  that target cities of different sizes. Urban policies often focus on
  either improving conditions in lagging cities or favoring cities of
  particular sizes. Our results suggest that targeting lagging cities
  tends to be more effective, except when the cost of implementing
  such policies does not increase with city size. In that case, target-
  ing the largest cities is better, because the benefits are shared by
  more people. The often observed policy in developing countries
  of favoring smaller cities is in general unwarranted. To implement
  policies based on city characteristics, a methodology is needed to
  rank cities by their different characteristics. Our model provides a
  framework to do so.
• Country-wide shocks are likely to have important spatial effects. We
  find that Mexico’s 1994 economic crisis increased the dispersion
  of efficiency across cities. This implies that the country’s largest
  cities, such as Mexico City, were spared more than the country’s
  smaller cities. It suggests that large cities are more resilient to
  country-wide shocks than small cities.
• From a methodological point of view, there is much to learn from a
  quantitative analysis of urban systems. Analyzing policy interven-
  tions for just one city, without accounting for its effects on others,
  is likely to be misleading. Given that the data requirements to
  implement this framework are minimal, we hope that policy mak-
  ers in many countries will find it useful.
114 Analyzing Urban Systems


Notes
 1. As in John Donne: No man is an island entire of itself; every man is a
    piece of the continent, a part of the main.
 2. The literature on firm dynamics and industrial policy has also focused
    on this problem. For example, is it more desirable to subsidize small
    firms or large firms? See Restuccia and Rogerson (2008).
 3. The online appendix is available at www.princeton.edu/~erossi/
    RethinkingCitiesCh14Appendix.pdf.
 4. See www.princeton.edu/~erossi/RethinkingCitiesCh14Appendix.pdf.
 5. Of course, given that people will move as a result of the policy, the ex
    post aggregate efficiency may be different.
 6. The numbers for 2005 are slightly different than those for Figure 4.3.
    Because we want to use a constant sample of cities across all years, the
    number of cities analyzed here is a bit lower.

Bibliography
Au, Chun-Chung, and J. Vernon Henderson. 2006. “Are Chinese Cities
   Too Small?” Review of Economic Studies 73: 549–76.
Bai, Chong-En, Hsieh, Chang-Tai, and Ying Yi Qian. 2006. “The Return to
   Capital in China.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 37 (2): 61–102.
Davis, Steve J., and John Haltiwanger. 1992. “Gross Job Creation, Gross
   Job Destruction, and Employment Reallocation.” Quarterly Journal of
   Economics 107 (3): 819–63.
Desmet, Klaus, and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. 2012. “Urban Accounting
   and Welfare,” Unpublished.
Glaeser, Edward L., and Joshua D. Gottlieb. 2008. “The Economics of
   Place-Making Policies.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 39 (1):
   155–253.
Kamal-Chaoui, Lamia, Edward Leman, and Zhang Rufei. 2009. “Urban
   Trends and Policy in China.” Regional Development Working Paper
   2009/1, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development,
   Paris.
Kehoe, Timothy, and Kim J. Ruhl. 2010. “Why Have Economic Reforms
   in Mexico Not Generated Growth?” Journal of Economic Literature 48
   (4): 1005–27.
McGrattan, Ellen, and Edward Prescott. 2009. Unmeasured Investment and
   the Puzzling United States Boom in the 1990s. Research Department Staff
   Report 369, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Minneapolis, MN.
                           Klaus Desmet and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg    115


Meza, Felipe, and Erwan Quintin. 2007. “Factor Utilization and the Real
   Impact of Financial Crises.” The B.E. Journal of Macroeconomics 7 (1):
   Article 33.
Restuccia, Diego, and Richard Rogerson. 2008. “Policy Distortions and
   Aggregate Productivity with Heterogeneous Plants.” Review of Economic
   Dynamics 11 (4): 707–20.
UN-Habitat. 2010. The State of African Cities 2010: Governance, Inequality
   and Urban Land Markets. Nairobi.
World Bank. 2009. World Development Report 2009: Reshaping Economic
   Geography. Washington, DC.
5


Are Cities the New Growth Escalator?

Enrico Moretti




In most countries, the geographical distribution of economic activity
is highly uneven. Urban areas tend to have much more productive
labor and higher salaries than rural areas, and there are vast differences
across urban areas. In the United States, the hourly wage of workers
in metropolitan areas with the highest average labor productivity is
more than twice the hourly wage of workers with similar skills and
experience in metropolitan areas with the lowest. In other words, the
same worker can earn vastly different nominal salaries depending on
where she locates. Even larger differences exist in many developing
countries. Employers also differ across metropolitan areas. Areas with
high salaries and high productivity tend to have employers that invest
in much more research and development than areas with low salaries
and low productivity.
   This chapter addresses two questions. First, it discusses the causes
of these vast geographical differences in wages, human capital, and
innovation. What makes some cities more economically successful
than others in productivity and salaries? The question is important
because the appropriate role of economic policy needs first to be
based on what is driving spatial economic differences in the first place.
                                                   Enrico Moretti 117


Most productivity differences within a country are unlikely to be
explained by exogenous factors, like natural resources endowments.
Instead, a part of these productivity differences reflects endogenous
factors: three forces of agglomeration economies, which ultimately
determine the location of workers and companies and thus shape
the futures of entire communities. The forces are thick labor, thick
markets for specialized service providers, and knowledge spillovers.
Understanding them is critical, because they are responsible for the
vast economic differences across cities and regions in most countries.
Understanding them also holds the key to designing policies that can
make struggling areas more economically successful.
   In a world with vast disparities in incomes across locales and with
significant agglomeration externalities, what is the proper role of
economic policy? Should national or local governments seek to redis-
tribute economic activity from rich areas to poor? The second part
of the chapter discusses regional economic development policies. In
the United States alone, states and the federal government spend
about $40–60 billion annually on these policies—more than is spent
on unemployment compensation in a normal year. The European
Union has an even more ambitious program transferring its develop-
ment funds to regions with below average incomes. Asian countries,
especially China, have a variety of special economic zones, designed
to attract foreign investment to specific areas.1
   Such regional development policies, often called place-based eco-
nomic policies, are effectively a form of welfare, targeting cities or
regions, not individuals. While such policies are widespread, the eco-
nomic logic behind them is rarely discussed and even less frequently
understood. This chapter clarifies when these policies are wasteful,
when they are efficient, and who the expected winners and losers are.
Understanding when government intervention makes sense—and
when it does not—is a crucial first step in setting sound economic
development policies.

What makes some cities more economically successful
than others?

Good salaries, high productivity, and vibrant innovation are highly
concentrated, not uniformly distributed over space.2 To get a more
118 Are Cities the New Growth Escalator?


precise sense of how large the geographical differences in the level
of economic activity can be within a country, consider Table 5.1.
The table shows average salary levels among U.S. metropolitan areas
with the highest percentage of local workers with a college degree.3
The list includes such large metropolitan areas as Austin, Boston,
Minneapolis-St. Paul, Raleigh-Durham, San Francisco, San Jose,
Seattle, and Washington, DC—as well as smaller cities with large
universities, such as Ann Arbor, Fort Collins-Loveland, Iowa City,
Lincoln, and Madison. In these cities, almost half the labor force is
college educated, and a significant fraction has a postgraduate degree.
Table 5.2 shows the metropolitan areas with the smallest percent-
age of workers with a college degree. It includes Flint, Michigan;
Vineland-Millville-Bridgeton, New Jersey; Visalia, California; and
Yuma, Arizona. In these cities, only 1 in 10 workers has a college
degree, and there is virtually no high-tech presence.
   These two tables have several noteworthy features. First, the sheer
size of the geographical differences is staggering, often exceeding the
differences between countries. Stamford, Connecticut, the city with
the highest percentage of college-educated workers in the United
States, has five times the number of college graduates per capita as
Merced, California, the city with the lowest. This difference is much
larger than the difference in schooling between the United States as
a whole and many developing countries, such as India (three times),
Peru (three times), and South Africa (four times).
   Second, differences in education are associated with huge differ-
ences in average nominal salary. College graduates in the top group
make $70,000–80,000 a year, or about 50 percent more than college
graduates in the bottom group. Compare San Jose, fifth from the
top, with Merced, at the very bottom. Both cities are in California,
less than 100 miles apart, but their labor markets belong to different
universes. San Jose, in the heart of Silicon Valley, has more than four
times as many college graduates per capita as Merced—and salaries
40 percent higher for college graduates and 130 percent higher for
workers with a high school diploma.
   The geographical differences are so large that high school graduates
in the top group often make more than college graduates in the
bottom. The average worker with a high school education in Boston
makes $62,423, or 44 percent more than a college graduate in Flint.
Table 5.1 Metropolitan areas with the largest percentage of college graduates

Top metro areas                                   Rank              Percentage with   Salary of college      Salary of high
                                                                     college degree    graduates ($)      school graduates ($)
Stamford, CT                                       1                      56             133,479               107,301
Washington, DC/MD/VA                               2                      49              80,872                67,140
Boston, MA-NH                                      3                      47              75,173                62,423
Madison, WI                                        4                      47              61,888                52,542
San Jose, CA                                       5                      47              87,033                68,009
Ann Arbor, MI                                      6                      46              65,452                55,456
Raleigh-Durham, NC                                 7                      44              63,745                50,853
San Francisco-Oakland, CA                          8                      44              77,381                60,546
Fort Collins-Loveland, CO                          9                      44              57,391                47,007
Seattle-Everett, WA                                10                     42              68,025                55,001
Trenton, NJ                                        11                     42              81,914                64,299
Lexington-Fayette, KY                              12                     41              55,238                44,915
Austin, TX                                         13                     41              62,289                48,809
Portland, ME                                       14                     40              57,366                48,080
Minneapolis-St. Paul, MN                           15                     40              69,955                57,187
Denver-Boulder, CO                                 16                     39              64,488                50,097
New York-Northeastern NJ                           17                     38              79,757                59,797
Lincoln, NE                                        18                     38              50,401                41,837
Santa Cruz, CA                                     19                     38              64,801                48,186
Tallahassee, FL                                    20                     38              59,380                46,715
Worcester, MA                                      21                     37              60,723                48,465
Source: Author’s calculations based on U.S. Census Bureau (2008).
Table 5.2 Metropolitan areas with the smallest percentage of college graduates

Bottom metro areas                                Rank              Percentage with   Salary of college      Salary of high
                                                                     college degree    graduates ($)      school graduates ($)
Mansfield, OH                                      286                    17               53,047                35,815
Beaumont-Port Arthur-Orange, TX                    287                    17               58,234                38,352
Rocky Mount, NC                                    288                    16               52,330                34,329
Stockton, CA                                       289                    16               59,651                37,928
Fort Smith, AR/OK                                  290                    16               50,937                33,187
Ocala, FL                                          291                    16               47,361                32,725
Yuba City, CA                                      292                    16               56,403                34,999
Modesto, CA                                        293                    15               60,563                36,126
Waterbury, CT                                      294                    15               54,651                37,280
Brownsville-Harlingen-San Benito, TX               295                    15               43,800                22,450
McAllen-Edinburg-Pharr-Mission, TX                 296                    15               44,605                22,845
Anniston, AL                                       297                    15               48,928                33,031
Yakima, WA                                         298                    15               50,160                29,084
Bakersfield, CA                                    299                    14               65,775                34,807
Danville, VA                                       300                    14               42,665                28,868
Houma-Thibodaux, LA                                301                    14               56,044                37,395
Vineland-Millville-Bridgeton, NJ                   302                    13               57,668                35,375
Flint, MI                                          303                    12               43,866                28,797
Visalia-Tulare-Porterville, CA                     304                    12               55,848                29,335
Yuma, AZ                                           305                    11               52,800                28,049
Merced, CA                                         306                    11               62,411                29,451
Source: Author’s calculations based on U.S. Census Bureau (2008).
                                                     Enrico Moretti 121


A high school graduate in San Jose earns an average of $68,009,
thousands more than college-educated workers in Merced, Yuma,
Danville, and all the other cities at the bottom. In other words, the
economic disparity between cities is so vast that it can dominate the
disparity between levels of education.
   These differences are not specific to the United States; they exist in
countries the world over, including developing countries. For exam-
ple, China exhibits significant spatial differences in schooling, labor
productivity, and salaries across regions. Average salaries in Beijing
and Shanghai are several times higher than those in Lhasa, Golmud,
and Yumen because workers in Beijing and Shanghai are much more
productive. Average schooling achievement also differs significantly
across cities, with the labor markets of highly developed coastal cities
having a higher share of college graduates and the labor markets of
less developed western cities having a lower share. The gap in average
salary and average schooling between Beijing and Shanghai and rural
areas in western China is even larger.
   Regional differences in India are equally striking. Metropolitan
areas in poorer parts of India—like Patna in Bihar—tend to have
average incomes four to five times lower than metropolitan areas in
richer parts of India, like Delhi and Bangalore (now Bengaluru). In
European countries, spatial differences tend to be more contained, as
in Italy, where salary differences between highly productive northern
cities like Milano, Trento, and Verona and less productive southern
cities like Agrigento and Cosenza are only 60–70 percent. The share
of college graduates in the labor force is 50–70 percent higher in the
northern group than in the southern group. France exhibits similar
spatial differences in productivity, salaries, and human capital.
   Throughout the world, the presence of many college-educated
residents changes the local economy in profound ways, affecting
both the kinds of jobs available to residents and the productivity of
workers. Cities with many college-educated residents tend to have
a local economy with a great deal of innovation. Table 5.1 includes
some of the world’s most important innovation clusters, including
Austin, Raleigh-Durham (Research Triangle), San Francisco, San Jose
(Silicon Valley), and Seattle. Compare Boston, third from the top,
with Flint, fourth from the bottom. Both have a proud industrial
past, but their economies are now at opposite ends of the spectrum.
122 Are Cities the New Growth Escalator?


Boston, with four times the number of college graduates, depends
heavily on innovation and finance. Flint, with one of the country’s
lowest concentrations of human capital, still focuses on traditional
manufacturing, primarily of automobiles. A college graduate in
Boston makes on average $75,173, or 75 percent more than the salary
of a similar worker in Flint.4 This is no accident. Forty years ago,
the rich areas in the United States and Europe were manufacturing
hubs with abundant physical capital. Today, human capital is one
of the best predictors of high salaries, both for individuals and for
communities, and this is becoming increasingly true for developing
economies.
    The cost of living in cities listed in Table 5.1 is higher than in cities
listed in Table 5.2, so salary differences adjusted for local prices are
smaller than nominal differences. While this explains why people still
live in Flint and Merced and why everyone has not moved to Austin,
Raleigh-Durham, and San Jose, it does not explain why there are still
employers in Austin, Raleigh-Durham, and San Jose. Why should
employers, especially those who compete nationally and internation-
ally, put up with such high labor costs to be in these locations? A
crucial question, because it holds the key to understanding why some
cities are more economically successful than others.
    If you visit these cities, you will not find many visual clues to why
salaries should be so high there. Take San Jose. Most of the iconic
Silicon Valley companies are in anonymous office buildings or office
parks. Like many other U.S. metropolitan areas, San Jose is made up
mostly of parking lots, corporate campuses, and a few sterile-looking
glass towers surrounded by an ocean of single-family homes. There is
nothing distinctive about its urban form: freeways crisscross its vast
expanse, and people drive everywhere. Local companies like eBay and
Adobe must pay a skilled worker with a college education $87,033
a year in San Jose, but a similar company in Merced would need to
pay only $62,411. In fact, if eBay and Adobe moved to Merced, they
would end up paying less to hire a college graduate than they are
paying now to hire a high school graduate, which is $68,009.
    The same puzzle arises in other countries. A large fraction of the
Indian high-tech sector is in Bangalore, where real estate costs and
salaries are higher than in other Indian cities. France, Japan, and the
                                                    Enrico Moretti 123


Republic of Korea exhibit even more geographical concentration,
as cities like Paris, Tokyo, and Seoul absorb the lion’s share of their
nations’ most innovative activities and talent. The same is true in
China, where Beijing and Shanghai have become magnets for the
country’s highest achievers. With high wages and office rents, these
cities are among the costliest places in China to operate a business.
One would expect these cities to be unattractive for firms, espe-
cially those that compete globally. A comprehensive study by the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development finds
that 57 percent of all patents in developed countries are generated
by 10 percent of metropolitan areas, and this concentration has been
increasing over time.
   What is so special about cities like Bangalore, San Jose, Seoul,
and Shanghai? In the past, firms established themselves near their
customers because transportation costs were high. For example,
during the Industrial Revolution, London companies could deliver
their products at a cost advantage because most of their customers
were in London. But today, transportation costs are low, and they do
not explain a big part of the geographical distribution of economic
activity. For high tech, the transportation costs are essentially zero,
since one can ship software code instantly and cheaply through any
modem. If all Bangalore software companies moved to the state of
Bihar, where real estate and wages are much lower, no user would
notice.
   The answer to the puzzle is that workers in cities in Table 5.1—
together with their counterparts in other countries—are more
productive. Employers are willing to pay higher wages because they
get more in return for each hour worked. If workers were not more
productive, firms in the traded sector would, in the long run, relocate
away from high-cost locations.
   This higher labor productivity does not reflect better endowments
of natural resources. After all, there is no silicon in Bangalore or
Silicon Valley. Nor is there oil in Shanghai. The higher labor produc-
tivity is due mostly to three important competitive advantages, which
economists refer to collectively as the forces of agglomeration: thick
labor, thick markets for specialized service providers, and knowledge
spillovers.
124 Are Cities the New Growth Escalator?


Thick labor

A major advantage of cities for workers and firms is that urban labor
markets are thicker. Economists have long understood that thick
markets—those with many sellers and many buyers—are particu-
larly attractive because they make it easier to match demand with
supply. This matters more for highly skilled workers than unskilled
ones, and it is a key reason for the existence of industrial clusters. If
you are a software engineer specializing in a particular type of soft-
ware design, it is really important to find the one biotech firm that
uses that specific technology. If you move to a city like Bangalore,
where many software firms are concentrated, you are more likely
to find the firm that really wants—and will pay for—your unique
skill set. If you move to a city like Calcutta (now Kolkata), with
fewer software firms, you might have to settle for a less ideal match
and thus a lower salary. You will have a vastly different career tra-
jectory depending on where you move. The advantages of a better
match also accrue to employers. By locating in Bangalore, a software
startup enjoys higher productivity and produces more patents,
because it can find exactly the kind of molecular biologist that fits
its needs. A thick market appears to be a win-win for workers and
firms alike.
    For workers in professional occupations, the economic return
of being in a thick labor market, as measured by increased earn-
ings, has been rising for the past 30 years. In the United States, the
average wage in labor markets with more than a million workers
is a third higher than the average wage in those with $250,000 or
fewer. This remains true even after worker seniority, occupation, and
demographics are held constant. Remarkably, this difference is now
50 percent larger than it was in the 1970s. Market size is especially
important for workers with highly specialized skills, such as high-tech
engineers, scientists, mathematicians, designers, and doctors. Among
doctors, specialists in large cities perform a narrower set of activities
than those in small ones (Baumgardner 1988). But market size does
not matter very much for unskilled workers; manual laborers and
carpenters perform similar tasks in large cities and small.
    The size of labor markets also affects how frequently people change
jobs. One study that followed 12,000 workers over a 20-year period
                                                     Enrico Moretti 125


revealed that early in a career, when a worker is shopping around for
a good match, she will change jobs more often in a large, diverse local
market than in a smaller, specialized one. Later in a career, however,
when stability presumably becomes more appealing, people change
jobs less often in large markets, because they are more satisfied with
their matches (Bleakley and Lin 2010).
    In addition, market thickness provides a form of partial insurance
against unemployment. When a layoff is caused not by a recession
but by problems specific to a firm, market thickness reduces the
probability that the worker will remain unemployed, because there
are more potential employers. And thick labor markets reduce the
likelihood that a firm cannot fill a vacancy.
    Market size is not just a curiosity. It has critical implications for
the future of cities. The thick-market effect is one of the main reasons
that the high-tech sector is concentrated in a small number of cities
worldwide. Because thick labor markets are better at matching work-
ers and employers, high-tech clusters have an enormous advantage in
attracting even more high-tech employers and workers. The flip side,
however, is that cities currently without a high-tech cluster find it
hard to create one. This eventually adds to the economic differences
across cities.
    Size also matters for the marriage market, which in many countries
is segregated along education lines, with well-educated professionals
increasingly marrying other well-educated professionals. Economists
call this assortative mating: people tend to marry people with similar
socioeconomic characteristics. It is nothing new. Even in the 1980s,
well-educated women were more likely to marry well-educated men
than less-educated men. This tendency has strengthened over the past
30 years, however, with a significant increase in the probability that
a man with a master’s degree will marry a woman with a master’s
degree, a man with a college degree will marry a woman with a col-
lege degree, and so on. This applies not just to education but also
to job type, salary, and many other factors. As assortative mating
increases, the need for a large marriage market also increases. If you
are looking for a partner with very specific characteristics, a thick
dating scene is better.
    Even for married couples, the need for thick cities is increasing,
because large labor markets are especially important for families in
126 Are Cities the New Growth Escalator?


which both husband and wife have a professional career. This kind of
“power couple” represents a small but growing number of households.
In a study of changing family structure, Costa and Kahn (2000)
found that in 1940, among U.S. couples in which both husband
and wife had a college education, only 18 percent of wives worked.
By 1970, that figure had more than doubled to 39 percent, but most
of the women had majored in fields such as education and nursing
and had been tracked into traditionally female jobs. Their experience
was one of “first family, then jobs,” and they often left the labor force
when their first child was born.
   By 1990, college-educated wives of college-educated men had
begun to resemble men in their professional choices and aspired to
“career, then family” or “career and family.” By 2010, 74 percent of
college-educated wives were in the labor force, with jobs in virtu-
ally all fields and sectors. As more married couples have two careers,
more of them face a location problem, since wives are increasingly
unwilling to be the ones who give up their careers to accommodate
their spouses’ job changes. Today, half of companies list a spouse’s
employment as the biggest reason that employees turn down a job
relocation offer. Thick labor markets—markets large enough to offer
good professional matches for both partners—are the best way to
solve this problem.
   This matters tremendously for the future of cities. Costa and Kahn
find that well-educated professionals are increasingly gathering in
large cities and that more than half this increased agglomeration is
due to the growing severity of the location problem of power couples.
This is bad news for small cities, because it means that they are
becoming less competitive, especially in the eyes of highly educated
professional couples. In the long run, smaller cities are destined to
experience a reduced inflow of well-educated professionals and will
therefore miss out on economic growth, thus becoming poorer over
time (Costa and Kahn 2000).

Thick markets for specialized service providers

A second advantage of large metropolitan areas, especially those that
develop large industrial clusters, is the presence of highly specialized
intermediate service providers. These vendors supply specialized
                                                      Enrico Moretti 127


services important to companies, such as advertising, legal support,
technical and management consulting, shipping and repair, and engi-
neering support. These services enable firms to focus on what they are
good at, without having to worry about secondary functions. By the
mere act of moving into a large cluster of similar firms, a company
in effect becomes larger overnight, because it can draw on specialized
local expertise. The larger the cluster, the more specialized the service
providers can be. As a result, firms within a large cluster become
more productive and more successful. A small software developer in
Seattle does not need an in-house lawyer, because there are already
plenty of local law firms specializing in intellectual property, licens-
ing, and incorporation of startups. A pharmaceutical company in
Mumbai can buy specialized services for its labs from local vendors,
and a hardware company can find specialized shipping services.
    Many of these services are non-tradable, which means that geo-
graphical proximity to clients is required to deliver the service (legal
services, for example, require a lot of face-to-face interaction between
client and attorney). And even when they are tradable, geographical
proximity to clients helps deliver successful products, as providers
often need to be close to potential clients to assess their needs and
show how they can help. This matters less for mature products but is
critical when a product is new.
    This is one important factor that keeps industrial clusters geo-
graphically together. Service providers are there because the clients
are; the clients are there in part because the service providers are. This
affects cities in two important ways. First, it increases the number of
local jobs created by local companies: if a city attracts an IBM office,
it gains not just the IBM jobs but also the jobs in the service sector.
Second, it further strengthens the attractiveness of cities that have
successful clusters at the expense of cities that do not: it makes IBM
more likely to open an office in Silicon Valley.5

Knowledge spillovers

More educated countries tend to be richer. More important, countries
whose citizens’ education grows faster tend to see faster economic
progress. The link between country education and economic growth
is quantitatively strong. Krueger and Lindhal (2001) find that each
128 Are Cities the New Growth Escalator?


additional year in the average education of a country results in a
gross domestic product (GDP) increase of 5–14 percent, a substan-
tial income gain. Of course, the direction of causality is not always
clear. Economists have long recognized that “education is both the
seed and the flower of economic development” (Harbison and Myers
1965, xi). For example, countries that improve their education sys-
tems could at once change other policies that enhance growth, thus
complicating the causal interpretation of the relationship between
education growth and economic growth.
    The same correlation between education and economic growth
across countries exists within countries across regions. Indian states
with the highest level of literacy and highest level of college graduation
also have the highest incomes. The same is true in countries as diverse
as Brazil, Germany, and Indonesia.
    Figure 5.1 shows the relationship between the average salaries of
high school graduates in each U.S. metropolitan area and the fraction
of workers with a college education in those areas. Tables 5.1 and 5.2
hinted at a positive relationship between local human capital and
salaries across U.S. metropolitan areas. The figure shows that this link
is robust, and it holds true for most U.S. cities. There appears to be
a clear positive association, indicating that the more college gradu-
ates, the higher the salaries for high school graduates.6 The economic




Figure 5.1 Fraction of college-educated workers and salary of high school
graduates in the United States, by metropolitan area
Source: Moretti 2012.
                                                     Enrico Moretti 129


effect is quite large. The earnings of a worker with a high school
education rise about 7 percent as the share of college graduates in his
city increases 10 percent.
   One may be concerned that the figure is comparing apples and
oranges—that workers who pick cities with many college graduates,
like Boston, might differ fundamentally from workers who pick cities
with fewer college graduates, like Flint. If Boston attracts high school
graduates who are smarter or more ambitious than those in Flint,
it should be no surprise that they earn more. To account for this
possibility, I relied on 14 years of data from the National Longitudinal
Survey of Youth, which has tracked the lives of 12,000 people
since 1979. This dataset is particularly useful because it ensures an
apples-to-apples comparison by tracking how the salary of a given
person changes over time as the number of college graduates in a city
changes. The finding? Workers who live in cities where the number of
college graduates increases experience faster salary gains than workers
who live in cities where the number of college graduates stagnates.
The same individual’s salary can thus depend on how many skilled
workers are nearby. This relationship holds for all sectors, but it is
especially strong for workers with high-tech jobs (Moretti 2004b).
   Three reasons explain the relationship between the number of
skilled workers in a city and the wages of their unskilled neigh-
bors. First, skilled and unskilled workers complement each other:
an increase in the former raises the productivity of the latter. In the
same way that working with better machines increases a worker’s
productivity, working with better educated colleagues increases the
productivity of an unskilled worker. Second, a better educated labor
force facilitates local employers’ adoption of newer and better tech-
nologies. Third, an increase in a city’s overall human capital gener-
ates human capital spillovers. This concept is at the heart of modern
economic growth theory, the study of what determines a country’s
economic success.
   Researchers have built sophisticated mathematical models show-
ing that sharing knowledge and skills through formal and informal
interaction generates significant knowledge spillovers. These spillovers
are thought to be an important engine of economic growth for both
cities and nations. Robert Lucas (1988), arguing that these spillovers
may be large enough to explain long-run differences between rich
130 Are Cities the New Growth Escalator?


and poor countries, showed that people learn from each other when
they interact and that this process makes those who interact with
better educated peers ultimately more productive and creative. More
recent research has extended and articulated the concept (see, for
example, Gaspar and Glaeser 1998; Glaeser 1994a, 1994b, 1999).
   New ideas are rarely born in a vacuum. Social interactions among
workers tend to generate learning opportunities that enhance inno-
vation and productivity. So the fact that workers earn more in highly
educated cities is not an accident but a reflection of the higher labor
productivity that comes from working alongside highly educated
colleagues and neighbors.
   Jaffe et al. (1993) used patent citations to understand how knowl-
edge diffuses within a circle of friends, colleagues, or scientists in a
city. When filing for a patent, inventors are required to list all the
inventions that their invention builds on. These links offered the
economists an innovative way to track the flow of knowledge among
inventors. They found that knowledge is subject to a significant
degree of “home bias,” in the sense that inventors are significantly
more likely to cite inventors living nearby than those living farther
away. Because patents are freely available, citations should not neces-
sarily display geographical favoritism. An inventor in, say, Raleigh-
Durham, should have the same awareness of products or ideas
generated elsewhere as of those generated locally. And yet an inventor
in Raleigh-Durham is much more likely to cite a previous invention
patented by someone else in Raleigh-Durham than one patented in
another city.
   The home bias is substantial. Excluding citations that come from
the same company, citations are twice as likely to come from the
city of their citing patent than from other places. This means that
scientists and inventors are more familiar with knowledge produced
by those who work near them, presumably because they share ideas
and information through informal conversations and interactions.
These interactions take place both inside and outside the workplace,
including casual settings like local cafés and social events.
   Thus, geography matters for spreading knowledge, and knowledge
quickly dies with distance. Citations are highest when the citing
inventor is located 0–25 miles from the cited inventor. Citations
are far lower when the citing inventor is more than 25 miles from
                                                      Enrico Moretti 131


the cited inventor, and the effect completely disappears beyond
100 miles.
    Geographical distance seems to impede the flow of ideas, even
within a firm. This alone should discourage companies from out-
sourcing any part of the innovation phase to low-cost countries. Take
the high-tech company Cadence, with about 2,000 employees in San
Jose, 1,000 in India, and another 1,000 scattered around the world.
An Indian software engineer at level T4 makes about a third of what
a similarly qualified software engineer in San Jose makes. When I
asked Cadence’s executive senior vice president, Nimish Modi, why
the company does not move more research and development to
India, given the potential savings, he told me that proximity and
personal interaction matter to the creativity of its engineers. “We
have sophisticated videoconferencing facilities, and we use them all
the time to communicate with India,” he said. “But it is not the same
as face-to-face interaction. Nothing replaces a group of engineers
sitting together and arguing in front of the whiteboard.”
    Being around smart people tends to make us smarter, more cre-
ative, and ultimately more productive. And the smarter the people,
the stronger the effect. Azoulay et al. (2010) focus on what happens
to medical researchers when they work with an academic superstar.
It is difficult to establish the causal relationship here because of self-
selection: superstars tend to work with strong researchers, so the
fact that their collaborators are especially prolific may just happen
because they are better, not because they are benefiting from knowl-
edge spillovers. To control for this, the three economists focused on
what happens to the productivity of a superstar’s collaborators when
the superstar dies unexpectedly (they identified 112 such deaths).
Although nothing changed in the collaborators’ own circumstances
following the superstars’ deaths, they experienced “a lasting 5 to 8
percent decline in their quality-adjusted publication rates” (Azoulay
et al. 2010, 2).
    It is not just that people publish more when they are close, the
quality of their research is better. When a team of Harvard Medical
School doctors analyzed all medical research articles published
at Harvard and correlated their data with the distance between
the authors’ offices, they found that being less than one kilometer
away raised the quality of research, as defined by how many other
132 Are Cities the New Growth Escalator?


researchers cited the article. The effect was even larger if the authors
were in the same building.
   Innovative firms thus have an incentive to locate near other inno-
vative firms. In the same way that having a good colleague next door
affects my creativity, having good neighbors—even competitors—
improves the creativity of companies and workers. This in turn helps
explain why workers in cities with many well-educated residents
earn higher salaries than identical workers in other areas. By clus-
tering near each other, innovators foster each other’s creative spirit
and become more successful. These effects have not faded over time.
While many people think that e-mail, cell phones, and the Internet
have made physical proximity less important to the creative process,
in reality the opposite is true. Location is more important than ever,
in part because knowledge spillovers are more important than ever.
   A large number of highly educated workers in a city is also associ-
ated with more creativity and a better ability to invent new ways of
working. One way to see this is to look at what Jane Jacobs called
“new work,” novel occupations that did not exist before. The econo-
mist Jeffrey Lin (2011) has studied which cities are the most creative,
in the sense that they generate the most new work as measured
by jobs that did not exist 10 years earlier. Between 5 percent and
8 percent of workers are engaged in new work at any time in the
United States, but this number is much higher in cities that have
a high density of college graduates—the ones in Table 5.1—and a
diverse set of industries. Lin also found that creativity pays off: for
the first few years after a new kind of job is created, workers in those
positions earn significantly higher wages than identical workers in
old jobs.

Implications for regional economic development policies

The discussion here has important implications for the future of
cities and for the policy makers interested in shaping it.
   There is something phenomenal about the forces of agglomeration
just uncovered. They are responsible for turning a collection of indi-
vidual workers and firms into something much larger than the sum
of its parts. This generates what economists call localized economies
of scale. The term economies of scale usually refers to the ability of
companies to become more efficient as they grow. For example, large
                                                     Enrico Moretti 133


car manufacturers are more efficient than small ones. But instead of
applying to a single company, these economies of scale apply to all
the companies in a geographical area. Larger cities, and cities with
larger industrial clusters, tend to be more efficient because they have
a thicker labor market, a more specialized supply of business services,
and more opportunities for knowledge spillovers.
   While individual companies in a cluster do not necessarily become
more efficient as they grow, all companies taken together become
more efficient as the cluster grows. A surprising implication is that
countries are more productive—and thus richer—when a significant
fraction of their economic activity is concentrated in some cities,
rather than spread out evenly across space.
   Another implication is that cities that are initially similar can grow
apart economically over time (Moretti 2012). These differences are
no accident—they are the predictable result of the three forces of
agglomeration. Cities with the right sectors and with workers who
have the right skills are likely to strengthen their position over time,
while others, trapped by their pasts, are likely to keep losing ground.
It is a tipping-point dynamic: once a city attracts some innovative
workers and companies, its economy changes in ways that make it
even more attractive to other innovative workers and companies. This
tends to generate a self-sustaining equilibrium, with many skilled
individuals looking for innovative jobs and innovative companies
looking for skilled workers.7
   This is a case where the future of a city depends on its past. Social
scientists call it path dependency. This presents a significant challenge
for policy makers, as it means that cities without a strong local
economy might find it difficult to start one. It is a classic chicken-
and-egg problem. Specialized workers will not move to a city that
does not have a cluster because it will be hard to find an employer
that values their unique skills. Innovative companies will not move
there because finding specialized labor will be difficult. This presents
a terrible challenge for communities that have fallen on hard times
and are struggling to reinvent themselves.

The economics of big pushes

A successful city’s economy is based on a remarkable equilibrium
between labor supply and demand: innovative companies (the labor
134 Are Cities the New Growth Escalator?


demand) want to be there because they know they will find workers
with the skills they need, and skilled workers (the labor supply) want
to be there because they know they will find the jobs they are looking
for.8 The economy of a struggling city is the opposite. Even if real
estate is dirt cheap, skilled workers do not want to be there, because
they know there are no jobs; innovative companies do not want to be
there either, because they know there are no skilled workers. It would
be in the interest of one group to move if the other did, but neither
wants to go first. It is a catch-22 (Moretti 2012).
   One way to move a city from a bad equilibrium to a good one is
with a big push: a coordinated policy that breaks the impasse and
simultaneously brings skilled workers, employers, and specialized
business services to a new location. Only the government can initiate
these big-push policies, because only the government has the ability
to coordinate the individual actors—the workers and employers—to
get the agglomeration process going. The idea is to provide public
subsidies for those willing to move first but then stop the subsidies
after the process becomes self-sustaining.
   The first and most important big push in U.S. history was the
Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA), created amid the Great Depression
to lift a desperately poor region out of poverty. In practice, this meant
investing in large infrastructure programs, particularly electricity-
generating dams, whose power was used to electrify the region
and boost local productivity; an extensive network of new roads; a
650-mile navigation canal; schools; and flood control systems. A
smaller portion of the funds was devoted to malaria prevention,
reforestation, education programs, and health clinics. The program’s
enormous scale went far beyond anything attempted before or since.
Over 1933–58, $30 billion from U.S. taxpayers poured into the
region. At the program’s peak, in 1950, the annual federal subsidy
to the region was $625 per household. After 1958, the federal
government began to scale back its investment, and the TVA became
a largely self-sustaining entity.
   This program is not unlike regional economic development poli-
cies that many developing countries currently adopt. This approach
to economic development is based on the intuitive notion that public
monies can jump-start a local economy trapped in poverty. But crit-
ics on both the right and the left have lambasted such initiatives,
                                                    Enrico Moretti 135


either as big government overreach or top-down control of local
communities. In an influential 1984 article in the New York Review
of Books, the progressive urban thinker Jane Jacobs wrote a scathing
critique of big-push policies, including the TVA, arguing that it is
an unnatural way to foster local economies and concluding that they
work miserably in practice.
    How can we rigorously assess these place-based policies? The real
test is not whether they create jobs during the push. The fact that
an inflow of money temporarily increases economic activity in an
area is hardly a sign that the money was well spent. We need to look
instead at whether the publicly financed seed can eventually generate
a privately supported cluster large enough to sustain itself. The idea
is that government investment carries the local economy past the
tipping point but no further. At that point, the forces of agglomera-
tion take over, continuing to attract businesses and workers well after
the subsidies end.
    A recent study of the TVA found that the program succeeded in
generating an industrial revolution in an area that had to that point
been largely rural (Kline and Moretti 2012). During the big-push
years of 1933–58, manufacturing jobs in the region grew much faster
than they did in the rest of the country—companies found the cheap
electricity and easy transportation attractive—and manufacturing
jobs kept growing faster after the federal subsidies dried up. Even
in 2000, more than 40 years after the end of the federal transfers,
manufacturing jobs in the region were growing faster than those
in comparable parts of the south, though the effect is now slowing
and will probably soon disappear. While the program succeeded in
moving the region from a low-productivity sector (agriculture) to a
high-productivity sector (manufacturing), it did not succeed in rais-
ing local wages in any significant way. The reason is simple: as more
and more jobs were created, more and more workers moved there
from the rest of the south to take advantage of improved economic
conditions. This increase in the supply of labor effectively offset the
increase in demand.
    The fundamental challenge with this type of place-based policies
is that for them to be successful, local policy makers must be able
to pick promising companies to invest in. They need to be a little
like venture capitalists. In this sense, President Franklin Roosevelt
136 Are Cities the New Growth Escalator?


had it easy. When manufacturing was the engine of job growth and
prosperity depended on infrastructure and cheap energy, the recipe
for development was obvious. The level of industrial development
in the Tennessee Valley was so low that it hardly mattered whether
an aluminum smelter, a steel factory, or a chemical factory opened
its doors. But today, the most important determinant of success for
local communities is human capital, and making the right call is
much harder. Should a county spend all its money attracting a new
nanotech lab, or should it go for Amazon’s latest computer farm? A
solar-panel research and development facility or a biotech lab? Even
professional venture capitalists have a hard time predicting which
industries and companies will succeed. For mayors of struggling
municipalities, this challenge can prove insurmountable.
    Overall, the track record on industrial public subsidies in the
United States and Europe is not great. It is simply too difficult for
policy makers, even the brightest and best intentioned, to identify
winning industries before they become winners. Even if it were clear
which industries would drive future growth, it would still be difficult
to pick winning companies within those industries.
    Indeed, looking at the United States’ most successful industrial
clusters, it is hard to find one spawned by a big push. No local poli-
tician set out to create Silicon Valley. In Austin, San Diego, and
Seattle, the success of an original anchor company was typically the
seed that grew into a high-tech or life-science cluster. The same is
true for smaller, more specialized clusters, arguably a more realistic
goal for struggling communities. Consider Boise, Idaho; Kansas City,
Kansas-Missouri; and Portland, Oregon, three small high-tech hubs
anchored by semiconductors, general high tech, and animal health
and nutrition sciences, respectively. Although small, these centers are
dynamic: Boise and Portland produce almost as many patents per
capita as Boston. None of these hubs was planned. The opening of
Intel’s semiconductor facility in 1976 jump-started Portland’s high-
tech sector. The seed for Boise was planted in 1973, when Hewlett-
Packard moved its printer division there. Life science research and
development in Kansas City can be traced back to the 1950s, when
Ewing Marion Kauffman started his pharmaceutical lab. Little of the
high-tech presence in these cities resulted from aggressive recruit-
ment of companies by local governments (Moretti 2012).
                                                      Enrico Moretti 137


   Other parts of the world have seen some success. Ireland used a
deliberate big-push policy to build up new human capital–intensive
sectors. Through aggressive tax incentives and other enticements, it
created clusters in high tech and finance, though the country’s recent
financial crisis throws the sustainability of such policies into question.
Israel’s high-tech cluster, one of the world’s most dynamic, depends
highly on the country’s military. Although the Israeli government did
not set out to create a local high-tech sector, its need for innovative
defense technologies and specialized human capital indirectly fostered
a private sector that later became globally competitive.
   Perhaps the best example of big-push success is Taiwan, China,
which in the 1960s and 1970s transformed its rural economy into an
advanced one with a dynamic innovation sector through a large-scale
policy of government-sponsored research. The program brought top
Chinese scientists back from the United States and established a clus-
ter of publicly supported research and development that eventually
became thick enough to sustain private companies. This is one of the
rare instances in which policy makers turned out to be good venture
capitalists. While they did bet on several failed technologies, they
also bet on semiconductors very early on. Semiconductors quickly
became the core of Taiwan, China’s, high-tech sector and arguably
one of its engines of prosperity. More recently, Taiwan, China’s, high-
tech cluster has embraced newer technologies, including life sciences.
But Taiwan, China, might just be the exception that proves the rule.

Cluster building

Ever since Harvard scholar Michael Porter popularized the catchy
concept of cluster building in the early 1990s, cities and states have
been trying to engineer economic clusters through a variety of public
policy measures.9 A widespread example of place-based industrial
policies is the use of economic subsidies to attract large companies
to struggling communities in order to seed a cluster. Virtually every
time a company announces plans for a new headquarters, a lab, or
a large production facility somewhere in the United States, the bid-
ding begins. States compete aggressively by offering larger and larger
enticements in the form of tax breaks, subsidized loans, local infra-
structure, export assistance and financing, workforce training, and
138 Are Cities the New Growth Escalator?


area marketing. These subsidies can be incredibly large. Panasonic
recently received more than $100 million ($125,000 per job) to
move its North American headquarters to Newark, New Jersey, while
Electrolux was given $180 million ($150,000 per job) in tax abate-
ments for its new establishment in Memphis, Tennessee. Mercedes
received a $250 million incentive package ($165,000 per job) for
locating in Vance, Alabama. Total state spending on local economic
development amounts to $40 billion a year, far more than the cumu-
lative federal spending for the TVA over its 30 years of government
subsidies.
    While politicians and the companies they subsidize usually extol
the benefits of these deals, critics complain that they are a huge waste
of public money. Is spending $150,000 per job really the best way to
help the residents of Memphis? What if we just wrote checks to those
residents instead? Greenstone et al. (2010) have studied what hap-
pens to local communities when their bid to attract a large employer
by offering subsidies succeeds. When firms are considering where to
open a large plant, they typically begin by looking at dozens of loca-
tions. They narrow the list to roughly 10 sites, from which two or
three finalists are selected. The study compared the experience of the
counties that the company ultimately chose (the winner) with the
runner-up counties (the losers). For example, when BMW decided
to open a new plant in the United States in the 1990s, the decision of
where to locate it came down to two finalists: Greenville-Spartanburg,
South Carolina, and Omaha, Nebraska. BMW choose Greenville-
Spartanburg, partly because of an incentives package worth $115
million. In this case and others, the losers were counties that had
survived a long selection process but narrowly lost the competition.
These cases can therefore tell us how the winner county would have
fared if it had decided not to bid.
    The study finds that in the years leading up to such a bidding war,
winners and losers were similar in terms of employment, salaries,
and productivity. But after, the winners’ productivity surged. These
productivity gains, which appeared to reflect knowledge spillovers,
were particularly large for existing plants that shared similar labor
and technology pools with the new plant. Thus, by making exist-
ing producers more productive, a new plant generated an important
benefit—a positive externality—for the rest of the country’s establish-
                                                     Enrico Moretti 139


ments. This higher productivity led to more jobs and higher wages.
So, the provision of subsidies might be seen as a way to internalize
this externality.
   To be efficient, however, the provision of the subsidy should
be commensurate with the magnitude of the social benefit. When
dozens of similar counties are desperate to attract outside investment,
their bids sometimes become so generous that they exceed the social
benefits to the community. Mayors and governors have an incentive
to bring the new company to town, no matter what the cost. When
they succeed, front-page stories in local newspapers tend to focus on
the hundreds of future local jobs, not on the fine print of the financial
packages offered. When they do not succeed, local politicians are
lambasted for not doing enough for the local economy. All this can
lead local governments to overbid. In such a case, the only winners
are the owners of the company being courted, because state and local
governments end up stuck with the bill.
   At a more fundamental level, one has to wonder about the aggre-
gate impact of place-based policies for the entire country. Even when
these subsidies make economic sense for a particular community,
they do not always make sense for the country as a whole, as com-
petition among municipalities for a given company can turn out to
be a zero-sum game for the nation (Glaeser and Gottlieb 2008). It is
even possible that these policies have a negative impact on aggregate
economic activity. Just like any other example of government inter-
vention, place-based policies redistribute economic activity from one
part of the economy to another. If the economic cost to communi-
ties that pay for the transfer is larger than the economic benefit to
communities that receive it, these policies may end up hurting the
country as a whole. More economic research is needed to establish
whether this possibility is empirically relevant.

Universities and local jobs

Given the importance of human capital for local economic develop-
ment, many local governments seek to raise the education of their
residents by supporting local colleges and universities. But do univer-
sities really change a community’s economy? The role of colleges and
universities in local development is complex. As seen, the number of
140 Are Cities the New Growth Escalator?


college-educated workers is the key factor driving cities’ economic
success. But college graduates are a very mobile group, and they
do not necessarily stay in the city where they went to school unless
market conditions are attractive.
    Research shows that the presence of a college or university in a
city increases both the supply of college graduates, by educating
some and attracting others from outside, and the demand for col-
lege graduates, by making them more productive (Moretti 2004a).
The demand effect comes through three channels. First, some busi-
nesses are created directly as a result of academic research. Recent
research indicates that the passing of the Bayh-Dole Act in 1980,
which encouraged universities to exploit their innovations com-
mercially, resulted in job growth for communities near universities.
Since 1980, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology has generated
3,673 patents; companies started by graduates and faculty generate
$2 trillion in sales each year. Stanford University and the University
of California (Berkeley) can make similar claims.
    A second important benefit of universities is that academic research
generates the kind of knowledge spillovers discussed earlier, and this
further fosters a local innovation sector. Jaffe (1989) found that this
spillover effect is particularly relevant in pharmaceuticals, medical
technology, electronics, optics, and nuclear technology. While some
of the spillover accrues to companies everywhere, a significant part
is local.
    A third channel is through a university’s medical school and its
associated hospital. Because hospitals are open 24 hours a day and
provide one of the most labor-intensive and skill-intensive prod-
ucts, they generate hundreds or even thousands of high-paid local
jobs. Much health care is a local service, following local prosperity
rather than causing it. But sometimes hospitals become regional
or national providers. Rochester, Minnesota (home to the Mayo
Clinic), Pittsburgh, and Houston attract patients from all over the
country and beyond. These hospitals are effectively producing a trad-
able service that is exported outside the local economy—not unlike
Microsoft and Apple—and therefore their presence is an important
driver of local wealth.
    Overall, research suggests that the presence of a university is on
average associated with a better educated labor force and higher
                                                     Enrico Moretti 141


local wages (Moretti 2004a). But mayors and local policy makers
should realize that a university—even a good one—is no guarantee
of economic success. While most large cities have universities, only
a small fraction of metropolitan areas have large concentrations of
innovative industries. Washington University in St. Louis is a better
academic institution than the University of Washington in Seattle,
but St. Louis has few high-tech jobs to show for it. In fact, its popula-
tion has been declining for 50 years, while Seattle is now one of the
world’s most dynamic innovation hubs. Arizona State University and
the University of Florida are among the largest U.S. institutions of
higher education, but Phoenix and Gainesville rank low on the list of
innovation hubs. Cornell and Yale dominate global academic rank-
ings, but other than employers directly connected to these universi-
ties, there is little in Ithaca and New Haven to suggest a world-class
high-tech cluster.
   So, proximity to a research university is important, but it alone is
not enough to form a sustainable cluster of innovative companies. This
is a key distinction, one ignored by countless local governments—
from Las Vegas to Detroit, from Italy to China—that invest
scarce resources in creating research centers. Universities are most
effective at shaping a local economy when they are part of a larger
ecosystem of innovative activity, one that includes a thick market
for specialized labor and specialized intermediate services. Once a
cluster is established, colleges and universities play an important role
in fostering its growth, often becoming a key part of the ecosystem
that supports it and makes it successful.

Who really benefits from place-based policies?

Government policies can be justified on grounds of either efficiency
or equity. This chapter has discussed under what conditions place-
based policies are an efficient use of taxpayer money. It now turns to
the question of who benefits from these policies. This is not easy to
answer in practice, because the beneficiaries of place-based industrial
policies are not necessarily those directly targeted by policy makers.
This has to do with the tight link between a city’s labor market and
its housing market.
142 Are Cities the New Growth Escalator?


   An increase in a city’s labor demand has two effects. It raises
employment and local wages. And the increase in employment raises
the local cost of housing. Cities where labor demand is strong tend
to have higher housing costs than those where it is weak, so that
differences in salaries adjusted for cost of living (real salaries) are
smaller than differences in unadjusted salaries (nominal salaries). An
interesting implication is that a significant part of the wealth created
by the dynamism of cities with a strong labor market accrues not just
to workers through the labor market but to homeowners through the
housing market, in the form of capital gains. These capital gains are
an important channel for some residents of an area to benefit from
the strength of their local economy. For renters, however, the effect
of a strong labor market is tempered by the increase in their monthly
housing costs.
   The economic benefit created by regional development policies
designed to increase a city’s employment is ultimately split between
local workers (in higher wages) and local homeowners (in higher
housing values). The change in real estate prices effectively redistrib-
utes the wealth created by job growth from one group to another.
The split depends on how accommodating the supply of housing
is and how mobile workers are (Moretti 2011). It is important to
recognize that local governments can affect the split. Policies that
allow for increases in local housing stock following increases in local
employment tend to keep housing prices in check, thus favoring
workers who do not own a house. By contrast, policies that limit
growth in the housing stock tend to result in housing cost increases,
thus favoring homeowners (Glaeser et al. 2005). Land-use regula-
tions, then, are an important mechanism that local governments
can use to redistribute the wealth created by job growth from home-
owners to renters.

                                 ***
Despite all the hype about exploding connectivity and the death
of distance, location matters now more than ever. Our best ideas
still reflect the daily, unpredictable stimuli that we receive from the
people we come across and from our immediate social environment.
Most of our crucial interactions are still face to face, and most of
                                                     Enrico Moretti 143


what we learn that is valuable comes from the people we know, not
from Wikipedia. The number of telecommuters as a fraction of the
total labor force is still incredibly small. Video conferencing, e-mail,
and Skype have not made a dent in the need for innovative people
to work side by side. In fact, that need is more important than ever.
Even as goods and information travel faster and faster to all corners
of the globe, there is an inverse gravitational pull toward key urban
centers. Globalization and localization seem to be two sides of the
same coin (Moretti 2012).
   It was not supposed to be this way. At the peak of the dot-com
frenzy in 2000, observers of all stripes almost unanimously concluded
that “the new economy gives both companies and workers more
locational freedom.” In The World Is Flat, one of the most influential
books about globalization, Thomas Friedman famously argued that
cell phones, e-mail, and the Internet lowered communication barriers
so much that location was irrelevant. Distance was dead. Geography
did not matter. This argument continues to resonate. The idea is that
no matter where people live, they can share knowledge and move
products at virtually no cost.
   According to this view, the good jobs, now concentrated in high-
cost locations such as Bangalore and Silicon Valley, will quickly
disperse to low-cost locations. This process of dispersion, the argu-
ment goes, will be faster than the dispersion of manufacturing jobs,
because moving software codes over the internet (using DSL technol-
ogy) is easier than moving bulky goods across borders. In this vision
of the future, the great innovation hubs of the globe will disappear,
and innovation jobs will disperse evenly across the country. The
key prediction is economic convergence. Low-cost areas will attract
more and more of the new, high-paying jobs. Cities that have been
lagging—the Clevelands, the Mobiles, the Topekas—will grow much
faster. Bogged down by their high costs, New York, San Francisco,
Seattle, and similar cities will decline.
   But the data do not support this view. In fact, the opposite has
been happening. For innovation, a company’s success depends on
more than just the quality of its workers—it also depends on the sur-
rounding ecosystem. This is important, because it makes innovation
harder to delocalize than traditional manufacturing. A textile factory
144 Are Cities the New Growth Escalator?


is a standalone entity that can be put pretty much anywhere labor is
abundant. By contrast, a biotech lab is harder to export, because you
would have to move not just one company but an entire ecosystem.
    A growing body of research suggests that cities are not just a col-
lection of individuals but are complex, interrelated environments
that foster the generation of new ideas and new ways of doing
business. For example, social interactions among workers tend to
generate learning opportunities that enhance innovation and pro-
ductivity. Being around smart people makes us smarter and more
innovative. By clustering near each other, innovators foster each
other’s creative spirit and become more successful. Thus, once a
city attracts some innovative workers and innovative companies, its
economy becomes even more attractive to other innovators. In the
end, this is what is causing an increased concentration of good jobs,
talent, and investment.
    This does not mean there is no merit to the view that low-cost areas
are destined to catch up. At a global level, the most important eco-
nomic development of the past decade is the incredible improvement
in the living standards of low- and middle-income countries, such as
Brazil, China, India, and Turkey, and even some African countries.
Their strong economic performance has greatly narrowed their gap
with rich countries, thus contributing to a marked convergence in
incomes. The catch-up experienced by the southern United States
over the past 50 years is another example of convergence. Many
southern states were much poorer than the rest of the country in the
1960s but grew more rapidly in the following decades.
    Yet in both cases, the process of catching up was geographically
uneven. Some southern cities—Atlanta, Austin, Dallas, Houston,
and Raleigh-Durham, for example—grew much faster than others,
thus increasing the disparity among communities in the south.
Developing countries exhibit similar regional differences. In China,
Shanghai has reached a per capita income close to that of a rich
nation. Its students outperform American and European students in
standardized tests by a wide margin. Its public infrastructure is better
than that of most U.S. cities. But agricultural communities in western
China have made much less progress. The regional differences in
China have clearly grown, even if the difference between China and
richer countries has shrunk.
                                                      Enrico Moretti 145


    The implications for economic policy are complex. Visionaries
have been trying to build thriving cities from the time people started
living in them. Utopian communities have always ignited imagina-
tions, with their promise of curing social ills through enlightened
planning and strong values. In most cases, these communities
have not lasted. People often have unrealistic expectations of their
governments. The role that local governments can play in revitalizing
struggling communities is less extensive than most voters realize and
most mayors would like to admit. The reality is that a city’s economic
fate is determined largely by historical factors. Path dependency and
strong forces of agglomeration present serious challenges for com-
munities without a well-educated labor force and an established
innovation sector.
    Local governments can certainly lay a foundation for economic
development and create all the conditions necessary for a city’s
rebirth, including a business climate friendly to job creation, but there
is no magic formula for redevelopment. Like politics, all innovation
is local: each community has its own comparative advantage. Local
governments must build on their existing capabilities by leveraging
local strengths and expertise. The use of public funds to create jobs
must be reserved for when there are important market failures and a
community has a credible chance of building a self-sustaining eco-
nomic cluster. Ultimately, though, local policy makers should realize
that when it comes to local development, there is no free lunch.

Notes
 1. A recent version of special economic zones is represented by “charter
    cities,” an idea originally promoted by economist Paul Romer. Honduras
    is seeking to develop a new major economic cluster from scratch. The
    idea of a charter city is an extension of the idea of special economic
    zones. But unlike the typical special economic zone, the political and
    legal institutions in Romer’s charter cities are not those of the host
    country, which is often corrupt and inefficient. They are instead the
    institutions of some external, well-functioning country.
 2. This section is based largely on Moretti (2012).
 3. To obtain a precise measure of the differences among metropolitan
    areas, I used data on 15.4 million workers ages 25–60 living in 306
    metropolitan areas from the American Community Survey, collected
146 Are Cities the New Growth Escalator?


      every year by the U.S. Census Bureau The Census Bureau defines met-
      ropolitan areas to include not just the political boundaries of a city
      but also its neighboring communities, to the extent that commuting
      patterns suggest that they are part of the same local labor market.
      Metropolitan areas are thus economically integrated regions that
      include places where people live and work. The New York metro area,
      for example, includes New York City and its suburbs in Long Island,
      New Jersey, Connecticut, and Westchester County. I focus on metro
      areas with employment of greater than 200,000. (In this chapter, I use
      the terms city and metropolitan area interchangeably.)
 4.   Of course, the relationship with innovation is not perfect. Stamford has
      a thriving financial sector but not many high-tech startups.
 5.   An important example of specialized service providers for innovative
      companies is venture capital. People have remarked for decades that
      one of the secrets of Silicon Valley’s success is its deep and articulated
      venture capital base. But what does proximity have to do with funding?
      Why, in a world of fast communication and cheap plane tickets, should
      venture capitalists on Sand Hill Road favor startups near them? The
      answer is that venture capitalists do not simply write a check and then
      disappear. An increasingly important part of their job involves monitor-
      ing, nurturing, and mentoring new businesses. This is why location
      matters. Nurturing and monitoring are clearly easier if the startup is
      nearby. In the end, geographical proximity to venture capitalists still
      matters. Skype and cell phones have not changed this simple fact. This
      is one reason that the world of high tech is and will remain geographi-
      cally concentrated.
 6.   The outlier in the top right corner is Stamford. Because 305 other cities
      are in the graph, the relationship is not driven by this outlier.
 7.   None of this should be an argument for complacency for successful
      cities. The forces of agglomeration are no guarantee that cities will keep
      their lead in innovation forever. Detroit was the Silicon Valley of its day,
      and its successful industrial cluster has largely disappeared.
 8.   This section is based largely on Moretti (2012).
 9.   This section is based largely on Moretti (2012).

Bibliography
Azoulay, Pierre, Joshua S. G. Zivin, and Jialan Wang. 1988. “Physicians’
  Services and the Division of Labor across Local Markets.” Journal of
  Political Economy 96 (5): 948–82.
——–—. 2010. “Superstar Extinction.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics
  125(2): 549–89.
                                                        Enrico Moretti 147


Baumgardner, James R. 1988. “Physicians’ Services and the Division of
    Labor across Local Markets.” Journal of Political Economy 96 (5): 948–82.
Bleakley, Hoyt, and Jeffrey Lin. 2010. “Portage: Path Dependence and
    Increasing Returns in U.S. History.” Working Paper 16314, National
    Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Costa, Dora L., and Matthew E. Kahn. 2000. “Power Couples: Changes in
    the Locational Choice of the College-Educated, 1940–1990.” Quarterly
    Journal of Economics 115 (4): 1287–315.
Gaspar, Jess, and Edward L. Glaeser. 1998. “Information Technology and
    the Future of Cities.” Journal of Urban Economics 43 (1): 136–56.
Glaeser, Edward L. 1994a. “Cities, Information and Economic Growth.”
    Cityscape 1 (1): 9–47.
——–—. 1994b. “Why Does Schooling Generate Economic Growth?”
    Economics Letters 44 (3): 333–37.
——–—. 1999. “Learning in Cities.” Journal of Urban Economics 46 (2):
    254–77.
Glaeser, Edward L., and Joshua D. Gottlieb. 2008. “The Economics of
    Place-Making Policies.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 39 (1):
    155–253.
Glaeser, Edward L., Joseph Gyourko, and Raven Saks. 2005. “Why Is
    Manhattan So Expensive? Regulation and the Rise in House Prices.”
    Journal of Law and Economics 48 (2): 331–69.
Greenstone, Michael, Rick Hornbeck, and Enrico Moretti. 2010.
    “Identifying Agglomeration Spillovers: Evidence from Winners and
    Losers of Large Plant Openings.” Journal of Political Economy 118 (3):
    536–98.
Harbison, Frederick, and Charles Myers, eds. 1965. Manpower and
    Education. New York: McGraw Hill.
Jacobs, Jane. 1984. “Why TVA Failed.” New York Review of Books, May 10.
Jaffe, Adam. 1989. “Real Effects of Academic Research.” American Economic
    Review 79 (5): 957–70.
Jaffe, Adam, Manuel Trajtenberg, and Rebecca Henderson. 1993.
    “Geographic Localization of Knowledge Spillovers as Evidenced by
    Patent Citations.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 108 (3): 577–98.
Klepper, Steven. 2010. “The Origin and Growth of Industry Clusters: The
    Making of Silicon Valley and Detroit.” Journal of Urban Economics 61
    (1): 15–32.
Kline, Patrick, and Enrico Moretti. 2012. “Local Economic Development,
    Agglomeration Economies and the Big Push: 100 Years of Evidence from
    the Tennessee Valley Authority.” University of California, Department of
    Economics, Berkeley, CA.
148 Are Cities the New Growth Escalator?


Krueger, Alan B., and Mikael Lindhal. 2001. “Education for Growth:
   Why and For Whom?” Journal of Economic Literature 39 (December):
   1101–36.
Lin, Jeffrey. 2011. “Technological Adaptation, Cities, and New Work.”
   Review of Economics and Statistics 93 (2): 554–74.
Lucas, Robert. 1988. “On the Mechanics of Economic Development.”
   Journal of Monetary Economics 22 (July): 3–42.
Moretti, Enrico. 2004a. “Estimating the Social Return to Higher Education:
   Evidence from Longitudinal and Repeated Cross-Sectional Data.”
   Journal of Econometrics 121 (1–2): 175–212.
——–—. 2004b. “Workers’ Education, Spillovers and Productivity:
   Evidence from Plant-Level Production Functions.” American Economic
   Review 94 (3): 656–90.
——–—. 2011. “Local Labor Markets.” In Handbook of Labor Economics,
   vol. 4B, edited by Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, 1237–313.
   London: Elsevier.
——–—. 2012. The New Geography of Jobs. New York: Houghton Mifflin
   Harcourt.
U.S. Census Bureau. 2008. American Community Survey 2008. Washington,
   DC.
6


Entrepreneurship, Public Policy,
and Cities

Joshua Lerner




Since the 2008–09 global financial crisis, interest among policy mak-
ers in promoting innovative, high-potential ventures has exploded.
The emerging great hubs of entrepreneurial activity—like Bangalore,
Dubai, Shanghai, Silicon Valley, Singapore, and Tel Aviv—bear the
unmistakable stamp of the public sector. Enlightened government
intervention played a key role in each region’s emergence. But for
each effective government intervention, dozens, even hundreds, dis-
appointed, with substantial public spending bearing no fruit.
   This scenario might lead one to conclude that the public sector’s
pursuit of entrepreneurial growth is a massive casino where bets are
made with few guarantees of good returns. Perhaps there are no les-
sons to learn from the success or failure of programs to stimulate
entrepreneurial activity. The truth, however, is that the disappoint-
ing outcomes of many government efforts to promote venture and
entrepreneurial activity were all too predictable. These efforts shared
flaws that doomed them virtually from the start. The same flaws have
150 Entrepreneurship, Public Policy, and Cities


appeared the world over—from Europe and the United States to the
newly emerging economies.
    Fast-growing entrepreneurs—and the investors who fund them—
have attracted more attention both in the popular press and from
policy makers, who see them as having played a large role in creat-
ing new industries and revitalizing economies. Many countries have
launched efforts to encourage entrepreneurial activity. This attention
will likely intensify as countries seek to overcome the deleterious
effects of the credit crunch and its recessionary effects.
    This chapter sheds light on how governments can avoid mistakes
in stimulating entrepreneurship. In recent decades, efforts have
increased to provide the world’s poorest with financing and other
assistance to facilitate their entry into entrepreneurship or the growth
of their small ventures. These are typically subsistence businesses
offering services like snack preparation or clothing repair. Such busi-
nesses typically allow business owners and their families to get by, but
little else. The public policy literature—along with academic studies
of new ventures—often does not distinguish among the types of
businesses being studied.
    We will focus here exclusively on high-potential new ventures and
the policies that enhance them. This choice, not intended to dimin-
ish the importance of efforts to boost microenterprises, reflects the
complexity of the field: the dynamics and issues involving microfirms
are quite different from those of their high-potential counterparts.1
A substantial literature suggests that promising entrepreneurial firms
can have a powerful effect in transforming industries and promoting
innovation.

The importance of entrepreneurial innovation

The world has an enormous appetite for growth. And the need for
growth leads inexorably to a hunger for innovation. The United
States and other developed countries are confronting a grim eco-
nomic calculus: huge unfunded liabilities, plus a lack of economic
growth, portend a much bleaker future.
   In the United States today, public spending and ongoing deficits
push the limits of sustainability. And the official balance sheets, if
anything, understate the problem: unfunded liabilities, not reflected
                                                     Joshua Lerner   151


on the government’s official balance sheet, for the two main health-
care entitlement programs alone, Medicare and Medicaid, are an
estimated $58 trillion (Meeker 2011).
   Nor do these problems show any signs of easing: recent
Congressional Budget Office estimates show the U.S. govern-
ment running a deficit until at least 2080 (U.S. Congress 2011).
Meanwhile, persistently high unemployment drains the limited
resources for social services and shrinks the tax base. The situation
in other advanced economies might be worse: Japan, the United
Kingdom, and the Eurozone face a toxic mixture of low growth, huge
debts, and high unemployment.
   The quick fix, of course, is to simply cut costs—whether wasteful
public programs or excessive entitlements. But this strategy—however
necessary in some cases—is not as effective as some would have you
believe. As in a number of countries, excessive spending cuts may
actually perpetuate the downturns that caused the financial crisis,
depressing growth and sapping consumer confidence.
   This dilemma is not confined to the developed world. Emerging
economies have come under enormous stresses and face social unrest
and outright revolution. In many cases, uneven economic progress
has been a key driver of discontent—as growth has not been substan-
tial or widely distributed.
   Economic growth leads to more working people and fewer unem-
ployed, more tax revenue, and a great easing of pressures. And there
are essentially two ways to achieve such growth, at least in advanced
economies that cannot simply imitate breakthroughs elsewhere. One
is simply to add more inputs: having workers, for instance, retire
later or run plants for longer hours. But this strategy is a game of
diminishing returns: countries can only push people so far to work
longer and harder. Nor, in a world of diminishing resources, is it clear
that producing more is always desirable.
   The alternative route is much more appealing: to get more out of
existing inputs through innovation. Such innovation can take many
forms, from new goods and services to new production processes to
improved organization and management. The pioneering work of
Moses Abramowitz and Robert Solow in the 1950s (Abramowitz
1956; Solow 1957) finds that technological change is critical to eco-
nomic growth: innovation has not just made our lives longer and
152 Entrepreneurship, Public Policy, and Cities


more comfortable but has made us richer as well. Many studies have
documented the strong connection between technological discover-
ies and economic prosperity across countries and over time. This
relationship is strongest in advanced countries—that is, those that
cannot rely on copying others or on a rapidly increasing population
to spur growth.
    Technological innovation is also critical for tackling the many
challenges the world will likely face over the next decades: envi-
ronmental degradation, global warming, proliferating pandemics,
and terrorism, just to name a few. Our responses—many requiring
advances in science and engineering—will shape our future and that
of our children.
    Moreover, there appears to be a strong relationship between
entrepreneurship and innovation. The role of start-ups in emerging
industries has been highlighted in both case studies and system-
atic research. Acs and Audretsch (1988) found that new, small firms
developed more than half the 20th century’s most important inno-
vations. But the contribution of small firms was not central in all
industries. Rather, their role was a function of industry conditions—
greatest in immature industries in which market power was relatively
unconcentrated.
    What explains the apparent advantage of smaller firms? Much of
it stems from the difficulty of large firms in fomenting innovation.
Using extensive case study evidence, Jewkes et al. (1958) note that:

   It is erroneous to suppose that those techniques of large-scale
   operation and administration, which have produced such remarkable
   results in some branches of industrial manufacture, can be applied
   with equal success to efforts to foster new ideas. The two kinds of
   organization are subject to quite different laws. In the one case the
   aim is to achieve smooth, routine, and faultless repetition, in the
   other to break through the bonds of routine and of accepted ideas.
   So that large research organizations can perhaps more easily become
   self-stultifying than any other type of large organization, since in a
   measure they are trying to organize what is least organizable.

   But this observation still begs a question. What explains the diffi-
culties of larger firms in creating true innovations? Answers explored
                                                      Joshua Lerner   153


in recent work include at least three reasons entrepreneurial ventures
are more innovative.
   The first has to do with incentives. Normally, firms provide incen-
tives to many types of employees, from salespeople to waiters. Yet
large firms are notorious for offering employees little more than a
gold watch for major discoveries. Why would the design of incentive
systems for innovative tasks differ from that for mundane tasks? The
weak incentives in large firms may reflect the inherent riskiness and
unpredictability of innovative projects, their length and complexity,
and the number of parties that could make crucial contributions.
Whatever the reason, there is a striking contrast between the very
limited incentives at large corporate labs and the stock-option-heavy
compensation packages at start-ups.
   Second, large firms may simply become ineffective at innovating.
Incumbent firms frequently have blind spots that stem from their
single-minded focus on existing customers.2 As a result, new entrants
can identify and exploit market opportunities that the established
leaders fail to see.
   Finally, new firms may choose riskier projects. New firms are more
likely to pursue high-risk strategies, while established firms rationally
choose more conventional approaches (see, for instance, Aron and
Lazear 1990). So while small firms fail more frequently, they are more
likely to introduce more innovative products. New firms are better
at creating new software categories, while established firms have a
comparative advantage in extending existing product lines (Prusa
and Schmitz Jr. 1994).
   So it might be clear why governments would want to promote
entrepreneurship, but why the frequent emphasis on venture funds?
The answer lies in the challenges facing many start-ups, which often
require substantial capital. A firm’s founder may not have the funds
to finance these projects alone, and so must seek outside financing.
Entrepreneurial firms with significant intangible assets expect years
of negative earnings, have uncertain prospects, and are unlikely to
receive bank loans or other debt financing. Venture capital—as inde-
pendently managed, dedicated pools of capital that focus on equity
or equity-linked investments in private, high-growth companies—can
help alleviate these problems.
154 Entrepreneurship, Public Policy, and Cities


    Typically, these investors do not primarily invest their own capi-
tal. They usually raise the bulk of their funds from institutions and
individuals. Large institutional investors, such as pension funds and
university endowments, are likely to want investments in their port-
folio that have the potential to generate high yields, such as venture
capital, and typically do not mind placing a substantial amount of
capital in investments that cannot be liquidated for extended peri-
ods. Often, these groups have neither the staff nor the expertise to
make such investments themselves, so they invest in partnerships
sponsored by venture capital funds, which in turn provide the funds
to young firms.
    We will explore efforts to promote the growth of high-potential
entrepreneurial ventures, as well as the venture capitalists that fund
them. While the public sector is important in stimulating these
activities, far too often public programs have not met their goals.
Many of these disappointments could have been avoided, however, if
the leaders had taken some simple steps in designing and implement-
ing these efforts.

The role of the public sector

If we have heard too many pronouncements of Silicon Valley leaders,
we might begin with the view that the government has nothing to
contribute to new ventures (see, for instance, Rodgers 2000). Is this
not the realm of heroic entrepreneurs and investors, as far removed
from government bureaucrats as imaginable?
   The history of Silicon Valley and several of the pioneering venture
capital groups suggests that reality is far more complex than some of
our more libertarian entrepreneur friends might have us believe. In
each case, the government’s catalyzing role was critical in stimulating
the growth of the region, sector, or firm.
   This is not to minimize the miscues along the way. There were many
challenges with these efforts: Silicon Valley’s pioneers labored with a
stop-and-start pattern of government funding: wartimes would see
a surge in funding for research and procurement that would just as
soon disappear when hostilities ended (see Leslie and Kargon 1996;
Saxenien 1994; and especially Sturgeon 2000). And in their early
years, the founders of pioneering venture groups, such as American
                                                      Joshua Lerner   155


Research and Development and 3i, did not clearly distinguish social
goals from financial objectives, leading to a muddled mission and
confused investors (Ante 2008; Liles 1978).
    Despite these caveats, it seems clear that the role of the public
sector—or, in the case of American Research and Development,
individuals operating with a broader social framework in mind—has
proven critical for catalyzing growth.
    To be sure, entrepreneurial markets allow us to make a credible
intellectual case for a natural government role in encouraging their
evolution. Entrepreneurship is a business with increasing returns. Put
another way, establishing a start-up is far easier with 10 other entre-
preneurs nearby. Firm founders and venture capitalists benefit from
their peers. For instance, if entrepreneurs are active in the market,
investors, employees, lawyers, data providers, and the wider capital
markets are likely to know about the venturing process and what it
takes in terms of strategy, financing, support, and exit mechanisms.
In entrepreneurship and venture capital, the actions of any one
group are likely to have positive spillovers—or “externalities”—for
their peers.
    Examples abound of government intervention triggering the
growth of a venture capital sector. For instance, the U.S. Small
Business Investment Company (SBIC) led to the formation of the
infrastructure for much of the modern venture capital industry (Bean
2001; Liles 1978; Noone and Rubel 1970). Many of the early ven-
ture capital funds and leading intermediaries—such as lawyers and
data providers—began as organizations oriented to SBIC funds and
then gradually shifted their focus to independent venture capitalists.
Similarly, public programs played an important role in triggering
the explosive growth of virtually every other major venture market
around the globe.
    But at least two well-documented problems can derail govern-
ment intervention programs. First, the programs can simply get it
wrong, allocating funds and support in an inept or, even worse, a
counterproductive manner. Competent programs are more common
in wealthier countries with more heterogeneous populations and an
English legal tradition.
    A second problem, delineated in the theory of regulatory capture,3
is that private and public sector entities will line up to capture direct
156 Entrepreneurship, Public Policy, and Cities


and indirect subsidies that the public sector hands out. For instance,
programs geared toward boosting nascent entrepreneurs might
instead end up boosting cronies of the country’s rulers or legislators.
   There is no shortage of examples of both problems in the history
of public venturing programs:

• In its haste to roll out the SBIC program in the early 1960s, the
  U.S. Small Business Administration chartered—and financed—
  hundreds of funds whose managers were incompetent or crooked.
• The incubators taking part in Australia’s 1999 Building on
  Information Technology and Strengths program frequently cap-
  tured the lion’s share of the subsidies meant for entrepreneurs by
  forcing the young firms to purchase their own overpriced services.
• Malaysia opened a massive BioValley complex in 2005 with little
  forethought as to whether there would be any demand for it. The
  facility soon became known as the “Valley of the Bio-Ghosts.”
• In the 1980s, the British Labor and Conservative governments
  subsidized and gave exclusive rights to publicly funded biotech-
  nologies to the firm Celltech, whose management team was inca-
  pable of exploiting those resources.
• Norway squandered much of its oil wealth in the 1970s and 1980s
  propping up failing ventures and funding ill-conceived new busi-
  nesses begun by relatives of parliamentarians and bureaucrats.

Strategies and their limitations

Policies that governments employ to encourage venture capital and
entrepreneurial activities take two forms: those that ensure an eco-
nomic environment conducive to entrepreneurial activity and ven-
ture capital investments; and those that invest directly in companies
and funds.
   First, it is necessary to ensure that entrepreneurship is attractive.
Often, in their eagerness to get to the “fun stuff” of handing out
money, public leaders neglect to set the table—to create a favorable
environment.
   Making entrepreneurship attractive will likely have several dimen-
sions. Ensuring that creative ideas can move easily from universities
and government laboratories is critical. But many entrepreneurs
                                                     Joshua Lerner   157


come not from academia but from corporate positions, and studies
have documented that the attractiveness of entrepreneurial activ-
ity for these individuals is very sensitive to tax policy. Also impor-
tant is ensuring that the law allows firms to enter into the needed
contracts—for instance, with a potential financier or a source of
technology—and that these contracts can be enforced. Finally,
education will likely be critical. Ensuring that business and technol-
ogy students are exposed to entrepreneurship classes will allow them
to make more informed decisions, and creating training opportuni-
ties in entrepreneurship for mid-career professionals will also likely
pay dividends.
   Second, it is important to ensure that international investors find
the country or province attractive for investment. In most entre-
preneurial hubs emerging in the past two decades, international
investors, not domestic institutions, have made the critical early
investments. These investors are likely to have the depth of knowl-
edge and experience that enables them to make large bets on the most
promising organizations. But these players are likely to be reluctant
to take part if regulatory conditions are not up to global standards,
or if there are substantial concerns about the ability of investors to
exit investments. Reaching out to interested and skilled individuals
overseas—most often, expatriate entrepreneurs—can also provide a
source of capital and expertise.
   A final important—though very challenging—role for govern-
ment is to intervene directly in the entrepreneurial process. As noted,
government programs must be designed thoughtfully to be sensitive
to the private sector’s needs and the market’s dictates. Because of the
“increasing returns” nature of entrepreneurship, these efforts can play
an important role in an industry’s early days.
   At the same time, governments must avoid the common pitfalls of
public venture initiatives. I divide these pitfalls into two categories:
conceptual issues, which doom a program from its very start, and
implementation issues, which create problems as the programs enter
operation.
   One common conceptual problem is to ignore the realities of
the entrepreneurial process. For instance, many public venture
capital initiatives are abandoned after a few years: the programs’
designers apparently did not understand that these initiatives take
158 Entrepreneurship, Public Policy, and Cities


many years to bear fruit. Others have added requirements—such
as the stipulation that portfolio companies focus only on explicitly
“precommercial” research—that, while seemingly reasonable from
a public policy perspective, run counter to the entrepreneurial
process. In other cases, reasonable programs have been created that
are too tiny to have any impact or so large that they swamp already
existing funds.
   A second common conceptual problem is to ignore the market’s
dictates. Far too often, government officials have sought to encour-
age funding in industries or geographic regions with a lack of
private interest. Whether driven by political considerations or hubris,
these efforts have wasted resources. Effective programs address this
problem by demanding that credible private sector players provide
matching funds.
   These broad conceptual problems can doom a program even
before it starts. But there are also plenty of pitfalls once programs
begin. One common implementation problem is not worrying about
incentives. Participants in public schemes to promote entrepreneur-
ship can do well regardless of whether the program meets the public
sector’s objectives. In many instances, they do well even if the com-
panies go belly up. The contrast with the best practices among private
investors, in which incentives are commonly given scrupulous atten-
tion, could not be more striking. Public initiative managers should
pay more attention to what will happen in various scenarios and how
incentives can lead to problematic behavior.
   Another implementation pitfall is the absence of appropriate eval-
uation mechanisms. Ideally, programs will undergo careful scrutiny
at two levels. First, each program will be carefully analyzed. While
recognizing that any initiative will take time to bear fruit, it is impor-
tant to periodically take stock of what appears to be working and
what is not. Second, fund managers and firms participating in the
programs should also be scrutinized. It is important to ensure that
the groups benefiting from these programs show the most promising
market performance and have the most potential to benefit, rather
than simply being most adept at garnering public funds.
   A final common implementation issue is to ignore the inter-
national nature of the entrepreneurial process. In today’s global
venture industry, limited partners’ capital commitments, venture
                                                    Joshua Lerner   159


capitalists’ investments, and entrepreneurial firms’ spending increas-
ingly flow across borders and continents. To attempt to build a local
entrepreneurial sector and venture capital industry without strong
global ties is a recipe for an irrelevant sector without much economic
impact. Yet in many instances, international participation is actively
discouraged.

Research and case study findings on program outcomes

Many policy makers suggest that they are interested primarily in
enhancing the growth and dynamism of entrepreneurial companies
in their region as a lever for overall regional or national economic
performance. A few policy levers are consistent with achieving that
objective.

Remember that entrepreneurial activity does not exist in
a vacuum
Entrepreneurs depend heavily on their partners. Without lawyers to
negotiate agreements, marketing gurus and engineers to work for low
wages and a handful of stock options, and customers to take a chance
on young firms, new ventures are unlikely to grow. But despite the
importance of the entrepreneurial environment, government officials
often hand out money without considering the other barriers
entrepreneurs face. This behavior is unlikely to address the problems
of young firms. In some cases, crucial aspects of the entrepreneurial
environment may initially seem tangential, such as robust public
markets for young firms to spur venture investment. Singapore took
a broader view, addressing not just a lack of capital but also the many
other barriers impeding the creation of a productive arena in which
entrepreneurs can operate.

Leverage the local academic scientific and research base
more effectively
One precondition of entrepreneurship deserves special mention: in
many regions, the low level of entrepreneurial activity and venture
capital financing does not match the strength of the scientific and
160 Entrepreneurship, Public Policy, and Cities


research base. The role of technology transfer offices is critical here.
Effective offices do far more than simply license technologies; they
also work closely to educate nascent academic entrepreneurs and
facilitate introductions to venture investors. It is crucial to build the
capabilities of local technology transfer offices and ensure that both
potential academic entrepreneurs and technology transfer personnel
have opportunities to train in the nature and mechanics of forming
a new firm. All too often, technology transfer offices are encouraged
to maximize the short-term returns from licensing transactions. This
leads to more transactions with established corporations that can
make substantial upfront payments, even though considerable evi-
dence suggests that licensing new technologies to start-ups can yield
substantial returns in the long run, both to the institution and to the
region as a whole. If policy makers are serious about developing an
entrepreneurial sector, they must think seriously about how technol-
ogy is transferred, the incentives offered, and their consequences.

Respect the need for conforming to global standards

It is natural to want to hold onto long-standing approaches in such
matters as securities regulation and taxes. These approaches have
evolved to address specific problems and have proven effective.
Despite the reluctance to change, there is a strong case for adopting
the de facto global standards if a country is serious about promoting
entrepreneurship and venture capital. Global institutional investors
and venture funds will likely be discouraged if the customary part-
nership and preferred stock structures cannot be employed in a given
country. Even if a perfectly good alternative exists, they might be
unwilling to devote the time and resources to explore it. Unless one
is in a country like China—where global investors will feel compelled
to master the system, no matter how complex, because of the size of
the market opportunity—there is much to be said for allowing trans-
actions that conform to the models widely accepted as best practice.

Let the market direct where subsidies should go to stimulate
entrepreneurial and venture activity
Two efforts that have largely met their goals (at least so far) are Israel’s
Yozma program and New Zealand’s Seed Investment Fund. While
                                                    Joshua Lerner   161


these programs differed in their details—the first was geared toward
attracting foreign venture investors while the second encouraged
local, early-stage funds—each used matching funds to determine
where public subsidies should go. In undertaking these efforts, the
following should be kept in mind:

• The right firms or funds will not likely be identified overnight.
  Rather than funding dozens of groups immediately, it makes more
  sense to first fund a handful of entities. As feedback is received
  from the early participants, it may be appropriate to launch a
  second and third batch, or instead to supplement the capital of
  the pioneering firms and funds.
• These initiatives should not compete with independent venture
  funds or engage in the protracted financing of substandard firms
  that cannot raise private financing. It would thus help if these
  efforts, emulating initiatives that have succeeded in the past,
  required a large amount of funds to be raised from non-public
  sources.
• In selecting which venture funds to provide with capital, it
  may be a challenge to interest top-tier venture groups. Rather,
  the expectation should be that a region can attract solid groups
  with a particular interest in industries where there is already real
  local strength.
• In the same spirit, policy makers might cast their net broadly
  in terms of the types of firms and funds they seek to attract. In
  addition to conventional standalone start-up venture funds,
  they might also consider encouraging corporate spin-offs and
  venture funds.
• In encouraging seed companies and groups, extensive interven-
  tion might be needed before these groups should get funding. This
  could entail working closely with the groups to refine strategies,
  recruit more partners (perhaps even from other regions), and
  identify potential investors. Moreover, the firms and groups must
  retain enough “dry powder” not to go belly up once the govern-
  ment subsidies run out. Having the right leader is critical for these
  interventions to be effective.
• Policy makers can encourage success by publicizing in advance
  their evaluation criteria for prospective firms and funds and if the
  criteria are close to those in the private sector.
162 Entrepreneurship, Public Policy, and Cities


Resist “overengineering” entrepreneurship and venture
capital initiatives
Government requirements that limit the flexibility of entrepreneurs
and venture investors can be very detrimental. It is tempting for
policy makers to restrict where firms can operate, the types of securi-
ties that venture investors can use, or the evolution of the firms going
forward (for example, restrictions on acquisitions or secondary sales
of stock). The government should eschew such efforts to microman-
age the entrepreneurial process. While it is natural for firms and
groups receiving subsidies to retain a local presence or to continue
targeting the local region for investments, it can help to minimize
these requirements.

Recognize the long lead times of public venture initiatives
Impatience is one of the common challenges of public entrepreneur-
ship and venture capital initiatives. Building an entrepreneurial sector
is a long-term endeavor. Promising programs must have enough time
to grow. Far too often, promising initiatives have been abandoned on
the basis of incomplete (and often, not the most critical) indicators,
such as low interim rates of return of initial program participants.
Moreover, many politicians have unrealistic expectations about the
likelihood of job growth from these efforts in the short and medium
terms. Young, high-impact firms are no doubt an engine of job cre-
ation, particularly at the regional level.4 But even substantial innova-
tion-driven entrepreneurship might be unable to quickly overcome
a jobs problem. As the last few years have shown, massive layoffs in
automobile manufacturing and construction cannot be solved with
even an extremely well-run biotech incubator. Unrealistic expecta-
tions and little patience—and consequently the creation of rules that
force program participants to focus on short-term returns—are a
recipe for disappointment.

Find the right size for initiatives
Policy makers must walk a fine line in finding the right size for ven-
ture initiatives. Too small a program will probably have little impact
                                                       Joshua Lerner   163


on the challenging environment facing pioneering entrepreneurs
and venture funds. Moreover, inflated expectations might create
a backlash that will make future efforts difficult. But too large a
program risks swamping the local markets. The imbalance between
plentiful capital and limited opportunities could introduce patholo-
gies. Consider the Canadian labor fund program. It not only backed
mostly incompetent groups that did little to spur entrepreneur-
ship but also crowded out some of the most knowledgeable local
investors.

Understand global connections

Entrepreneurship and venture capital are increasingly emerging as
global enterprises. This evolution has two important consequences.
First, no matter how eager policy makers are to encourage activity in
their own backyard, they must realize that to meet their goals, firms
must have a greater international presence. Restricting firms to local
hiring and manufacturing are likely to be profoundly self-defeating.
Second, to promote successful firms, it can help to involve foreign
investors as much as possible. Substantial benefits can come to local
companies in relationships with funds that are based elsewhere but
that invest capital locally. Moreover, initial investments that do well
will attract more foreign capital. In addition, local affiliates of a fund
based elsewhere—having developed an attractive track record—will
gain the credibility they need to raise their own funds. That said,
when using public funds to subsidize activities by overseas parties,
these entrepreneurs and groups should commit to recruiting local
personnel and reveal the extent to which the partners based elsewhere
will manage the local groups.

Institutionalize careful evaluations of these initiatives

In the rush to succeed, many policy makers make no provision for
evaluating their efforts. The future of these initiatives should be
determined by the extent to which they meet their goals, rather
than other considerations (such as the vehemence with which pro-
gram supporters argue for their continuation). Careful program
164 Entrepreneurship, Public Policy, and Cities


evaluations will lead to better decisions. These evaluations should
consider not just the participating funds and companies but also the
broader context, including:

• Gathering and publicizing accurate data on the extent of high-
  potential entrepreneurship and formal and informal venture capital
  activity. Some of this information can be collected immediately;
  other information can be gathered only after some activity. These
  data will be important not only for program evaluations but also
  to publicize the growing size and dynamism of the local venture
  market to prospective investors.
• Comparing publicly supported firms and venture groups with
  their peers to determine the difference the program has made.
• Tracking the performance of the companies that are and are not
  participating in the program, including not just financial returns
  but also such elements as sales and employment growth.

   The evaluators might also consider whether it would be feasible
to randomize at least some awards, or explore the use of regression
discontinuity analysis in the evaluations.

Realize that the programs to promote entrepreneurship and
innovation need creativity and flexibility
Many public venture initiatives are like the villain in a horror
film—as much as one tries, they cannot be killed off. Their seeming
immortality reflects the capture problem discussed above: powerful
vested interests soon coalesce behind these initiatives, making them
impossible to get rid of. The countries that have had the public
programs with the greatest impacts, on the other hand, have been
willing to substitute new incentives for programs not doing well.
They have also been willing to end programs because they are too
successful—they have met their goals and thus no longer need public
funding. Moreover, program rules may have to evolve, even if it
means eliminating important classes of participants. If government is
going to be promoting entrepreneurship, it needs some of the same
qualities itself.
                                                     Joshua Lerner   165


Recognize that “agency problems” are universal, and take steps
to minimize their danger

The temptations of directing public subsidies in problematic
ways are not confined to any region, political system, or ethnicity.
While we might wish that humanity would commit to maximizing
the public welfare, more selfish interests are all too common. In
designing public programs to promote venture capital and entre-
preneurship, limiting the possibilities for such behavior is clearly
essential. Defining and adhering to clear strategies and procedures
for venture initiatives, creating a “firewall” between elected officials
and program administrators, and carefully assessing the programs
can help limit these interests.

Make education a greater part of the mix

It helps if there is an emphasis on education, with at least three
dimensions:

• The first is building outsiders’ understanding of the local market’s
  potential. A lack of information is one of the critical barriers to
  venture investment in a country. Visiting a racetrack for the first
  time, it is nice to know whether the track favors front-runners or
  late closers and who the hot local jockeys are. In the same way,
  institutions often feel much more comfortable investing if they
  can access information about the level of entrepreneurial activity
  in local markets, the outcomes of the investments, and so forth.
  An important role for government is to gather this information
  directly or to encourage (and perhaps fund) a local trade associa-
  tion to do so.
• Second, in many emerging venture markets, some entrepreneurs
  have a great deal of confidence but little understanding of the
  expectations of top-tier private investors, potential strategic part-
  ners, and investment bankers. The more that can be done to fill
  these knowledge gaps, the better.
• Finally, a broad understanding in the public sector of the chal-
  lenges of entrepreneurial and venture capital development is very
166 Entrepreneurship, Public Policy, and Cities


   helpful. In many instances, policy makers have made expensive
   errors in promoting these activities out of a lack of understanding
   of how markets really work.

Less-consistent approaches

Not all suggestions are good. Some are heard frequently—indeed,
touted by consultants and intermediaries—but do not align with the
global evidence on the right steps to build an entrepreneurial sector
or venture capital industry.
   Local entrepreneurs and venture investors frequently demand that
local pools of government funds—whether sovereign funds owned
by the states or pension funds for public employees—be allocated
largely to domestic entrepreneurs or venture funds. This suggestion,
while initially plausible, is problematic for several reasons:

• The creation of dynamic markets appears to be driven largely by
  global private equity limited partners, not local players. Early-
  stage venture funds—assuming that they can develop a good track
  record—are likely to attract considerable interest from institu-
  tional investors. By directing funds to local groups that cannot
  raise money, governments are likely to be rewarding precisely the
  groups that do not deserve funds.
• As highlighted above, public programs are in real danger of flood-
  ing the market with far more capital than they can reasonably
  deploy. Such well-intentioned steps can actually end up hurting
  entrepreneurs and venture capitalists.
• It flies in the face of the principle that public venture capital funds
  should rely on the market to identify attractive opportunities,
  rather than mandating activity. While it is hoped that local pen-
  sion and investment funds will eventually play an important role
  here, it should be at a pace comfortable for them.

   A second, less-helpful suggestion is the common demand for pro-
visions that would give investors an immediate tax deduction when
a venture capital investment is made. A frequently cited model is the
CAPCO program, pioneered in Louisiana and adopted by a number
of other states. Unfortunately, these efforts have met few of their
                                                    Joshua Lerner   167


goals. This suggestion, while initially appealing, raises concerns for
two reasons:

• The evidence suggests that tax policy encourages venture capital
  primarily through the demand side: the incentive that entrepre-
  neurs have to (typically) quit their salaried jobs and begin a new
  firm instead. Little evidence suggests that tax policy can dramati-
  cally affect the supply of venture capital by the types of sophis-
  ticated institutional investors that provide capital to the world’s
  leading venture industries. Indeed, many dominant venture
  capital investors—such as pension funds and endowments—are
  tax-exempt in most countries.
• One of the powerful features of the venture capital process is the
  alignment of incentives. No one—whether limited partner, ven-
  ture capitalist, or entrepreneur—achieves substantial gains until
  the company is sold or goes public. Economists argue that such
  an alignment keeps everyone focused and minimizes the danger
  of strategic behavior that benefits one party but hurts the firm.5
  Giving substantial tax incentives at the time of the investment
  could distort this alignment of incentives.

   A third suggestion that raises concerns is relying on an outside
investment firm to manage a fund-of-funds for that locale. It has
been tried in a number of American states but is problematic for
several reasons:

• The fees charged by these intermediaries are often substantial.
  These services, while they might appear small (only 1 percent of
  capital under management), often end up eating a huge fraction
  of the returns.
• The investments by the intermediary might not be driven primar-
  ily by the local government’s priorities. Intermediary fees can also
  create incentives to do deals for the intermediary’s own sake, rather
  than taking the steps that advance the mission of the fund. Thus,
  a financial institution may be tempted to put the money to work
  quickly so it can raise another fund (and generate more fees).
• There may be funds that the intermediary has a “special relation-
  ship” with (for example, an investment bank’s fundraising group
168 Entrepreneurship, Public Policy, and Cities


   may be gathering capital for that group). In these instances,
   divided loyalties will come into play, and the government’s best
   interests might not be served. It is thus no surprise that U.S. states
   that have tried such efforts have seen only very limited growth in
   their venture industries.

    Another persistent theme—perhaps the hardest to resist—is the
desirability of blindly duplicating programs and incentives provided
elsewhere. For instance, many Persian Gulf states have borrowed
concepts from Dubai, even if the very fact that the strategies worked
for Dubai means that they are less likely to work elsewhere (such as
the creation of a major air travel hub).
    Moreover, there has been a strong temptation to emulate even
ill-considered programs. For instance, despite having been widely
emulated, incentive schemes in other regions that gave large tax
benefits to those investing in entrepreneurial firms have typically not
met policy makers’ goals in promoting entrepreneurship. Similarly,
we have seen that the widely adopted strategy of instructing local
pension fund managers to make economically targeted investments
with employees’ funds has had mixed results.
    Ill-considered steps to promote entrepreneurship and venture
capital can be profoundly distorting, attracting inexperienced opera-
tors and leading to ill-fated investments. The resulting poisonous
legacy can discourage legitimate investors from entering the market
for years to come and set back the creation of a healthy industry.
So, tempting as it is to match these investment incentives offered by
others, if a strategy appears ill considered, it is best avoided.

Final thoughts

The quest to encourage venture activity can seem like a sideshow
among governments’ many responsibilities, from waging war to
ensuring the stability of major financial institutions. Certainly, the
annual spending on public venture capital programs—while substan-
tial in absolute terms—pales in comparison to defense and health
care spending. But the picture changes when looking at the long-term
consequences of policies that facilitate or hinder the development of
a venture sector—that is, a vital entrepreneurial climate’s impact on
                                                     Joshua Lerner   169


national prosperity. In the long run, the significance of these policies
looms much larger.
   In many cases, there is likely to be a government role in stimulat-
ing a vibrant entrepreneurial sector, given the early stage of maturity
of these activities in most countries. But it is easy for the govern-
ment to overstep and squander its investments in this arena. Only by
designing a program that reflects an understanding of, and a willing-
ness to listen to, the entrepreneurial process can government efforts
be effective.
   There is also a great need for more academic research in this area.
The paucity of research reflects in part the fact that these programs
are difficult to evaluate. In undertaking these assessments, one has
to ask what would have happened without the subsidies. This may
seem pretty daunting: we need to look inside a crystal ball and figure
out what would have happened in the parallel universe in which the
program did not exist.
   Of course, a lack of research is a problem in many fields, whether
evaluating new pedagogical approaches or testing new pharmaceu-
ticals. By conducting randomized trials, in which some otherwise
undeserving entities are selected for awards while some otherwise
deserving entities are passed over, the impact of the program can be
understood. The entrepreneurs who receive awards but are below the
cut-off score, and those who are above the line but do not receive
awards, are compared with their peers to get a sense of the program’s
impacts. In this way, any unobserved differences between the entre-
preneurs who received awards and the controls are eliminated. That
the entrepreneurs who take part in a government program do better
than their peers does not mean the program has made a difference.
Rather, the applicants could have been disproportionately the best
and the brightest entrepreneurs, smart enough to learn about the
program and find the time to fill out the application. Moreover, if
there is a competition for the awards, the screening process should
pick out the better groups.
   Yet such trials—however widely adopted in other areas—remain
quite rare when assessing public efforts to promote entrepreneurship.
A frequent objection to randomization is that it is wrong to know-
ingly give public money to an inferior entrepreneur. While we have
long been comfortable with the use of randomized trials in medical
170 Entrepreneurship, Public Policy, and Cities


research, in which one set of cancer patients gets the experimental
drug and another gets the traditional treatment, the introduction of
random choices in economic settings makes many leaders nervous.
Whatever the merits of their reluctance, it has blocked attempts to
use randomization while assessing public venturing programs.
   Fortunately, there is an alternative: regression discontinuity analy-
ses. This type of analysis accounts for the fact that when program
managers assess potential participants, there will always be some
applications that fall just above the cut-off or just below. By compar-
ing these entrepreneurs or venture funds, which are likely to be very
similar except that some were chosen for the program and others not,
one can get a good sense of the program’s impact without a random-
ization procedure. As Adam Jaffe, one of the most vocal advocates
of better evaluation approaches, has observed: “I and others have
previously harped on randomization as the ‘gold standard’ for pro-
gram evaluation. I now believe that [regression discontinuity] design
represents a better tradeoff between statistical benefits and resistance
to implementation” (Jaffe 2002). But even getting access to data on
rejected applicants can be a sensitive process. Getting better research
will require that policy makers be more open to policy experiments;
it will also take academics willing to work with government officials
to address their concerns.
   While these critical issues can seem arcane and technical, well-
considered—or misguided—policies are likely to profoundly influence
our opportunities, as well as those of our children and grandchildren.
However challenging the encouragement of entrepreneurship might
seem, it is too important to be left entirely to policy specialists.

Notes
 1. For a discussion of these issues, see Schoar (2010).
 2. The first example of arguments along these lines I am aware of is
    Foster (1986).
 3. The articulation of this model in the economics literature is frequently
    attributed to Olson (1965) and Stigler (1971), and its formal modeling
    to Peltzman (1976) and Becker (1983).
 4. See earlier papers in this series, most recently Haltiwanger (2012).
 5. For a detailed review of the academic literature, see Gompers and
    Lerner (2004).
                                                          Joshua Lerner   171


Bibliography
Abramowitz, Morris. 1956. “Resource and Output Trends in the United
    States since 1870.” American Economic Review 46: 5–23.
Acs, Zoltan J., and David B. Audretsch. 1988. “Innovation in Large and
    Small Firms: An Empirical Analysis.” American Economic Review 78:
    678–90.
Ante, Spencer. 2008. Creative Capital: Georges Doriot and the Birth of Venture
    Capital. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Aron, Debra J., and Edward P. Lazear. 1990. “The Introduction of New
    Products.” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 80: 421–26.
Bean, Jonathan J. 2001. Big Government and Affirmative Action: The
    Scandalous History of the Small Business Administration. Lexington, KY:
    University Press of Kentucky.
Becker, Gary S. 1983. “A Theory of Competition among Pressure Groups
    for Political Influence.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 98: 371–400.
Foster, Richard N. 1986. Innovation: The Attackers’ Advantage. London:
    Macmillan.
Gompers, Paul, and Joshua Lerner. 2004. The Venture Capital Cycle. 2nd ed.
    Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Haltiwanger, John. 2012. “Job Creation and Firm Dynamics in the U.S.”
    Innovation Policy and the Economy 12: 17–38.
Jaffe, Adam B. 2002. “Building Program Evaluation into the Design of
    Public Research Support Programs.” Oxford Review of Economic Policy
    18: 22–34.
Jewkes, John, David Sawers, and Richard Stillerman. 1958. The Sources of
    Invention. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Leslie, Stuart W., and Robert H. Kargon. 1996. “Selling Silicon Valley:
    Frederick Terman’s Model for Regional Advantage.” Business History
    Review 70: 435–72.
Liles, Patrick R. 1978. Sustaining the Venture Capital Firm. Cambridge, MA:
    Management Analysis Center.
Meeker, Mary. 2011. USA Inc. A Basic Summary of America’s Financial
    Statements. Menlo Park, CA: Kleiner, Perkins, Caufield, & Byers.
Noone, Charles M., and Stanley M. Rubel. 1970. SBICs: Pioneers in
    Organized Venture Capital. Chicago: Capital Publishing.
Olson, Mancur. 1965. The Logic of Collective Action. Cambridge, MA:
    Harvard University Press.
Peltzman, Sam. 1976. “Towards a More General Theory of Regulation.”
    Journal of Law and Economics 19: 211–40.
172 Entrepreneurship, Public Policy, and Cities


Prusa, Thomas J., and James A. Schmitz Jr. 1994. “Can Companies Maintain
   Their Initial Innovation Thrust? A Study of the PC Software Industry.”
   Review of Economics and Statistics 76: 523–40.
Rodgers, T. J. 2000. Why Silicon Valley Should Not Normalize Relations with
   Washington D.C. Washington, DC: Cato Institute.
Saxenien, Annalee. 1994. Regional Advantage: Culture and Competition in
   Silicon Valley and Route 128. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Schoar, Antoinette. 2010. “The Divide between Subsistence and Trans-
   formational Entrepreneurship.” Innovation Policy and the Economy 10:
   57–81.
Solow, Robert M. 1957. “Technical Change and the Aggregate Production
   Function.” Review of Economics and Statistics 39: 312–20.
Stigler, George. 1971. “The Economic Theory of Regulation.” Bell Journal
   of Economics 2: 3–21.
Sturgeon, Timothy J. 2000. “How Silicon Valley Came to Be.” In
   Understanding the Silicon Valley: Anatomy of an Entrepreneurial Region,
   edited by Martin Kenney. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
U.S. Congress. 2011. “CBO’s 2011 Long-Term Budget Outlook.”
   Congressional Budget Office, Washington, DC. http://www.cbo.gov/
   ftpdocs/122xx/doc12212/06-21-Long-Term_Budget_Outlook.pdf.
7


Urbanization and (In)Formalization

Ejaz Ghani and Ravi Kanbur




Inexorable urbanization and formalization have been the expectations
in development discourse. The two are expected to proceed hand in
hand. Indeed, measures of urbanization and formalization have been
proposed and used as indicators of development. But while urbaniza-
tion has proceeded apace in developing countries, formalization has
slowed significantly over the past quarter century. This disconnect
raises questions for development analysis and development policy.
Why did we expect urbanization and formalization to go together
in the first place? Is the link between urbanization and formalization
more complex than what we had once thought? What then explains
the recent disconnect between urbanization and formalization? Is
formalization a reasonable policy goal? Might urbanization policies
and formalization policies conflict? If so, what can be done to resolve
the conflicts? These are the questions this chapter addresses.
    The chapter has three core sections. The first section asks what
exactly is meant by formality and informality. It argues that part of the
policy confusion on urbanization and formalization arises from the
many concepts of informality that abound—ranging from poverty
itself, through the small scale of enterprise and a lack of maintained
174 Urbanization and (In)Formalization


written accounts, to whether laws and regulations are complied
with. Proposing a definition of formality that relates activity to state
regulation, the chapter also asks why formalization may have stalled
and why informal sectors are large.
    The second section turns to urbanization processes and asks how
they intersect with and interact with the incentives to formalize.
It argues that there are two standard mindsets in development
discourse—one that expects urbanization to lead to formalization and
one that expects urbanization to be associated with increased urban
informality. It looks at the origins of these mindsets in the literature
and traces their development to the modern literature. In particular,
it examines how informality is treated in discussions of urbanization,
structural transformation, and agglomeration externalities and finds
that treatment to be somewhat lacking. The section also explores how
countries might attempt to integrate agglomeration, urbanization,
and formalization.
    The third section looks at policy. Each view of how urbanization
feeds formalization has distinctive policy conclusions. Early views
of industrialization—as leading to an inexorable pull of the rural
population into formal employment—saw industrialization, urban-
ization, and formalization as the same thing, to be encouraged by
policy. Later views of rural-urban migration—as leading to a transla-
tion of rural poverty into urban poverty in the informal sector—
coincided with cautions about urbanization and greater support for
rural development. We now find ourselves at a juncture where job
creation and agglomeration benefits make a strong case for urbaniza-
tion as an integral part of development strategy, but concerns about
urban poverty in the informal sector are folded into general concerns
about congestion costs that run counter to such a policy stance. The
section then considers whether any policy packages can harvest
the benefits of density that urbanization can offer, while managing
the downside. The response to urban informality turns out to be an
important part of such a policy package.

Formality: concepts, measurement, and trends

The terms formality and informality are very common in develop-
ment discourse. Technical and policy discussions are replete with
                                        Ejaz Ghani and Ravi Kanbur   175


these terms, and their use dates back several decades, intersecting
with other terms such as “dual economy” or dualism between a
“modern/capitalist” sector and a “traditional” sector. And discussions
of the rural-urban transition also overlap with debates on informality.
Given this attention in the literature, one might expect the evolu-
tion of a clear and consistent conceptualization and measurement
of formality and informality. But as argued in Guha-Khasnobis et
al. (2006) and in Kanbur (2009), we do not find this at all. On
the contrary, a range of concepts and associated measurements
emphasize different features and characteristics. We begin this sec-
tion with a brief overview of how the discourse has evolved in its
various strands.

Concepts

The earliest discussions of a “dual economy” and associated notions
of formality and informality—though these terms were not used
at the time—have elements still present in the mindsets of many
analysts and policy makers. The Dutch anthropologist and colonial
administrator Julius H. Boeke (1943) envisioned a dualism between
activities that came under the jurisdiction of colonial law and the
traditional sphere outside the ambit of these rules and regulations.
The easiest way to capture this mindset is to think of a wall separating
the two domains. On one side of the wall was a domain ordered by
regulations, on the other, a domain that was not, implying disorder
and disorganization. Nearly 50 years later, Elinor Ostrom (1990)
would question vigorously the notion that there was indeed disorder
on the “other side.” Looking more deeply into activities outside the
realm of conventional state regulation, her research revealed carefully
crafted management mechanisms. But the tension between these
perspectives persists to this day.
    The Lewis (1954) model of dualistic development has surprisingly
little to say about state regulations. Instead, the dualism is between
the capitalist mode of production, where profits are maximized and
factor payments are according to marginal product, and a traditional
mode of production, where they are not. In the Lewis perspective,
labor could not be paid its marginal product in the traditional mode
of production because the marginal product of labor was zero—some
176 Urbanization and (In)Formalization


other, “traditional” rules of output allocation applied. Although
this traditional sector has typically been associated with the rural/
agriculture sector in later discussions, it is clear that such a simple
dichotomy was not necessarily what Lewis had in mind. He wrote
about “capitalist agriculture” on plantations and the like, but for him
elements of the “reserve army of labor” could equally be found in
urban settings:

   The phenomenon is not, however, by any means confined to the
   countryside. Another large sector to which it applies is the whole range
   of casual jobs—the workers on the docks, the young men who rush
   forward asking to carry your bag as you appear, the jobbing gardener,
   and the like. These occupations usually have a multiple of the number
   they need, each of them earning very small sums from occasional
   employment; frequently their number could be halved without
   reducing output in this sector. Petty retail trading is also exactly of
   this type. It is enormously expanded in overpopulated economies,
   and each trader makes only a few sales. Markets are crowded with
   stalls, and if the number of stalls were greatly reduced, the consumers
   would be no whit worse off. (Lewis 1954, 2)

   Although Lewis does not use the term “informal sector,” it seems
clear that for him it would be a sector where the marginal product of
labor was close to zero.
   The 1970s saw a flurry of analyses and publications. For econo-
mists, Harris and Todaro (1970) is seminal from a conceptual point
of view. Although it does not use the term formality, it starts by
saying that a key feature of the model is a “politically determined
urban minimum wage at levels substantially higher than agricultural
earnings” (Harris and Todaro 1970, 126). Thus implicit is a sector
that comes under the purview of state regulations, which underpin a
statutory minimum wage. The point for Harris and Todaro (1970),
however, is that this wage is not market clearing. Workers displaced
then end up getting very low earnings in the urban sector—the
“informal” sector. It is this sector that absorbs the excess, and it is this
sector that adjusts. This mindset informs at least some of the policy
discourse on regulations today. Of course, there is also rural-urban
migration in the Harris-Todaro model (see next section).
                                           Ejaz Ghani and Ravi Kanbur    177


   It is generally recognized that anthropologist Keith Hart (1973)
introduced the term “informal sector” to the literature, describing
economic activity in an urban slum in Accra, Ghana:

  The main message of the paper (Hart 1973) was that Accra’s poor
  were not “unemployed.” They worked, often casually, for erratic and
  generally low returns; but they were definitely working… Following
  Weber, I argued that the ability to stabilize economic activity within
  a bureaucratic form made returns more calculable and regular for the
  workers as well as their bosses. That stability was in turn guaranteed
  by the state’s laws, which only extended so far into the depths of
  Ghana’s economy. “Formal” incomes came from regulated economic
  activities, and “informal” incomes, both legal and illegal, lay beyond
  the scope of regulation. I did not identify the informal economy
  with a place or a class or even whole persons. Everyone in Accra,
  but especially the inhabitants of the slum where I lived, tried to
  combine the two sources of income. Informal opportunities ranged
  from market gardening and brewing through every kind of trade to
  gambling, theft, and political corruption. (Hart 2006, 25)

   Hart’s conceptualization echoed International Labour Organi-
zation (ILO) (1972), and subsequent attempts to systematize
the definition of informal activity for national statistical purposes
followed closely the notion that entities recognized by the law were
formal and those not so recognized were informal. ILO (1993,
para. 5) provides the following definition:

  [Informal enterprises] are private unincorporated enterprises …,
  that is, enterprises owned by individuals or households that are not
  constituted as separate legal entities independent of their owners and
  for which no complete accounts are available that would permit a
  financial separation of the production activities of the enterprise from
  the other activities of its owner(s).

Since the 1990s, some have moved to broaden the concept of
informality, from an enterprise-based perspective as given above in
ILO (1993) to a worker-based perspective focused on whether the
worker receives certain mandated protections and benefits from the
employer. The distinction is made between the informal sector and
178 Urbanization and (In)Formalization


the informal economy, the former on an enterprise-based definition,
the latter on a worker-based definition, so as to
  extend the focus to include not only enterprises that are not
  legally regulated but also employment relationships that are not legally
  regulated or protected. In brief, the new definition of the “informal
  economy” focuses on the nature of employment in addition to the
  characteristics of enterprises. (Chen 2006, 76)

Measurement and trends
With so many different concepts of informality and formality, it is no
surprise that getting nationally comparable estimates of informality is
difficult. Even if the basic concept is agreed—for example, registered
enterprises—the detailed specification may vary across countries,
because the registration requirements will vary, too. Estimates by
national authorities may differ from those by international agencies
because of differing definitions and data sources.
    Despite concerns about data and definitions, there is agreement
that the informal sector is large in most developing countries and that
it is the overwhelming employer of labor in the non-agricultural sector.
For developing countries as a group, more than half of all jobs—more
than 900 million workers—are in the informal sector (Jutting and de
Laiglesia 2009). The sector is large not just in employment but also
in number of enterprises. Many more new establishments are created
in the informal sector than in the formal sector.
    Figure 7.1 plots the share of informal employment in total
non-agricultural employment for 50 developing countries against
their per capita incomes, using data from the International Labour
Organization’s Key Indicators of the Labor Market, the Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), and the
World Bank’s World Development Indicators. For these countries
as a group, nearly half of non-agricultural jobs are generated in the
informal sector. In India, the share is much higher, at more than
80 percent. Also high in Sub-Saharan Africa, it is slightly lower in
Latin America, with Brazil at 42 percent and Mexico at more than
50 percent. The lowest share is in Central and Southeastern Europe,
with the share in Poland and the Russian Federation in single digits.
                                              Ejaz Ghani and Ravi Kanbur       179




Figure 7.1   Jobs in developing countries are concentrated in the informal
sectors
Source: ILO 2011; OECD 2009; World Bank 2010.
Note: Chart uses latest available data on informal share of employment for 52 coun-
tries (1995–99 or 2000–07). GDP per capita is in 2005 purchasing power parity
international dollars.



    The relationship between the size of informal sector and devel-
opment in Figure 7.1 slopes down. This stylized cross-section
relationship, established many times in the literature, informs the
mindset that predicts a decline in informality with development.
But notice first a huge dispersion in the cross-country relationship.
Second, however, the cross-section relationship is not found in recent
time series. Figure 7.2 compares the trend over time in the share of
informal employment in total non-agricultural employment for
a dozen developing countries. What is striking is that the size of
informal sector has remained exceptionally persistent. It has not con-
tracted over time. To the contrary, it seems to have increased, with
few exceptions.
    This persistence of informality in the face of inexorable urbaniza-
tion frames the analytical and policy questions in this chapter. The
stubborn resistance to formalization is a challenge to analysts—why
is it happening?—and to policy makers—what, if anything, can and
should be done about it? We turn now to these questions in the next
two sections.
180 Urbanization and (In)Formalization




Figure 7.2 Informal sectors are exceptionally persistent (share of population in
informal employment, earliest and latest data points available)
Source: Government of India, various years; ILO 2011.



Urbanization and the transition to formality

Urbanization is proceeding inexorably in the world; formalization is
not. Kanbur (2011) explores why informality might persist in many
countries despite economic growth. Possible explanations include
looser regulations, weaker enforcement of regulations, and techno-
logical changes that have made it less inefficient to avoid regulations
by operating at a smaller scale. An additional factor could be the
changing gender composition of the labor force (Ghani et al. 2011c).
The focus of this section, however, is on the connections and interac-
tions between urbanization and formalization. Why might we expect
the two to move together at all? Indeed, might there instead be a
more intimate connection between urbanization and informality?
And what does the literature on agglomeration externalities and con-
gestion costs say about the incentives of enterprises to become formal
or to stay informal?
                                        Ejaz Ghani and Ravi Kanbur   181


The traditional literature

This section begins with the traditional literature on dualism and
on the formal/informal divide reviewed in the last section, to see
what different elements of it say about the connections between the
rural-urban transition and the informal-formal transition. In Boeke’s
(1943) view, to the extent that the urban comes under the ambit of
colonial regulation while the rural does not, urbanization is associ-
ated with increased formality. In the Lewis (1954) framework, the
key distinction is between capitalist and non-capitalist modes of
production. As investment takes place in the capitalist (or “modern”)
sector, labor is drawn away from the traditional sector, the pool of
surplus labor. Only if we identify the traditional sector with rural and
the capitalist sector with urban do urbanization and formalization go
together in the Lewis framework. The Hart (1973) framework focuses
on the urban sector and identifies informality as activities outside the
reach of state regulation. In this setting, urbanization would lead to
an increase in informality if rural migrants went disproportionately
into informal activities, as envisioned by Hart. Migration is under-
explored in Hart (1973), though there are suggestions that recent
migrants may be more likely to be in the informal sector.
   The Harris-Todaro framework (1970), in the original and as devel-
oped by many later studies, comes closest to offering the possibility
of a systematic link between rural-urban migration and informality.
Recall that migration in this model takes place in response to the
differential between rural income and expected urban income—the
urban sector offers the probability of employment in the formal
sector, where the wage is set at a high level, but also the one-minus-
this probability of ending up with a very low income in the urban
informal sector. Jobs in the formal sector are rationed, and getting
one of these high-paying jobs is in effect winning a lottery. Losing the
lottery is ending up in the informal sector.
   With this setting, consider first the addition of a new job in
the formal sector. If all other employment in the economy (urban
informal and rural) is classified as informal, the degree of informal-
ity will fall. But the increased employment in the formal sector will
increase the probability of getting a high-paying formal sector job
182 Urbanization and (In)Formalization


and thus induce more migration, increasing the absolute size of
the urban informal sector. In a full migration equilibrium, when
expected urban income is equated to rural income, the relative size of
the informal sector in the urban area will remain unchanged. In this
scenario, then, informality will either fall or stay the same, depending
on how it is measured.
   Now consider a scenario where the formal sector wage is increased,
holding formal sector jobs constant. Raising the formal sector wage
will induce more migration and, since total jobs in this sector are
fixed, a higher proportion of the now larger urban population will
end up in the urban informal sector. If informality means rural
employment plus urban informal, of course the degree of informality
will not change. But if informality means simply urban informality,
and official definitions of informality focus mainly on the part of the
non-agricultural labor force that is informal, the degree of informal-
ity will increase with urbanization.
   The Harris-Todaro framework (1970) thus provides some insights
into possible connections between urbanization and informality,
but it is entirely worker-based—the location decision of enterprises
is not considered. And yet these decisions are just as important for
the overall pattern of urbanization. Considering enterprise behavior
links the discussion to the recent literature on agglomeration benefit
and congestion externalities.

Enterprise size, geographical density, and formality

Beall et al. (2010) identify the key features of the urban context as
proximity, density, diversity, dynamics, and complexity. The origins
of this discourse go back at least as far as Lewis Wirth (1938) who
said that a city was a “relatively large, dense, and permanent settle-
ment of socially heterogeneous individuals” (Wirth 1938, 1). For
economists, starting at least with Marshall (1920), dense proximity
of a diverse pool of skills has been the foundation of agglomeration
benefits. But such disciplines as sociology and anthropology have
emphasized the problems of differences in close proximity—for
example, ethnic cleavages—and urban responses to these challenges.
Of course, economists have also discussed the costs of agglomeration
in the form of congestion costs. The recent literature has discussed
                                         Ejaz Ghani and Ravi Kanbur   183


the balance between agglomeration benefits and costs to arrive at
optimal city concentration (Overman and Venables 2010; Desmet
et al. 2012).
   This section focuses on the interactions among enterprise size, city
traits, industry traits, and agglomeration economies in both the for-
mal and informal sectors. It relies on a direct empirical link between
enterprise size and formality. Larger enterprises are more likely to be
formal, in the sense of coming within the ambit of state regulations
and complying with these regulations (Levy 2007). Regulations in
many countries (India, for example) are written to apply to enter-
prises of at least certain size (for example, enterprises with 10 workers
or more). Further, official statistical definitions of formality (India’s
definition of the “organized sector,” for example) also relate to enter-
prise size.
   With this background, consider the incentives for large and small
enterprises to locate within or outside densely populated areas—and
what affects these incentives. Larger manufacturing enterprises clearly
need more land, which is more easily available in less densely popu-
lated areas. One possible cost of moving to less dense areas is the loss
of access to public goods like electricity. But technological advances
mean that firms can have small generators without a substantial cost
increase, and besides, own-generators can guarantee supply where
the public electric supply is erratic, as in many urban settings. In
addition, large enterprises that operate in industries with mature
technology seem to benefit less from agglomeration economies. To
the extent that smaller firms are less vertically integrated, it helps to
be in a dense ecosystem with forward and backward supply chain
links in inputs and outputs in close proximity. And to the extent that
larger firms are more likely to be vertically integrated, moving to a
less dense location is likely to cost less.
   Putting these arguments together, we can construct a rationale
for why, all else equal, smaller firms are more likely than larger
firms to benefit from agglomeration externalities. This is only a
tendency, of course—location decisions will be influenced by many
considerations. But the question arises—what may have changed
in the last 20 years to increase the advantage of smaller firms locat-
ing in more densely populated areas, and the reverse for larger
enterprises?
184 Urbanization and (In)Formalization


   One straightforward reason is the ongoing urbanization, which is
increasing density. This puts larger firms at a disadvantage because of
their greater need for land. At the same time, problems in urban gov-
ernance and infrastructure are well documented. And as suggested
above, larger firms are more likely to be able to escape these problems
by locating in less dense areas, where they can control power supply
through private generators and are perhaps not as hemmed in by
land-use regulations. Further, smaller enterprises are more likely to
benefit from density because they are more likely to not be vertically
integrated.
   Related to this is another possible reason for smaller (and thus
more likely informal) enterprises to migrate to urban areas. If tech-
nology is changing to make scale economies less important than in
an earlier era, informal enterprises are more able to survive. All else
held constant, if technological change or the emergence of a sup-
ply chain makes production possible at a smaller and less vertically
integrated scale, and especially if the coordination across elements of
the previously integrated chain of production is made easier through
the physical proximity that urban density makes possible, data on the
persistence of informality should not be surprising. On this reason-
ing, we would expect smaller enterprises to migrate to urban areas
and larger enterprises to migrate from urban areas. But what is the
evidence for this reasoning? Turn now to some remarkable recent
trends in India.

The location of formality in India

As noted, India’s official definition of formality, from the enterprise
perspective, turns essentially on enterprise size. In manufacturing,
the “organized” sector includes establishments with 10 workers or
more and that use electricity. If the establishment does not use elec-
tricity, the threshold is 20 workers or more. These establishments
are required to register under the India Factories Act of 1948. The
“unorganized” manufacturing sector, by default, comprises establish-
ments that fall outside the scope of the Act.
   India is the world’s second-fastest growing economy, but it also has
a very large informal sector. In manufacturing, nearly 99 percent of
enterprises—and 81 percent of employment—are in the unorganized
                                      Ejaz Ghani and Ravi Kanbur   185


sector. In services, the unorganized sector is an estimated 74–90
percent of employment, depending on the definition. The Indian
economy has undergone amazing structural transformation over the
last two decades, but the unorganized sector’s employment share has
remained high (Ghani et al. 2011a, 2011b). For manufacturing, it
was 81 percent in 2005, almost exactly the same as in 1989. So the
unorganized sector is also exceptionally persistent. India provides a
good case for examining how urbanization and formalization have
interacted and evolved over time. Is the formal sector moving out
of urban areas? Is the informal sector moving in? Do cities generate
agglomeration economies in the informal sector? Has the spatial
allocation of plants improved across urban and rural locations?
   Ghani et al. (2012) examine trends in the spatial location of
organized and unorganized enterprises in India. They combine the
enterprise data from the Annual Survey of Industries for the orga-
nized (formal) sector and from the National Sample Survey for
the unorganized (informal). The organized manufacturing sector is
surveyed by the Central Statistical Organization every year through
the Annual Survey of Industries, while unorganized manufactur-
ing establishments are surveyed separately by the National Sample
Survey Organization at roughly five-year intervals. These surveys
identify whether each establishment is in an urban or rural loca-
tion. Establishments are surveyed with state and four-digit National
Industry Classification stratification.
   On the whole India’s manufacturing became more urbanized,
with the share of workers in urban areas rising from 33 percent of
employees in 1989 to 41 percent in 2005 (Figure 7.3a). Urbanization
growth was most dramatic from 1989 to 1994, slowing to 2000. The
urbanized employment share was basically flat from 2000 to 2005.
This pattern was also present in manufacturing plant counts, but the
opposite trend emerges for manufacturing output, which has moved
increasingly toward rural areas.
   The differences in the relative movements of the organized and
unorganized sectors are striking (Figures 7.3b and 7.3c). Over
1989–2005, the organized sector moved from urban to rural loca-
tions, with its urban employment share declining from 69 percent to
57 percent. By contrast, the urban employment share for the unor-
ganized sector increased from 25 percent to 37 percent. Because the
        a. Plants and employment are urbanizing—output deurbanizing




                    b. The organized sector is deurbanizing




                    c. The unorganized sector is urbanizing




Figure 7.3   Spatial location of economic activity in India
Source: Ghani et al. 2012.
Note: The figures plot urban shares of plants, employment, and output for each year
using survey data on plants from formal (organized) and informal (unorganized)
manufacturing sectors in India.
                                        Ejaz Ghani and Ravi Kanbur   187


unorganized sector accounts for about 80 percent of employment in
India’s manufacturing, total urbanization increased for employment.
Likewise, the organized sector accounts for more than 80 percent of
India’s output, such that aggregate output becomes more rural. Large
firms in India with high capital and land intensity are more likely to
locate in rural areas. There is evidence to support this from within-
district and between-district movements, which both tend to work in
the same direction for the urbanization of the unorganized sector and
the deurbanization of the organized sector.
   Could these changing patterns in the urbanization of the infor-
mal sector and the deurbanization of the formal sector be explained
merely by changing the definition of urbanization? Probably not.
India’s definition of an urban setting has been mostly stable since
the 1961 census, and the country uses more demanding criteria than
most countries. For example, substantial parts of U.S. metropolitan
areas like Atlanta or Phoenix would be classified as rural in Indian
statistical analyses because their population densities fall below 1,000
people per square mile (Ghani et al. 2012).
   What attracts new entrepreneurs and workers to cities? Ghani
et al. (2011b) quantify the factors and traits of cities and industries
that systematically predict greater entry of new establishments in
the formal and informal sectors. They use cross-sectional establish-
ment surveys in 630 districts in India across 35 states and union
territories. They quantify entrepreneurship as firms younger than
three years and define entry measures through employment in these
new establishments. They examine the role of demographic traits in
cities (age profiles, population, population density), structural traits
of cities (education of the local labor force, quality of local physical
infrastructure, connectivity to major cities), business climate traits
(stringency of labor laws, household banking conditions), and the
impact of agglomeration economies in formal and informal sectors.
They develop metrics that unite the incumbent industrial structures
of districts with the extent to which industries interact through the
traditional agglomeration channels (Marshall 1920).
   This conceptual approach has also been used to describe location
decisions and city structures in several advanced economies. The first
agglomeration channel is proximity to customers and suppliers, which
reduces transportation costs and thus increases productivity. The
188 Urbanization and (In)Formalization


second is the Chinitz effect. Chinitz (1961) argued that Pittsburgh’s
large, integrated steel firms depressed external supplier development.
By contrast, New York City’s much smaller firms, organized around
the decentralized garment industry that then dominated the city,
were better suppliers to new firms. The third channel is labor pooling.
    Table 7.1 provides basic spatial results for the organized manufac-
turing sector. Column 1 includes just district populations, district-
industry employments, and industry fixed effects. Not surprisingly,
existing district-industry employment strongly shapes the spatial
location of entry in the organized sector: a 10 percent increase in
incumbent employment raises entry employment into formal sectors
by around 2 percent. In addition, a district’s population increases
entry rates with an elasticity of 0.5. Higher-order population terms
are not found to be statistically significant or economically important.
    Column 2 includes the district traits. Three factors stand out as
discouraging the entry of new plants into the formal manufacturing
sector in cities: high population density, strict labor regulations, and
greater distance to one of India’s 10 largest cities. The first factor,
observed in many spatial settings, is closely studied by Desmet et al.
(2012) in India. The traded nature of manufacturing products allows
more rural settings for firms, and manufacturers often seek environ-
ments with lower wages and cheaper rents than those in high-density
areas. The second connects with earlier studies of India arguing that
strict labor laws reduce economic growth. These policies are associ-
ated with reduced entry even after conditioning on district-industry
size. The third highlights that while organized manufacturers avoid
the high costs of urban areas, they also avoid the most remote areas
in favor of settings nearer to large population centers, likely to access
customers directly or to connect to road transport and shipping
routes. By contrast, the education of a district’s workforce is strongly
linked to higher entry rates. This is consistent with the findings for
the United States. The elasticity for India is in fact stronger in eco-
nomic magnitude, if not precision, than that in comparable studies
of advanced economies.
    Table 7.2 computes these estimates for the unorganized manufac-
turing sector. Several distinct differences exist. First, local population
has a much greater connection with unit elasticity in column 1’s
simplest estimate. This greater connection of entry to the overall size
Table 7.1 Harnessing entrepreneurship and job creation in cities—formal manufacturing
                                                            Base          District           Full          Adding            Using leg
                                                        estimation         traits        estimation      consumption        entry count
                                                            (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)                (5)
                                                                          DV is log entry employment by district-industry
Log of incumbent employment in district-industry           0.229+++         0.186+++        –0.028          –0.030            0.032+
                                                          (0.043)          (0.040)          (0.048)          (0.047)         (0.018)
Log of district population                                 0.531+++         0.483+++         0.475+++         0.482+++        0.216+++
                                                          (0.179)          (0.155)          (0.156)          (0.161)         (0.056)
District Traits:
Log of district population density                                         –0.569+++        –0.563+++       –0.562+++       –0.197+++
                                                                           (0.088)          (0.080)         (0.079)         (0.029)
Share of population with graduate education                                 0.211+           0.235++         0.230++         0.078+
                                                                           (0.110)          (0.107)         (0.111)         (0.042)
Demographic dividend for district (age profiles)                            0.605            0.567           0.535           0.271
                                                                           (0.458)          (0.446)         (0.468)         (0.177)
Index of infrastructure quality for district                                0.018            0.096           0.086           0.015
                                                                           (0.100)          (0.094)         (0.097)         (0.038)
Strength of household banking environment                                   0.143            0.095           0.085           0.027
                                                                           (0.104)          (0.100)         (0.106)         (0.036)
Stringency of labor laws in district’s state                               –0.210+++        –0.161++        –0.157++        –0.095+++
                                                                           (0.070)          (0.064)         (0.065)         (0.023)
Log travel time to closest large city                                      –0.275+++        –0.241+++       –0.237+++       –0.091+++


                                                                                                                                (Contd.)
Table 7.1 (Contd.)

   Base                                                          District               Full             Adding           Using leg
                                                                estimation             traits          estimation       consumption          entry count
                                                                    (1)                 (2)                (3)               (4)                 (5)
                                                                                      (0.090)             (0.083)           (0.083)           (0.031)
Log per capita consumption                                                                                                   0.152
                                                                                                                            (0.505)
Local Industrial Conditions by Incumbent Firms:
Labor market strength for district-industry                                                               0.161              0.164             0.026
                                                                                                         (0.102)            (0.102)           (0.041)
Inputs/supplier strength for district-industry                                                            0.485+++           0.485+++          0.154+++
                                                                                                         (0.098)            (0.098)           (0.043)
Outputs/customer strength for district-industry                                                           0.388+++           0.387+++          0.167+++
                                                                                                         (0.140)            (0.140)           (0.057)
Chinitz small suppliers metric for district-industry                                                      0.279              0.279             0.337+++
                                                                                                         (0.213)            (0.212)           (0.129)
Industry fixed effects                                              Yes                Yes                Yes                  Yes               Yes
Observations                                                       4,843              4,843              4,843               4,843              4,843
Adjusted R-squared                                                 0.128              0.166              0.218               0.218              0.279
Source: Ghani et al. 2011b.
Note: Estimations quantify the relationship between district-industry employment in new establishments and local district conditions. District-level
traits are taken from the 2001 census. Industrial conditions are calculated from 2005–06 using incumbent establishments in the district-industry. Labor
regulations are a composite of adjustment and disputes laws. Estimates weight observations by an interaction of district size and industry size, include
industry fixed effects, and cluster standard errors by district. Non-logarithm variables are transformed to have unit standard deviation for interpretation.
Table 7.2 Harnessing entrepreneurship and job creation in cities—informal manufacturing
                                                            Base          District            Full          Adding            Using leg
                                                        estimation         traits         estimation      consumption        entry count
                                                            (1)             (2)               (3)             (4)                (5)
                                                                           DV is log entry employment by district-industry
Log of incumbent employment in district-industry           0.163+++          0.123+++        –0.075++        –0.078+++       –0.040
                                                          (0.031)           (0.029)          (0.029)          (0.029)        (0.026)
Log of district population                                 1.051+++          0.878+++         1.010+++         1.025+++       0.866+++
                                                          (0.161)           (0.157)          (0.160)          (0.153)        (0.138)
District Traits:
Log of district population density                                         –0.019            –0.044          –0.042          –0.044
                                                                           (0.070)           (0.068)         (0.073)         (0.057)
Share of population with graduate education                                –0.002            –0.026          –0.079          –0.046
                                                                           (0.080)           (0.084)         (0.087)         (0.074)
Demographic dividend for district (age profiles)                            0.954+++          1.053+++        0.770++         0.798+++
                                                                           (0.326)           (0.330)         (0.326)         (0.285)
Index of infrastructure quality for district                                0.386+++          0.365+++        0.259++         0.325+++
                                                                           (0.096)           (0.097)         (0.104)         (0.086)
Strength of household banking environment                                   0.222+++          0.211+++        0.152+          0.193+++
                                                                           (0.080)           (0.080)         (0.082)         (0.071)
Stringency of labor laws in district’s state                               –0.007             0.000           0.020           0.030
                                                                           (0.069)           (0.069)         (0.066)         (0.062)



                                                                                                                                 (Contd.)
Table 7.2 (Contd.)

Base                                                             District               Full             Adding           Using leg
                                                                estimation             traits          estimation       consumption          entry count
                                                                    (1)                 (2)                (3)               (4)                 (5)

Log travel time to closest large city                                                 –0.004               0.009             0.029             0.017
                                                                                      (0.069)             (0.074)           (0.074)           (0.065)
Log per capita consumption                                                                                                   1.191+++
                                                                                                                            (0.365)
Local Industrial Conditions by Incumbent Firms:
Labor market strength for district-industry                                                               0.263+++           0.271+++          0.028+++
                                                                                                         (0.075)            (0.075)           (0.067)
Inputs/supplier strength for district-industry                                                            0.553+++           0.542+++          0.504+++
                                                                                                         (0.107)            (0.108)           (0.096)
Outputs/customer strength for district-industry                                                           0.291+++           0.292+++          0.246+++
                                                                                                         (0.050)            (0.051)           (0.044)
Industry fixed effects                                              Yes                Yes                Yes                  Yes               Yes
Observations                                                       6,451              6,451              6,451               6,451              6,451
Adjusted R-squared                                                 0.195              0.233              0.264               0.267              0.294
Source: Ghani et al. 2011b.
Note: Estimations quantify the relationship between district-industry employment in new establishments and local district conditions. District-level
traits are taken from the 2001 census. Industrial conditions are calculated from 2005–06 using incumbent establishments in the district-industry. Labor
regulations are a composite of adjustment and disputes laws. Estimates weight observations by an interaction of district size and industry size, include
industry fixed effects, and cluster standard errors by district. Non-logarithm variables are transformed to have unit standard deviation for interpretation.
                                         Ejaz Ghani and Ravi Kanbur   193


of local markets almost certainly reflects unorganized entry’s being
proportionate to market size and servicing local needs. Unorganized
manufacturing clearly conforms much more closely to the overall
contours of India’s economic geography than does organized manu-
facturing.
   The other two district traits associated with strong entry are the
strength of local, within-district physical infrastructure and the
strength of local household banking environments. This contrasts with
organized manufacturing entry, where education stood out. An intui-
tive explanation is that these patterns and their differences reflect the
factors that each sector depends on most. Organized manufacturing
establishments, for example, may have broader resources that reduce
their dependence on local infrastructure and household finance.
Likewise, it is reasonable to believe that the unorganized sector
depends less on educated workers than the organized sector. Finally,
measures of input/supplier strength and output/customer strength
have a greater impact on employment growth for the unorganized
sector than for the organized. Thus, while agglomeration benefits exist
in both formal and informal manufacturing, they appear empirically
to be stronger for the informal sector. Additionally, input-cost factors
are more influential in the location choices of small startups, while
output conditions and labor markets are more important for large
entrants.
   So economic reasoning, and Indian evidence, would suggest that,
from an enterprise-based perspective, the comovement of urbaniza-
tion and informality should be no surprise. Similarly, a worker-based
perspective can also produce, as in the Harris-Todaro framework, a
comovement of urbanization and informality. What does this mean
for policy? Turn to the next section.

Policy implications

We have argued that of the two great stylized predictions on the
development process—increasing urbanization and increasing
formalization—the first is proceeding apace while the second has
stalled. We have investigated why informality is on the increase, and
indeed how urbanization may itself be associated with increasing
informality. But what are the policy implications of these trends
194 Urbanization and (In)Formalization


and these causalities? The answer to this in turn depends on why we
should worry about informality, what can be done about it, and in
particular what cities can and should do about it. We turn now to
these questions.

Why worry about informality?

There are (at least) three reasons for informality to be a concern
in policy circles—it is associated with higher levels of poverty and
vulnerability, lower levels of productivity, and lower contributions to
fiscal revenue. Consider each in turn.
    Figure 7.4 plots the share of informal jobs against poverty rates
across countries. The line slopes up, suggesting that a larger size
of the informal sector is associated with higher poverty rates. The
macro-level association is confirmed by almost every micro-level
country-specific study that looks at the association between poverty
and informality. Workers in the informal sector are predominantly
poor in both income and non-income dimensions. The reason is
that informal jobs have low productivity, and some groups, such as
women and the young, are overrepresented in the informal sector
(Jutting and de Laiglesia 2009). In India, workers in the unorganized




Figure 7.4   Large informal sectors are associated with high poverty rates
Source: ILO 2011; OECD 2009; World Bank 2010.
Note: Chart uses latest available data on informal share of employment for 48 coun-
tries (1995–99 or 2000–07).
                                            Ejaz Ghani and Ravi Kanbur     195


sector have nearly twice the incidence of poverty (20.5 percent) than
their counterparts in the organized sector (11.3 percent) (NCEUS
2007). Studies also find lower levels of health, education, and other
non-income achievements in the informal sector.
    Some caveats are in order. The links between working informally
and being poor are not always straightforward. Recent empirical
work has emphasized heterogeneity within the informal sector
(Chen 2006). Not all jobs in the informal economy yield paltry
incomes. Indeed, many in the informal economy, especially some
self-employed, earn more than unskilled or low-skilled workers in the
formal economy. There also is much innovation and many dynamic
growth-oriented segments in the informal economy, requiring con-
siderable knowledge and skills. One is the fast-growing information
and communications technology sector in India’s large cities. And
some evidence suggests that informal sectors have expanded in Indian
districts where the formal sectors have expanded. Finally, in the spirit
of the Harris-Todaro analysis (1970), informal sectors in cities attract
the poor people. They do not make them poor.
    Despite these caveats, the strong association between informality
and poverty is the driving concern of policy makers, and their chief
worry is persistent informality in the face of rapid growth. In addition
to the income, education, and health dimensions of poverty, there
is also the exclusion of the informal sector from the city’s decision
making and outright harassment by police and government agents.
The experiences of the Self Employed Women’s Association (SEWA),
a union of women who earn their living in the informal sector, are
telling. As a recent publication notes:

  Delhi is a place where people migrate in search of work. But as each
  day passes, people become invisible among the crowd and glitter. The
  less educated migrants find a variety of work like labor work, ironing
  work, vending work, home-based work, domestic work, and driving
  rickshaws—and they earn well enough. With rapid development
  happening in all major cities of India, the poor are displaced ruthlessly.
  The situation for street vendors is no different. The street vendors
  are harassed by MCD [Municipal Corporation of Delhi], Police,
  Goons, and Mafias, in the process of beautification, modernization,
  and development… The Goons and Mafias, with support from Police
  and MCD, set up the markets at various places and illegally charge
196 Urbanization and (In)Formalization


  vendors for the space. In desperation, vendors pay Rs 500–1,000 to
  Goons or Mafias to make a living. Besides, MCD charges a penalty
  to vendors for setting up illegal spaces. Thus, vendors are exploited by
  both Mafias and MCD. (SEWA 2012, 1)

   Along with lower incomes, the lower productivity of enterprises
in the informal sector is well documented (Jutting and de Laiglesia
2009). Most recently, Busso et al. argued that in Mexico total factor
productivity is much higher in the formal sector than in the infor-
mal—so much so that “one peso of capital and labor allocated to
formal and legal firms is worth 28 percent more than if allocated
to illegal and informal firms, and 50 percent more than if allocated
to legal and informal firms” (Busso et al. 2012, 1). But other studies
have pointed out strong evidence for manufacturing convergence.
In a study of 100 countries using industry data for formal sectors,
Rodrik (2011) finds that industries that start at lower levels of labor
productivity grow faster.
   Figure 7.5 plots labor productivity in India’s unorganized indus-
try at the district level. Each dot in the scatter plot reflects labor
productivity in the unorganized industry in a district. A line sloping
down suggests that districts that started with lower labor productivity
in the initial period experienced faster productivity growth in later
periods. But there is a lot of dispersion. No doubt, the pace of con-
vergence will accelerate with better infrastructure, improved policies,
and stronger institutions, as discussed earlier. The convergence in the
unorganized manufacturing sector can have a huge impact on aggre-
gate manufacturing convergence, given that more than 80 percent
of India’s manufacturing employment is in the unorganized sector.
The impact of formal manufacturing on aggregate manufacturing
convergence is reduced by its small share of employment.
   Figure 7.6 shows manufacturing convergence in India’s organized
sector at the district level. Districts that started with lower labor
productivity in the initial period grew faster in later periods. Formal
sectors can converge faster due to the tradable nature of the goods
they produce, the benefits of scale economies, and the better connec-
tivity through cities into global production networks. So, cities play
a role in manufacturing convergence in both formal and informal
sectors.
                                                 Ejaz Ghani and Ravi Kanbur        197




Figure 7.5 Convergence in productivity in India’s unorganized manufacturing,
1989–2005
Note: The horizontal axis is the initial labor productivity of unorganized industry in a
district in 1989. The vertical axis is the growth of labor productivity in unorganized
industry in that district.




Figure 7.6 Convergence in productivity in India’s organized manufacturing,
1989–2005
198 Urbanization and (In)Formalization


   What about the fiscal implications? Policy makers worry that the
informal sector is largely outside the tax net. Indeed, in some coun-
tries the statistical definition of enterprise informality is based on
whether it is registered for tax purposes. Of course, if an exogenous
shift in conditions brings more firms into the tax net, that is good fis-
cally. But if informality increases, the tax net suffers. The important
question from a policy perspective, however, is whether policy mea-
sures could be taken to induce greater formality and greater revenue.
   The answer is not self-evident—and certainly not as simple as
relaxing regulations to bring more firms into the formal sector. For
example, on taxing profits, Auriol and Warlters (2005) argue that
there is a tradeoff between restricting entry to the formal sector, which
would raise taxable profits per firm, and increasing the number of
formal sector firms by relaxing regulation. The argument is confirmed
by their empirical analysis of regulation, taxation, and informality for
a cross-section of 64 countries. In a similar vein but focusing on tax
collection, Keen and Mintz (2004, 559) model tradeoffs in lowering
the tax threshold to bring in more firms into the value added tax
net: “Too high a threshold compromises the basic objective of raising
revenue; too low a threshold may leave the authorities overwhelmed
by the difficulties of implementation and impose excessive compli-
ance costs on taxpayers.”

What should be done about informality?
The dominant policy perspective on informality can be illustrated by
two quotations, the first from the World Bank (n.d.), and the second
from The Economist (2010):

   There are various reasons why governments may be concerned about
   large informal sectors. These include potentially negative consequences
   for competitiveness and growth, incomplete coverage of formal social
   programs, undermined social cohesion and law and order, and fiscal
   losses due to undeclared economic activity. For most governments,
   these concerns outweigh any advantages that the informal sector
   offers as a source of job creation and as a safety net for the poor.
      Thanks largely to baroque regulation, half the labor force toils
   in the informal economy, unable to reap the productivity gains that
   come from technology and greater scale.
                                        Ejaz Ghani and Ravi Kanbur   199


    It would seem that the informal sector is a problem because of low
productivity, low contribution of fiscal resources, and high concen-
tration of poverty, vulnerability, and exclusion. Further, the major
causes of informality are to be found in “baroque regulations.”
    The conventional wisdom’s headline policy conclusion is thus
clear—informality is a problem, it is caused by overly strict regulation
of the formal sector, and it can be solved by deregulation. We wish,
however, to sound a note of caution, especially given the stubborn
persistence of informality across the world, and even in the face of
historically high economic growth when regulations have not neces-
sarily been tightened—if anything, they have been relaxed. Yet job
creation in the formal sector has slowed, leaving the informal sector
to pick up the slack. If these trends continue, the informal sector may
need to be viewed not as a problem to be solved by “formalization”
but as requiring support to enhance the productivity of the poorest
members of society.
    Our focus here has not been informality per se—it has been infor-
mality in the context of urbanization and the lack of formalization
in the face of rapid urbanization. We have shown that the persistence
of informality is to be expected as urban formal sector jobs expand,
because the expectation of securing these jobs pulls in far more
migrants from the rural sector than there are formal jobs, with the
surplus ending up in the informal sector. We have also shown that
from an enterprise-based perspective, it can be a perfectly rational
response to stay small. This can be in response to regulations or to
rising urban density and to changes in technology that make operat-
ing at a smaller scale less inefficient than before. If this argument
has some validity, informality caused by small scale is unlikely to
disappear with urbanization. Indeed, it is likely to grow.
    The arguments here suggest that caution about the conventional
policy perspective is particularly warranted, given that the increase in
informality over the last two decades has happened alongside rapid
urbanization. Research on interaction between urbanization and
informality is still at an early stage, and empirical evidence on why
some cities attract more informal activity than others is still sketchy.
While the “cost of doing business” clearly is relevant (Levy 2007),
other factors can also be important. Agglomeration economies may
be more important for the informal sector than the formal, and
200 Urbanization and (In)Formalization


changes in technology may explain persistent informality despite
unprecedented rates of economic growth.
   The comovement of informalization and urbanization juxtaposes
concerns about growing informality, because of its association with
poverty, with the policy drive to urbanize in order to reap agglomera-
tion benefits. Is there a conflict, then, between the growth gains of
urbanization and the possible poverty costs of informalization? Our
answer: not necessarily. Instead, a policy package is needed to make
the best of urbanization’s growth potential while addressing issues
of informality.
   Note that, alongside the benefits of agglomeration, the analyti-
cal and policy literature has also highlighted various agglomeration
(“congestion”) costs. There is already a discussion of how to manage
and mitigate these costs—addressing such issues as transportation
and infrastructure, residential zoning and land-use patterns more
generally, and above all, urban governance (Ahluwalia et al. 2014).
Among the urban governance issues is how to tax rising land values
in order to provide urban services that could mitigate the conges-
tion costs of agglomeration. As our enterprise-based discussion of
informality makes clear, small firms in the informal sector benefit
from agglomeration externalities as much, if not more, than larger
firms in the formal sector. This is one reason for the migration of
informal enterprises into dense urban settlements—and the rela-
tive movement of formal enterprises out. Providing urban services
to these enterprises is thus as important as the usual focus on the
formal sector.
   As discussed, informal sectors play a bigger role in the job-
enhancing effects of structural transformation. Formalization should
not result in overly regulating it, lest the sector’s growth be slowed
or the incentives to remain informal increase. But not formalizing
reduces the informal sector’s access to service delivery, which is
often linked to fiscal policies. So there are huge tradeoffs. That said,
policy makers can consider reducing the cost of becoming formal and
increase the cost of staying informal. To reduce the cost of becoming
formal, tax structures and rates should be simplified, and tax exemp-
tions and holidays should be reduced. Authorities could improve tax
administration and implement a simple presumptive tax—linking
payments to the availability of infrastructure services (for example,
                                         Ejaz Ghani and Ravi Kanbur   201


bulk electricity at an industrial or business tariff). Of course, to make
such an offer effective, it should be costly to “steal” electricity.
    A value added tax needs to be implemented effectively, and tax
credits for previous tax payments need to be made available to those
ready to be formalized. Not giving tax credits for previous value
added tax payments (especially for imported goods) can be costly to
informal sector businesses (and a gift to the tax authority). Cities also
need to reduce labor market rigidities that increase the cost of being
formalized or becoming big. If governments do initiate some sort of
wage or employment subsidies, they should be temporary, transpar-
ent, and targeted—and of course available only if employers pay the
basic taxes.
    The policy response from this perspective is not necessarily to view
informality as a threat to productivity and growth and to move to
deregulate—or to reduce the costs of regulations so as to reduce the
incentives to avoid them. Regulations should be subject to tests of
efficiency and equity. For example, if law says that all enterprises with
10 workers or more have to register, and if the cost consequences of
registration are relatively high, many enterprises will stay below the
critical threshold, and there will be a distortion away from optimal
firm size. But if optimal firm size is declining in any case, and this
is particularly so in urban areas because of the added benefits of
density and agglomeration, then reforming regulations may not be
as high a priority as ensuring that the benefits of density are indeed
reaped by all enterprises. The focus then turns more to the provi-
sion of urban services and to urban governance, which underpins
the delivery of these services, rather than the narrow and specific
weakening regulation or strengthening enforcement, though they
have their place.

An agenda for city mayors to address the challenge of
growing informality

It is important for policy makers to recognize that much urbanization
in developing countries is thanks to the informal sector. Informality
is not going away—it is growing. And the forces leading to its growth
go beyond regulations on the formal sector. So deregulation is a tool
with limited impact on informality. It is not a panacea—it cannot
202 Urbanization and (In)Formalization


be the mantra. But the link between urbanization and informal-
ization needs to be better managed. City mayors need to focus on
three ‘I’s—integration, intervention, and institutions—and on one
‘E’—entrepreneurship:

• Integration. Policy makers should take an inclusionary approach to
  the urban informal economy, not an exclusionary approach. City
  mayors need to promote better integration of urbanization with
  the informal sector. The interaction between urbanization and for-
  malization will improve the link between strategies for growth and
  jobs. City mayors should find ways to ensure that the informal
  sector is integrated into city planning, budgeting, and financing.
  The more that cities recognize the link between urbanization and
  formalization, and design appropriate policies and investments to
  support it, the more effective the policy interventions will be.
• Intervention. Workers in the informal sector are predominantly
  poor—in both income and non-income dimensions. The reason
  is that informal jobs have low productivity, and certain groups,
  such as women and the young, are overrepresented in the informal
  sector. Informal sectors lack access to basic services (water, sanita-
  tion, electricity). City mayors should improve service delivery in
  informal sectors and slums. Workers in informal sectors will also
  benefit from social protection programs.
• Institutions. To sustain development, many policy makers and
  business leaders want to encourage the informal-to-formal sector
  transition of workers through changes in property rights, business
  registration procedures, and financial access, often with specific
  application to whether entrepreneurs enter the formal economy.
  City mayors need to address these issues at the local level, with
  a focus on which policies can grow the overall size of the formal
  sector. What should city mayors do? Engage with organizations of
  informal workers as partners in development, and invite them to
  participate in city management. Understanding how the transi-
  tion to organized involvement occurs is important for city plan-
  ning and policy choices.
• Entrepreneurship. If job creation is a priority, policy makers
  should focus on promoting entrepreneurship locally. Of course,
  many policy levers can promote entrepreneurial growth. To
                                         Ejaz Ghani and Ravi Kanbur   203


   help this, mayors should invest in local education and physical
   infrastructure. Job growth is predicted by higher concentrations
   of new and young establishments. The two most consistent factors
   that predict overall entrepreneurship are the levels of local educa-
   tion and the quality of local physical infrastructure. High-quality
   goods and services cannot be produced without well-educated
   workers, and they cannot be delivered without roads, electricity,
   and telecommunication. And moving people is as important as
   moving goods, if not more important.

   The key point is that policy makers have to change their mindsets
and bring small enterprises—their owners and their workers—into
urban governance structures. They should be given greater voice in
the design and management of urban policies. Today, large enter-
prises have disproportionate influence on urban decisions. But the
urban future appears to be with smaller informal enterprises. This
disconnect needs to be addressed.

                                  ***
Two of the great stylized predictions of development theory, and two
of the great expectations of policy makers as indicators of progress
in development, are inexorable urbanization and inexorable for-
malization. Urbanization is indeed happening, beyond the tipping
point where half the world’s population is now urban. Our main
conclusions about trends in informality and the interactions between
urbanization and formalization can be stated as follows:

• Cities create the space for structural transformation, entrepreneurship,
  and jobs. The world’s urban population is expected to swell to
  more than 60 percent over the next two decades—and continue
  to rise after that. Almost 90 percent of that growth will happen
  in the developing world: an expansion of almost 2 billion people.
  Africa and South Asia, the only regions still mostly rural, will
  see their urban populations double in that time. Much of the
  transformation will be in the informal sectors and in small and
  intermediate cities, which often lack the skills, facilities, and
  services to cope with the human tide.
204 Urbanization and (In)Formalization


• Informal sectors are large and persistent. Informal sectors in cities
  account for more than 50 percent of jobs, and in India, 80 percent
  of manufacturing employment. They also account for a majority
  of entrepreneurship—in India, more than 99 percent of establish-
  ments in the manufacturing sector. Nearly a billion people live in
  slums, and most of them work in the informal sector. While the
  formal sector has grown rapidly and propelled growth in devel-
  oping countries, the informal sector has kept pace. The informal
  sector’s persistence is not due to some industries becoming less
  formalized and others more so, though technologically advanced
  and capital-intensive industries tend to have lower informal sector
  shares. Persistence is more systematic and an integral part of urban-
  ization. Many more new enterprises that locate in cities are in the
  informal sectors, and many more people migrate to cities seeking
  better paying jobs and living conditions. Indeed, informal sectors
  seem to thrive in cities with dynamic formal sectors. Fast-growing
  state industries tend to experience increasing informal activity in
  India. All in all, informal sectors have become an integral part of
  urbanization and structural transformation.
• Cities provide the ecosystem and generate agglomeration economies in
  the informal sector. Most empirical studies on cities and agglom-
  eration economies have focused on developed economies and
  formal sectors. But there is emerging evidence that agglomeration
  economies in developing countries also operate in the informal
  sector. Related to the agglomeration economies is the fact that
  entrepreneurs often find it difficult to work with large, vertically
  integrated suppliers, and small entrepreneurs work better with
  many more small entrepreneurs. A diverse and large number of
  entrepreneurs in New York City’s garment industry made it more
  competitive, while Pittsburgh, with one large and vertically inte-
  grated steel factory, has become a ghost town.
• Formal firms are moving out of cities and informal firms are mov-
  ing in. Formal firms are moving out of more expensive cosmo-
  politan cities in search of lower land and labor costs, at an even
  earlier stage of development in developing countries. The traded
  nature of manufacturing products allows more rural settings
  for firms, and manufacturers often seek cheaper environments
  than the wages and rents associated with large and high-density
                                        Ejaz Ghani and Ravi Kanbur   205


  areas. Indian industries with high capital and land intensity are
  more likely to locate in rural areas. By contrast, informal firms
  move into cities in search of better infrastructure and to benefit
  from externalities generated by thicker labor markets, access to
  inputs, and proximity to customers. Cities with better education
  and infrastructure not only attract many more entrepreneurs but
  also urbanize faster. Has the fast pace of urbanization shrunk
  informal sectors? Has persistence in informal sectors slowed
  urbanization? What can be done to integrate informal sectors with
  urbanization?
• What can cities do to improve the link between formalization and
  urbanization? It is important for policy makers to recognize that
  much of the urbanization in developing countries is occurring
  through the informal sector.

   In conclusion, the growing informality in the face of rapid urban-
ization is fairly new to the research and policy-making arena. Older
findings, older assumptions, and older policy prescriptions will need
to be reconsidered as further research identifies the causes underly-
ing the trends. Some of the main topics for exploration include the
nature of agglomeration externalities and how they play out in the
formal and informal sectors; the precise reasons that productivity in
the informal sector is lower than in the formal sector, especially if
agglomeration benefits seem to accrue equally if not more to informal
enterprises; the reasons that informality in many countries persists in
the face of rapid growth and continued deregulation; how to bring
informal enterprises into the tax net so that they can contribute to
the services that enable them to flourish; and what policy measures
can support the informal sector in creating jobs and addressing pov-
erty, given that it does not look as though job creation in the formal
sector has been, or is likely to be, sufficient to meet the employment
and poverty challenges of the next two decades. We have begun to
raise these questions and to provide preliminary answers. It should be
clear that research on urbanization and (in)formalization should be
high on the agenda of economists and policy makers.
206 Urbanization and (In)Formalization


Bibliography
Ahluwalia, Isher, Ravi Kanbur, and P.K. Mohanty, eds. 2014. Urbanisation
   in India: Challenges, Opportunities, and the Way Forward. SAGE India:
   New Delhi.
Auriol, Emmanuelle, and Michael Warlters. 2005. “Taxation Base in
   Developing Countries.” Journal of Public Economics 89 (4): 625–46.
Beall, Jo, Basudeb Guha-Khasnobis, and Ravi Kanbur. 2010. “Beyond the
   Tipping Point: A Multidisciplinary Perspective on Urbanization and
   Development.” In Urbanization and Development: Multidisciplinary
   Perspectives, edited by Jo Beall, Basudeb Guha-Khasnobis, and Ravi
   Kanbur. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Boeke, Julius H. 1943. Economies and Economic Policy in Dual Societies.
   Haarlem, the Netherlands: Tjeenk Willnik.
Busso, Matias, Victoria Fazio, and Santiago Levy. 2012. “(In)Formal and
   (Un)Productive: The Productivity Costs of Excessive Informality in
   Mexico.” IDB Working Paper 341, Inter-American Development Bank,
   Washington, DC.
Chen, Martha. 2006. “Rethinking the Informal Economy: Linkages with
   the Formal Sector and the Formal Regulatory Environment.” In Linking
   the Formal and Informal Economy: Concepts and Policies, edited by
   Basudeb Guha‐Khasnobis, Ravi Kanbur, and Elinor Ostrom. Oxford,
   UK: Oxford University Press.
Chinitz, Benjamin. 1961. “Contrasts in Agglomeration: New York and
   Pittsburgh.” American Economic Review 51 (2): 279–89.
Dauth, Wolfgang. 2011. “The Mysteries of the Trade: Interindustry
   Spillovers in Cities: Analyzing the Causes of MAR-Externalities Using
   Spatial Econometric Techniques.” Working Paper, IAB Institute for
   Employment Research and University of Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen,
   Germany.
Delgado, Mercedes, Michael Porter, and Scott Stern. 2010. “Clusters and
   Entrepreneurship.” Journal of Economic Geography 10 (4): 495–518.
Desmet, Klaus, Ejaz Ghani, Stephen D. O’Connell, and Esteban Rossi-
   Hansberg. 2012. “The Spatial Development of India.” Policy Research
   Working Paper 6060, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Drucker, Joshua, and Edward Feser. 2007. “Regional Industrial Dominance,
   Agglomeration Economies, and Manufacturing Plant Productivity.”
   CES Working Paper 07-31, Center for Economic Studies, U.S. Census
   Bureau, Suitland, MD.
Duranton, Gilles, and Henry Overman. 2008. “Exploring the
   Detailed Location Patterns of UK Manufacturing Industries Using
   Microgeographic Data.” Journal of Regional Science 48 (1): 313–43.
                                         Ejaz Ghani and Ravi Kanbur   207


The Economist. September 9, 2010. “Nobody’s Backyard: Latin America’s
   New Promise—And the Need for a New Attitude North of the Rio
   Grande.” http://www.economist.com/node/16990967
Fields, Gary. 1975. “Rural-Urban Migration, Urban Unemployment
   and Underemployment, and Jobsearch Activity in LDCs.” Journal of
   Development Economics 2 (2): 165–87.
Ghani, Ejaz, Arti Grover Goswami, and William R. Kerr. 2012. “Is
   India’s Manufacturing Sector Moving Away From Cities?” Working
   Paper 17992, National Bureau of Economic Research, Washington,
   DC.
Ghani, Ejaz, William R. Kerr, and Stephen D. O’Connell. 2011a.
   “Promoting Entrepreneurship, Growth, and Job Creation.” In Reshaping
   Tomorrow: Is South Asia Ready for the Big Leap? edited by Ejaz Ghani.
   Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
——–—. 2011b. “Spatial Determinants of Entrepreneurship in India.”
   Working Paper 17514, National Bureau of Economic Research,
   Washington, DC.
——–—. 2011c. “Local Industrial Structures and Female Entrepreneurship
   in India.” Working Paper 17596, National Bureau of Economic Research,
   Washington, DC.
Government of India. Various years. Annual Survey of Industries and
   National Sample Survey (manufacturing only). Ministry of Statistics and
   Programme Implementation, New Delhi.
Guha‐Khasnobis, Basudeb, Ravi Kanbur, and Elinor Ostrom, eds. 2006.
   Linking the Formal and Informal Economy: Concepts and Policies. Oxford,
   UK: Oxford University Press.
Gundogan, Naci, and Mustafa Kemal Bicerli. 2009. “Urbanization and
   Labor Market Informality in Developing Countries.” MPRA Paper
   18247, Munich Personal RePEc Archive, Anadolu University, Eskişehir,
   Turkey. http://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/18247.
Harris, John, and Michael Todaro. 1970. “Migration, Unemployment and
   Development: A Two Sector Analysis.” American Economic Review 60
   (1): 126–42.
Hart, Keith. 1973. “Informal Income Opportunities and Urban Employment
   in Ghana.” Journal of Modern African Studies 11 (1): 61–89.
——–—. 2006. “Bureaucratic Form and the Informal Economy.” In
   Linking the Formal and Informal Economy: Concepts and Policies, edited
   by Basudeb Guha‐Khasnobis, Ravi Kanbur, and Elinor Ostrom. Oxford,
   UK: Oxford University Press.
Henderson, J. Vernon. 2010. “Cities and Development.” Journal of Regional
   Science 50 (1): 515–40.
208 Urbanization and (In)Formalization


International Labour Organization (ILO). 1972. Incomes, Employment and
   Equality in Kenya. Geneva.
——–—. 1993. Resolutions Concerning Statistics of Employment in the
   Informal Sector Adopted by the 15th International Conference of Labour
   Statisticians. Geneva.
——–—. 2011. Key Indicators of the Labor Market. 7th ed. Geneva: ILO.
Jutting, Johannes P., and Juan R. de Laiglesia, eds. 2009. Is Informal Normal?
   Towards More and Better Jobs in Developing Countries. Paris: Organisation
   for Economic Co-operation and Development.
Kanbur, Ravi. 2009. “Conceptualizing Informality: Regulation and
   Enforcement.” Indian Journal of Labour Economics 52 (1): 33–42.
——–—. 2011. “Avoiding Informality Traps.” In Reshaping Tomorrow: Is
   South Asia Ready for the Big Leap? edited by Ejaz Ghani. Oxford, UK:
   Oxford University Press.
Keen, Michael, and Jack Mintz. 2004. “The Optimal Threshold for a Value
   Added Tax.” Journal of Public Economics 88 (3–4): 559–76.
Levy, Santiago. 2007. Good Intentions, Bad Outcomes: Social Policy,
   Informality and Economic Growth in Mexico. Washington, DC: Brookings
   Institution.
Lewis, W. Arthur. 1954. “Economic Development with Unlimited Supplied
   of Labour.” Manchester School of Economic and Social Studies 22:
   139–91.
Marshall, Alfred. 1920. Principles of Economics. 8th ed. London: Macmillan.
National Commission for Enterprises in the Unorganised Sector (NCEUS).
   2007. Report on Conditions of Work and Promotion of Livelihoods in the
   Unorganised Sector. New Delhi. http://nceuis.nic.in/Condition_of_
   workers_sep_2007.pdf.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD).
   2009. “Is Informal Normal? Towards More and Better Jobs in Developing
   Countries.” http://www.oecd.org/inclusive-growth/Is%20Informal%20
   Normal%20Towards%20More%20and%20Better%20Jobs%20in%20
   Developing%20Countries%20.pdf
Ostrom, Elinor. 1990. Governing the Commons. New York: Cambridge
   University Press.
Overman, Henry G., and Anthony J. Venables. 2010. “Evolving City
   Systems.” In Urbanization and Development: Multidisciplinary Perspectives,
   edited by Jo Beall, Basudeb Guha-Khasnobis, and Ravi Kanbur. Oxford,
   UK: Oxford University Press.
Rodrik, Dani. 2011. “Unconditional Convergence.” Unpublished.
                                        Ejaz Ghani and Ravi Kanbur   209


Self Employed Women’s Association of India (SEWA). 2012. “Where Else
   are Vendors Harassed by Mafias Like Delhi?” SEWA Newsletter 39,
   Gujarat, India. http://www.sewa.org/Thirty_nine.asp.
World Bank. 2010. World Development Indicators 2010. Washington, DC.
——–—. n.d. Workers in the Informal Economy. Washington, DC.
   http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/TOPICS/
   EXTSOCIALPROTECTION/EXTLM/0,,contentMDK:20224904~m
   enuPK:584866~pagePK:148956~piPK:216618~theSitePK:390615,00.
   html
Wirth, Lewis. 1938. “Urbanism as a Way of Life.” The American Journal of
   Sociology 44 (1): 1–24.
8


Bridging Divides
Enabling Urban Capabilities


Saskia Sassen




Cities benefit from two key conditions, both with direct implications
for social, cultural, and economic integration. One is a large middle
class and a large sector of modest profit-making firms, distinct from
a sharp concentration of incomes and profits. The other is a well-
distributed urban economy: robust neighborhood sub-economies
preventing excessive economic concentration in the center, and good
transportation for people and goods—not only to the center but
also transversally. Securing the conditions cannot solve racial and
sexual violence, environmental destruction, and other problems. But
the weakening of the middle sectors since the 1980s has not solved
these problems either, bringing new economic negatives. Cities
worldwide have seen growing inequality, devastated neighborhood
sub-economies, and rising racial and sexual violence. These develop-
ments signal that extreme inequality is not good for cities or most
urban residents.
   The post–World War II decades into the 1980s best illustrate the
growth of the middle sectors—from Europe to large swathes of Asia,
                                                      Saskia Sassen   211


Africa, and Latin America. Cities were generally poorer than they are
today, as measured by municipal gross domestic product (GDP) and
municipal government budgets, and as a share of national wealth and
income. But their economies were better distributed, with far more
small firms and middle-class households. Despite some brutal excep-
tions, such as apartheid in South Africa and racial segregation in the
United States, cities in this era generally had less violence, crime, and
religious conflict. Many cities with diverse religions that are today
aflame saw peaceful coexistence, bordering on indifference, in that
earlier period.
   We cannot go back to that era. Indeed, even the cities that con-
tinue to benefit from such basic conditions today must confront
rapid population growth and the associated challenges of integra-
tion in labor markets, housing, and transport. The urban economy is
marked by capture at the top, poorer middle classes, larger destitute
populations, and more crime and conflict. These challenges, though
present in cities the world over, play out differently in smaller, pros-
perous cities in Europe and North America than in megacities in
Asia, Africa, and Latin America.
   But cities today are also seeing a massive upgrading of infrastruc-
ture in city centers and high-value neighborhoods. This is due partly
to the expansion of high-end business districts and residential areas—
and their associated expulsions of more modest firms and households.
One outcome is widespread homelessness and destitution, even in
cities where these problems had become rare by the mid- to late-20th
century. The reasons for this juxtaposition vary enormously due to
the differences among cities and among the national economies and
societies in which they function. Some cities are sinking under the
weight of the negatives, while others are, more recently, succeeding.

When clashing visual orders obscure
economic articulations

Two aspects are often overlooked in discussions about urban econo-
mies, whether small or large, global or local. One is that there are
multiple articulations between backward and advanced sectors,
no matter how different their urban spaces. The second, a critical
instance of the first, is that a particular type of manufacturing is
212 Bridging Divides


very much a part of today’s urban service economies, including the
most advanced.
    How advanced economic sectors interact with backward sectors is
a key indicator of a city’s economic health. Considered by some a relic
from days passed, many backward sectors actually serve the advanced
economic sectors and their high-income employees. Today’s cities
have a type of urban manufacturing geared to design sectors of all
sorts (from jewelry to furniture design, architecture, and interior dec-
oration); cultural industries (theaters and opera houses need sets and
costumes, and museums and galleries need display settings for their
collections); building trades (customized woodwork and metalwork);
and other sectors of advanced service-based economies (the staging
in luxury shops and restaurants, displays in corporate headquarters).1
Because urban manufacturing is deeply networked and operates in
contracting and subcontracting chains, it inverts the historical rela-
tion between manufacturing and services. Moreover, because urban
manufacturing is often fairly customized and hence needs to be near
its customers and a diverse pool of top craftspeople, it should be seen
as infrastructure for integration.
    But the visual orders and topographies of major cities do not help
us see these articulations. The increasingly homogenized environ-
ments of the glamour zone are visually disconnected from the infor-
mal economy and urban manufacturing and, at their most extreme,
with slums in global south cities. Making these articulations visible
would help policy makers and urban civic organizations interested in
more urban integration.
    Some types of material economies, including those I refer to as
urban manufacturing, are critical even in advanced knowledge sec-
tors. These kinds of urban material economies matter enormously for
cities and vice versa. Urban manufacturing, both formal and infor-
mal, thrives in cities and, if properly recognized, could contribute to
a better distributed economy that produces more mid-level jobs and
firms with mid-level profits rather than large profits.
    Urban manufacturing is often highly specialized—but just as often
in ways that analyses of the knowledge economy overlook. Unlike
mass manufacturing, it needs to be in cities or urban areas because it
is networked, is based on multiple supplier and contractor links, and
needs direct contact with customers. And it varies enormously across
                                                       Saskia Sassen   213


cities, reflecting their differing economic histories. For instance,
when major producers of fiber optics, light-emitting diodes, and
other advanced glass components sought to expand, one potential
site was Toledo, Ohio. This old industrial city beat out high-tech
cities, such as Austin, Texas, for these factories (Fitzgerald 2009). The
key was that Toledo had a long history of manufacturing traditional
industrial glass products and a knowledgeable workforce that could
be trusted with the new types of glass production.
    In cities with extreme inequalities, where the advanced economy
captures most of the income and profits, urban manufacturing
partly shifts to slums.2 This is evident in cities as diverse as Istanbul,
Mumbai, and São Paulo. All three have long histories of manufactur-
ing and have seen the emergence of a new type of urban manufactur-
ing that services advanced sectors—from design to culture. Whether
in cities or in slums, urban manufacturing often goes unrecognized
by economic development experts and planners or is misunderstood
as an impediment to an advanced urban economy. The spaces and
visual orders of urban manufacturing do not fit the image of the
advanced economy and are thus easily seen as backward leftovers.
    In cities where the advanced economy captures a disproportion-
ate share of income and profits, initiatives that cut across the divide
of the economic center and economic periphery can make an enor-
mous social and economic difference for the city at large. A growing
number of municipal governments have recognized this, instituting
diverse strategies that incorporate marginal areas and groups into
mainstream economic circuits. We see a significant effort to over-
come barriers that keep the poor from realizing their work capacities
simply because they cannot get to their workplaces. Much can be
done through transport initiatives that recognize the importance of
connecting workers and economies, city centers, and their peripher-
ies. Examples can be found in many cities.
    More generally, today’s political economy clearly needs and gener-
ates a growing number of global cities. Together, these cities form
a multi-sited, advanced infrastructure for global actors—economic
and cultural, professionals and immigrants. But far less recognized is
the rise of global slums in major cities of the global south. Most slums
are not global, just as most cities are not. Yet, despite the immobili-
ties of their inhabitants, some slums are becoming actors with global
214 Bridging Divides


projection. Dharavi in Mumbai, perhaps the best known of these
slums, is one of the most developed, with its many informal enterprises
catering to some of the city’s major economic sectors. São Paulo has
several major slums, some quite international, with migrant workers
and small entrepreneurs from Peru and other neighboring countries.
And La Salada in Buenos Aires, drawing both locals and immigrants
into its manufacturing and trading activities, is now South America’s
largest informal market (Sassen 2011a).
   One way to capture these less-visible dynamics is to think of the
urban economy as traversed by myriad specialized circuits connect-
ing sectors to a far broader range of urban activities than is usually
understood. Even finance, when disaggregated into these circuits, has
been shown to be linked to urban manufacturing suppliers, often
through the design and building trades.
   Many smaller cities have the skilled workers and potential for
developing an urban manufacturing sector linked to somewhat rou-
tine corporate services. This is due to the urbanization of a growing
range of economic components of non-urban sectors; for example,
mining and large-scale manufacturing firms buy many of their cor-
porate services in cities. Firms in all economic sectors nowadays are
buying more insurance, legal, and accounting services. The services
needed by the more conventional economic sectors (heavy manu-
facturing, mining, industrial agriculture, transportation) can be pro-
duced in smaller cities. Further, the presence of a corporate services
sector, along with the resulting growth of a high-income workforce
that prefers urban living, in turn generates a demand for urban
manufacturing. Such urban living entails a bundle of demands—for
high-end restaurants and shops, for museums and cultural events, for
customized furniture and metalwork, and for the renovation of older
buildings, many of which create demand for urban manufacturing.
A lack of support from policy makers, and even from analysts and
researchers, can quash the potential for developing a healthy urban
manufacturing sector.
   A network effect lies at the heart of urban economies. The sector
connections described above is one reason to reject the widespread
tendency among city governments to privilege the advanced ser-
vices and neglect most other sectors. Such privileging is a profound
                                                      Saskia Sassen   215


mistake. It means missing the opportunity to articulate the multiple
components of urban economies more strongly and effectively. And
to a city’s advantage, most firms, whatever their sector, cannot move
out without losing this effect, and so are more likely to stay. A city
that puts in the effort and resources necessary to develop most of its
sectors can have a diversified urban economy, including the extremes
of urban manufacturing and advanced services. This also means
a diversified social structure and neighborhood sub-economies.
Dynamic advanced services and cultural sectors can drive demand
for urban manufacturing products. Indeed, that is a condition for
having a dynamic urban manufacturing sector and, as I argue, speci-
fies it (Sassen 2010).
    These types of economic articulations across sectors, which look as
if they have nothing to do with each other, are a solid infrastructure
for social integration policies, because they feed job growth across a
broad range of jobs and incomes. This can help reduce the violence
and anger growing in so many cities worldwide where elites grow
richer and the rest see their earnings fall and their jobs disappear.

Women in cities: obstacles and vectors to
urban inclusion

There are many ways that gendering promotes the types of inequality
that can be an obstacle to making cities inclusive, some going well
beyond hurting women themselves. But in urban space, the absence
of a gendered perspective is the main obstacle to urban inclusion
in gendered societies. It is the failure to recognize women’s needs
for public space, transport routes, street safety, and more. Genderless
urban planning in societies that are mostly still gendered works
against many women, though not all. Women face challenges in
access to essential services, housing security, livability, and mobility.
The fear and insecurity women experience in many cities is often
invisible to men, though young boys and children generally do expe-
rience their own forms of fear.
   Cities, urban cultures, and the safety experienced by women, men,
and children varies enormously across the world. Here I examine a
few aspects of this vast subject.
216 Bridging Divides


    A solid body of research documents the ways that women are
disadvantaged in the use of urban space—be it public parks, feeling
safe, or access to transport. Thus, while there is good critical work
on cities, much of it is based on neutral concepts as they relate to
gendering: family, population, transport, business districts, and so
on. There is urgent need to revisit urban planning from a gender
perspective. Basic urban systems do not respond to women’s needs.
Falu and Segovia observe an appropriation of women’s time through
inconvenient distances to transport, shopping, schools, health
services, and possibly jobs (Falu and Segovia 2007). For instance,
men commute to and from their jobs, and traffic systems are geared
mostly to this pattern, albeit with significant differences in quality
and frequency by an area’s income level. Women, however, often
combine work and family and need short, interconnected trajectories
given their fragmented uses of time.
    These urban patterns point to an appropriation of women’s time
and a devaluing of their economic contribution in both their homes
and their paid jobs (Falu and Segovia 2007). Ana Falu (2009) takes
this a step further and argues that the different values assigned to
their activities are the central gender system for organizing urban
space. For instance, the public sphere is marked mostly masculine,
so it acquires economic and social value; the private sphere, marked
mostly feminine, is given only symbolic value.
    Such gendering effects often take on specific forms within a female
population through ethnic, race, status, and religious variables, with
certain combinations producing the most devastating effects. In
South America, being a poor indigenous woman produces the sharp-
est negative outcomes. Indeed, they are likely to be the lowest paid
but also the most threatened in public space. Another particularly
vulnerable and growing population are immigrant women, who even
if lawful residents face the threat of deportation if they should report
abuse or mistreatment. Box 8.1 describes an initiative in Hong Kong
Special Administrative Region (SAR), China, that helps immigrant
household workers. Fear itself, even without actual violence or abuse,
can become a deterrent for women to claim their rights or to use pub-
lic space and public transport (Viswanath and Mehrotra 2008). Wars
can bring some of the most acute needs for women. One initiative
                                                        Saskia Sassen   217



       Box 8.1    Foreign domestic worker rights, Hong Kong
                            SAR, China

  Hong Kong SAR, China, relies heavily on migrants to meet the
  demands of the local labor market. In 2012, some 230,000 foreign
  women—mostly Filipino, Thai, and Indonesian—worked in the city
  as live-in cooks, nannies, and maids (Stanton 2012). Under Hong
  Kong’s immigrations law, foreign domestic workers (FDWs) are bound
  exclusively to their employers by two-year contracts. The contracts
  require FDWs to live in their employer’s home, and should they be
  fired, they have just two weeks to find new employment or be deported
  (Hong Kong Immigration Department 2012). The ever-present threat
  of deportation is a significant constraint on FDWs’ ability to report
  abuse or mistreatment, and many employers take advantage. Indeed, of
  Indonesian domestic workers in Hong Kong SAR, China, 42 percent
  were paid less than they agreed on with their employers (Varia 2007).
  In 2001, more than 25 percent of FDWs reported verbal or physical
  abuse, with a high prevalence of sexual abuse (Hong Kong Human
  Rights Monitor 2001).
      The Bethune House Migrant Women’s Refuge was founded in
  1986 to help migrant women in need, especially those fired by their
  employers or who have fled their abuse. The refuge’s goal, beyond free-
  ing women from unsafe or abusive working conditions, is to develop
  their ability to advocate for themselves—both in society and in a court
  of law. The refuge provides legal aid and arranges for FDWs to observe
  legal proceedings so that they can become familiar with the process
  and empower themselves as self-advocates. Some former FDWs use
  the skills and knowledge they gained through the Bethune House to
  advocates for other migrant workers (Stanton 2012).



addressed this in Afghanistan, a country racked by more than three
decades of war. The damage to the country’s human capital, especially
that of women and girls, has been devastating (Box 8.2).
   But women have organized in cities across the world to get men,
communities, and governments to address their disadvantages.
They have pushed or forced their governments and employers to
provide needed facilities. For instance, a common issue is the long
218 Bridging Divides



    Box 8.2    Female Youth Employment Initiative, Afghanistan

  Afghanistan has been racked by more than three decades of war, and
  the damage to its human capital, especially of women and girls, has
  been devastating. In 2006, the United States Educational, Scientific
  and Cultural Organization estimated that the literacy rate among
  adolescents ages 15–24 was at most 20 percent (World Bank 2009).
  During the Taliban’s rule (1996–2001), women were excluded from
  the education system, and literacy for rural women fell to as low as
  10 percent. In 2007, six years after the fall of the Taliban, women
  made up less than a third of students in school (World Bank 2009).
  With the U.S. military’s withdrawal on the horizon, along with the
  rollback of international aid, Afghanistan needs to maximize its human
  capital to integrate into the global economy.
      To help tackle this challenge, the World Bank, the Nike Foundation,
  and the Government of Denmark have partnered to fund the
  Afghanistan Female Youth Employment Initiative. The pilot program,
  launched in 2009, targets women ages 15–27 living in Mazar-e-Sharif,
  the capital of Balkh Province, and seeks to equip them with non-
  traditional skills so that they can participate in export opportunities
  made possible by the city’s proximity to Tajikistan, Turkmenistan,
  and Uzbekistan (World Bank 2009). Urban Afghanistan has received
  disproportionately little aid money for education; the pilot seeks to
  redress this imbalance and give Afghan women not just education
  but also marketable skills. As of 2012, the pilot project had created
  opportunities for some 1,300 young women to receive education and
  occupational training from private non-governmental organizations in
  Afghanistan (Afghanistan Ministry of Education 2012).



work commutes for poor working women and their children. This
is particularly acute for breastfeeding women in poor countries,
who lack the options available to working women in the developed
world (including sterile and refrigerated receptacles for storing milk).
Breast milk should not be wasted given extreme food insecurity and
malnutrition in poor countries. Box 8.3 describes an initiative that
addresses this challenge. Another type of initiative that has benefitted
women is cash transfers through diverse mechanisms. One targeted
effort that has worked well is Peru’s Juntos project (Box 8.4). These
cases illustrate initiatives that could work anywhere.
                                                        Saskia Sassen   219



      Box 8.3     Childcare for factory workers, Bangladesh

Bangladesh’s booming export economy is built in part on the backs of
working women. Discounting associated industries, garment factories
produce 10 percent of the country’s GDP and employ 3 million work-
ers, 80 percent of them women (German and Pyne 2010). Each year,
roughly 500,000 Bangladeshis migrate from the countryside to Dhaka,
the capital, to find work (Akter 2010). And even if they find work,
their struggles are far from over. In 2010, 67 percent of people living
in Mohammadpur slum, one of the city’s oldest and largest, earned less
than 5,000 taka a month (roughly $60). The average household spent
3,232 taka a month on food and 933 taka a month on rent (Akter
2010). These low wages and high expenses make it nearly impossible
for mothers to stay home with their children, even in families where
fathers are the primary wage earners. Children are often left unattended
in dangerous conditions while their mothers work to support the
family. If possible, older children stay home to care for their younger
siblings—but at the expense of their education (UNICEF 2002). In
any case, poor women struggle to care for themselves and their families
as they integrate into the urban workforce.
    Many humanitarian and international organizations have provided
significant aid to Bangladesh. The non-governmental organization,
Phulki, however, identified a key problem—breastfeeding is all but
impossible for mothers working in factories (Schwab Foundation).
Options available to working women in the developed world, such as
expelling milk throughout the day and storing it in sterile, refrigerated
containers, is not possible due to a lack of infrastructure and education.
Given Bangladesh’s high food insecurity and malnutrition, the discom-
fort that lactating women experience when they cannot discharge their
milk, and breastfeeding’s many health benefits for both mothers and
children, solving that problem alone would have been extremely valu-
able. But Phulki’s solution has grown to address other struggles that
working migrant mothers face. Working directly with factory owners
and employees, Phulki established factory-based daycare centers for
children of ages six weeks to two years. The organization establishes
the centers, provides start-up support, and then turns their manage-
ment over to factory owners. Factory employees gain access to afford-
able childcare and can breastfeed nursing children (UNICEF 2002).
Moreover, many of the factory owners take advantage of their relation-
ship with Phulki to offer adult education classes on topics like family
planning, literacy, and nutrition (The Global Fund for Women 2003).
Over 20 such factory-based childcare centers have been established.
220 Bridging Divides



   Box 8.4 Juntos program: conditional cash transfers targeting
                        women in Peru

  Poverty in Latin America remains highly influenced by gender. But
  inequality is not static across the region. As many countries narrowed
  their wage, poverty, and education gaps, Peru fell behind. Despite a
  constitution that provides for equal rights, women hold only about
  25 percent of land titles (SIGI 2012). Also, the legal tradition of “infor-
  mal ownership” allows husbands to sell their wives’ property without
  permission, women earn about 46 percent less than men, and 38 per-
  cent of women report being victims of domestic violence (SIGI 2012).
      Juntos, a conditional cash transfer government aid program estab-
  lished in 2005, has made significant headway not only in reducing
  family poverty and malnutrition but also in empowering women. Like
  other conditional cash transfer programs, Juntos pays needy families
  a small monthly stipend (about $33) in exchange for participating in
  health and education programs and obtaining government identifica-
  tion documents (Holmes et al. 2010). Mothers of eligible families
  (women with children younger than 14 or pregnant women) are paid
  directly. Women who receive these payments are required to attend
  weekly training sessions that focus on basic reading and writing and
  are introduced to other programs that focus on empowerment, equal-
  ity, and legal aid (Holmes et al. 2010). A primary goal of these time-
  consuming training sessions is to hold Peruvian men responsible for
  household work and to change their attitudes toward the gendered
  division of labor. Women in the program have reported some success in
  this endeavor, with both men and women reporting that changes were
  taking hold. According to one man interviewed, “Before only men were
  the boss …. Now it is different, we are changing …. Previously, my wife
  did what I said, she didn’t give her opinion. Now she does, one can tell,
  and we reach a solution. Women’s opinions were less important. Now
  she gives her opinion regarding how to progress in life” (Holmes et al.
  2010, 4). According to a woman, “We now have reached an agreement,
  we go alone to the bank. [Previously] men did not understand, they got
  annoyed even when we attended meetings. We were afraid and even
  had to miss meetings.” Another woman: “Out of jealousy, sometimes
  they asked us, ‘Why do you go? You leave your house unattended.’
  … Now they don’t” (Holmes et al. 2010, 4). Juntos, with its strong
  impact on gender relations in Peru, is creating more links for women to
  integrate themselves into mainstream society.
                                                        Saskia Sassen   221


   And women themselves have fought to gain back the streets,
develop safety audits, and fight for their rights to the city. Over
the last two decades, movements have proliferated throughout the
world—in Latin America, Africa, Asia-Pacific, Europe, and North
America. We now have two decades of research and grassroots action
on safer cities for women. One strong emergent approach is that of
the rights to the city and a right to safety in the city (see, for example,
Whitzman et al. 2012). Immigrant women in New York City have
organized a domestic workers union, a first in the city and perhaps
in the country (Fosado and Jackson 2009). Marta Fonseca and Sara
Ortiz Escalante describe how women are making urban spaces inclu-
sive by developing a series of urban diagnoses: gender audits of every-
day life, walks through a city to reclaim women’s history in that city,
and deploying women wearing shirts with the sign “public women”
in places of vulnerability.3 Their key starting point: “Neutral and
universal planning does not exist. What this neutrality does is ignore
diversity in our society based on gender, origin, social class, ethnicity,
religion, sexual orientation, etc.” Perhaps one of the most impressive
grassroots initiatives is Mother Centers, which aim to build social
infrastructure in communities that have suffered economic disloca-
tion. The initiative started in a few localities and has now spread to
the world, with more than 800 centers (Box 8.5).


          Box 8.5    Mother Centers International Network
                         for Empowerment

  The Mother Centers International Network for Empowerment grew
  out of social research by the German Youth Institute in Munich in
  the early 1980s (Jaeckel et al. 2002). Staff members discovered that
  preventative policies that enabled families to access community assets
  were much more effective than intervening after families fail (MINE
  2012). To facilitate this, they opened family-oriented, grassroots com-
  munity centers (Mother Centers) to recreate family and community
  networks that had been damaged by socioeconomic dislocation. The
  main tenet of the organization is participation: everyone has something
  to contribute to the community, and the centers exist to facilitate
  that interaction (Laux and Kolinska 2004, 5). Many social service
                                                                 (contd.)
222 Bridging Divides



  Box 8.5 (contd.)
  providers project the message that individuals seeking help have some
  kind of deficit (“You have a problem. Come to us, the experts, for
  help”), but at Mother Centers, everyone is a participant and a con-
  tributor, and the message is that they are needed (“You are good at
  at least one thing. Come to the Mother Center and contribute to the
  community”) (Laux and Kolinska 2004).
      The fall of totalitarian governments in Eastern Europe created a
  huge demand for community infrastructure and social services that had
  disappeared in a sea of unemployment, violence, upheaval, and decay.
  Mothers at home with children faced severe isolation—not just from
  goods and services but also from human contact and social networks.
  The Mother Center initiative spread quickly through peer visits and
  exchanges in the post-socialist world (MINE 2012) and helped restore
  the contact points that are the foundation of coherent society.
      The Mother Centers movement has continued to expand though
  grassroots peer exchanges and individual initiative. Today, there are
  more than 850 centers worldwide (not only in the United States,
  Germany, and the former socialist regimes of the European Union
  but also in countries like Rwanda and Cameroon) (Laux and Kolinska
  2004). The centers are self-managed public spaces in neighborhoods
  that offer peer networks and drop-in childcare, facilitate access to
  community and employment resources, and expand children’s positive
  social space. They revolve around a drop-in coffee shop or other shared
  space where childcare is provided. And they offer adult education
  classes and services, such as hair cutting, secondhand shops, sewing
  classes, computer training, and job retraining. When possible, women
  are paid hourly for services, providing them with much-needed income
  and a sense of ownership and empowerment (MINE 2012). Centers
  usually reach between 50 and 1,000 families per neighborhood. They
  supplement the usual social safety net—and in some cases replace it
  (Jaeckel et al. 2002).


Cities and political subjectivity: when powerlessness
becomes complex

Cities are key sites for making new norms and identities. Max Weber’s
The City identifies a city’s ideal-typical features, the conditions that
compel residents and leaders to craft innovative responses and
                                                     Saskia Sassen   223


adaptations to challenges—in short, to push the urban population
into action. For Weber, the cities of the Late Middle Ages had
these conditions: ideally a set of social structures that encourage
individuality and innovation and hence are an instrument for change.
But Weber did not find these qualities in the industrial cities of his
time; he found that large factories and corporate bureaucracies were
dominating cities, robbing citizens of the ability to shape at least
some of their cities’ features.
   Another key idea in Weber’s work is that these transformations
could instill larger foundational transformations beyond the city,
offering the possibility of understanding changes that could—under
certain conditions—eventually encompass all of society. Weber shows
us how, in many cities, these changes led to what today might be
called governance systems and citizenship. Political, economic, legal,
and cultural struggles centered in cities can become the catalysts for
new trans-urban developments in many institutional domains—
markets, participatory governance, rights for members of the urban
community regardless of lineage, judicial recourse, and cultures of
engagement and deliberation.
   Cities again emerged as strategic sites when the global era began,
a trend counter-intuitive but now extensively documented (Sassen
2012). Global cities have sprung up across the world and emerged as
strategic sites for innovation and transformation in multiple institu-
tional domains. This process has not been painless. Key components
of economic globalization and digitization concentrated in global
cities produced dislocations and destabilizations of institutional
orders in and beyond cities.4 Further, some of the key legal, regula-
tory, and normative frames for handling urban conditions are now
part of national framings—much of what is called urban develop-
ment policy is also national economic policy. The high concentration
of these new dynamics in global cities forces both the powerful and
the disadvantaged to craft new responses and innovations, albeit for
very different types of survival.
   By contrast, from the 1930s to the 1970s, when mass manufactur-
ing dominated, cities had lost strategic functions and were not sites
for creative institutional innovations. The large factory—at the heart
of mass manufacturing and mass consumption—and the government
were at the time the strategic sites of major institutional innovations.
224 Bridging Divides


My own reading of the Fordist city corresponds to Weber’s in that
the strategic scale under Fordism is the national scale—cities lose
significance. But I part company with Weber in that the large Fordist
factory and the mines became key sites for the making of a modern
working class and a syndicalist project; it is not always the city that is
the site for making new norms and identities.
    With globalization and digitization—and all that they entail—
global cities do emerge as strategic sites for making norms and identi-
ties. Some norms and identities, such as those of global managerial
elites, project extreme power. Others, notably those of immigrant
neighborhoods, project innovation under extreme duress. While
the strategic transformations are concentrated sharply in global
cities, many also develop (besides being diffused) in smaller or less-
global cities.
    Weber’s observation about urban residents, rather than merely
leading classes, is also pertinent for today’s global cities. Conditions
in these cities are not only creating new power structures but also
opening the door for new types of actors long without a political
voice. The localization of strategic components of globalization in
these cities allows the disadvantaged to develop new ways of contest-
ing global corporate power. And the growing numbers and diversity
of the disadvantaged affords them a greater presence in these cities,
in a way they could not on a plantation, for instance.
    It is critical to uncover the differences between powerlessness
and invisibility within this process of enabling the disadvantaged to
contest global power and to gain presence in their engagement with
power, indeed, also in their interactions with each other. Today, the
localization of the most powerful global actors in global cities cre-
ates objective conditions for engaging power at a local scale. This
makes powerlessness complex, even if it does not necessarily generate
empowerment. Highly localized struggles are actually a form of global
engagement, a horizontal, multisited recurrence of similar demands
in cities the world over (see Sassen 2008, ch. 6, 8). Examples include
the struggles against gentrification’s encroachments on minority
and disadvantaged neighborhoods, as well as modest middle-class
neighborhoods; the related struggles for the rights of the homeless,
whose numbers increased in many cities starting in the 1980s; and
demonstrations against police violence, often connected to gentri-
                                                      Saskia Sassen   225


fication and displacement. These struggles are different from the
ghetto uprisings of the 1960s, which were short, intense eruptions
damaging mostly the ghettos themselves.
    Two conditions make some of today’s cities strategic sites, and both
capture major transformations that are destabilizing older systems of
organizing territory and politics. One is the rescaling of strategic ter-
ritories that articulate the new politico-economic system and hence
at least some features of power. The other is the partial unbundling
or at least weakening of the country as the container of social pro-
cesses, due to the variety of dynamics encompassed in globalization
and digitization. The consequences of these two conditions are many;
what matters here is that cities emerge as strategic sites for major
economic processes and for new types of political actors. Even poor
immobile individuals and marginalized communities can become
part of a global space for making demands for justice, recognition,
and voice.
    The political practices in today’s global city differ from what might
have arisen in Weber’s medieval city. In the medieval city, a set of
practices allowed the burghers to set up systems for owning property
and protecting it against more powerful actors, such as the king and
the church, and to build defenses against despots. Today’s political
practices, I would argue, have to do with the presence of those with-
out power and with a politics that claims rights to the city rather than
protection of property. What the two situations share is the notion
that through these practices new forms of political subjectivity—that
is, citizenship—are being established and that the city is a key site for
this type of political work. The city is, in turn, partly built on these
dynamics. Far more so than a peaceful and harmonious suburb, the
contested city is where the civic is getting built. After centuries of
the ascendance of the national state and the scaling of key economic
dynamics at the national level, the city today is once again a scale for
strategic economic and political dynamics.

Cities as frontier spaces: the hard work of keeping
them open

One key condition for the city to survive as a space of complexity
and diversity—and not merely as a high-density concrete jungle—is
226 Bridging Divides


reducing conflict, whether originating in racism, government wars
on terror, or the devastation of climate change (see, for example,
Marcuse 2002).
   Can the urbanity of city residents and city spaces—rather than
ethnicity, religion, or phenotype—mark a city? Bringing out the urban
subject in city residents has historically been one force in thwarting
urban conflicts. But that mark does not simply fall from the sky. It
often stems from hard work and learning from failures. One question
is whether it can also stem from the need for new solidarities in cities
that confront major challenges, such as racism, sexual violence, and
environmental crises. These challenges might force a critical mass of
city residents into joint responses and, from there, into a stronger
urban subject and identity rather than an individual or group (for
example, ethnic or religious) subject and identity.
   One historical window into this type of urban capability is immi-
gration. What must be emphasized here is the hard work of making
open cities and of repositioning the immigrant and the citizen as
urban subjects that mostly transcend nationality. In a city’s daily
routines, the key ruling factors for both immigrants and citizens are
work, family, school, public transportation, and so on. Perhaps the
sharpest difference in a city is between the rich and the poor, both of
which include immigrants and citizens alike (see, for example, Smith
and Favell 2006). When the law and the police enter the picture,
the differences between immigrant status and citizen status become
key factors. But most of daily life in the city is not ruled by this
distinction.
   Here I address this issue from the perspective of the capacity of
urban space to make norms and subjects that can escape the con-
straints of dominant power logics, such as nationality, the war on
terror, and racism. Historical European immigrant integration
through the making of the European open city is one window into
this complex and historically variable question.
   In my reading, the history of Europe and the Western Hemisphere
shows that the challenges of incorporating the outsider often became
the push to develop a stronger civic and urban experience of mem-
bership, rather than a civic based on religion, class, and ethnicity.
At times, immigrant inclusion became the occasion for expanding
                                                     Saskia Sassen   227


the rights of the already included, notably citizens. Responding to
claims by the excluded has over time expanded the rights of citizens,
a subject I develop at length elsewhere (Sassen 1999). And very often,
restricting the rights of immigrants also restricted those of citizens;
one recent example is the U.S. Illegal Immigration Reform and
Immigrant Responsibility Act of 1996, an immigration law that took
away rights from immigrants and, far less noticed, citizens.5
    Anti-immigrant sentiment, long a critical dynamic in Europe, has
until recently been mostly overlooked in most accounts of European
history, given self-understanding as a continent of emigration.6
Anti-immigrant sentiment and attacks occurred in each major immi-
gration wave in all major European countries. No labor-receiving
country has a clean record—not Switzerland, with its long admirable
history of international neutrality, and not France, the most open to
immigration, refugees, and exiles. For instance, French workers killed
Italian workers in the 1800s, accusing them of being the wrong type
of Catholic.
    There have always been, as there are today, individuals, groups,
organizations, and politicians who believe in making society more
inclusive. History suggests that those fighting for immigrant inclu-
sion have succeeded in the long run, even if only partially. The trans-
formation from disdain for foreigners to acceptance is also the result
of constraints in a large city; for instance, in a sound, reasonably
fast public transport system, it is not feasible to check the status of
all users. A basic rule needs to be met: pay your ticket and you’re
on. That is the making of the civic as a material condition. Anyone
who meets the basic rule—pay the ticket—can use public transport,
regardless of whether they are citizens or immigrants, former prison-
ers, tax evaders, or generally nice people.
    Europe has a little-known several-century history of internal cross-
border labor migration. This history hovers in the shadows of official
European history, dominated by the image of Europe as a conti-
nent of emigration, never of immigration. Yet in the 1700s, when
Amsterdam built its polders and cleared its bogs, it brought in north-
ern Germans to help; when the French developed their vineyards,
they brought in Spaniards. Workers from the Alps were brought in
to help develop Milan and Turin, as were the Irish when London
228 Bridging Divides


needed help building water and sewage infrastructure. In the 1800s,
when Haussmann rebuilt central Paris, he brought in Germans and
Belgians; when Sweden decided the monarchy needed some new
palaces, it brought in Italian stoneworkers; when Switzerland built
its Gothard Tunnel, it brought in Italians; and when Germany built
its railroads and steel mills, it brought in Italians and Poles.
    During these flows of intra-European migration, immigrant
workers were initially seen as outsiders—as undesirables, as threats to
the community, as people who could never belong. The immigrants
were mostly from the same broad cultural group, religious group,
and phenotype as receiving societies. Yet they were considered impos-
sible to assimilate. The French saw Belgian and Italian immigrant
workers as the wrong type of Catholic; the Dutch saw German
immigrant workers as the wrong type of Protestant. These telling
facts suggest that it is incorrect to argue, as is so often done, that
it is more difficult today to integrate immigrants because of their
different religions, cultures, and phenotypes. When these features
were similar, anti-immigrant sentiment was as strong as it is today,
and it often led to violence.
    Yet after two or three generations, many immigrants found their
way into the community fabric. They often maintained their distinc-
tiveness, while still being members of the complex, highly heteroge-
neous social order of any developed city.7
    Today, the argument against immigration is focused on race,
religion, and culture, and this focus might seem rational—cultural
and religious distance is why integration is difficult. But in sifting
through the evidence, we find only new contents for an old passion:
the racializing of the outsider as the ‘Other’. Today, the Other
is stereotyped by differences of race, religion, and culture. These
arguments mirror those of the past, when migrants were broadly
of the same religious, racial, and cultural group. Migration hinges
on a move between two worlds, even if within a single region or
country, such as that of East Germans moving to West Germany
after 1989, where they were often viewed as a different ethnic group
with undesirable traits. What is today’s equivalent challenge, one
that can help us look beyond our differences and make what would
correspond to that traditional European civic tradition built through
incorporating at least a share of the foreigners in their midst?
                                                        Saskia Sassen   229


Where we stand

The major challenges that confront cities—and society in general—
have increasingly strong feedback loops that disassemble the old civic
urban order. But these challenges also have the potential to spur
the development of new types of civic cultures—broad platforms
for urban action and collaboration across groups. Fighting climate
change might well force citizens and immigrants to work together,
regardless of religion, culture, or phenotype. Similarly, fighting the
abuses of state power in the war on terror can create coalitions that
bring together residents who once would never have collaborated.
Now that there are greater threats to civil rights—and even basic
survival—amid sharp inequalities and climate change, we might well
see novel solidarities emerge.
   Zooming into the city level, with the evidence I examined, includ-
ing the cases described in this paper, one conclusion jumps out.
Cities that succeed in their interventions show us that the old model
of “integrating them” does not work; what seems to work best is a
different starting point: “we are all in here—we all are the city. There
is no ‘them.’” Integration policies that work begin with building on
current integration efforts that have succeeded (even if integration
has been limited). The work of integrating across divides in a city
then becomes the work of improving existing integration nodes
(schools, workplaces, neighborhood sub-economies, housing, cul-
tural districts) and expanding the number of points of integration to
achieve better distributed urban economies, housing, and transport.
The aspiration is multi-nodal cities on all three vectors.

Notes
 1. See also Gratz’s (2010) chapter on manufacturing in New York City
    linked to top-level design sectors—for example, making classic style
    furniture replicas to be sold through the Museum of Modern Art.
    Another example is American Apparel, a fashion store that made a point
    of manufacturing in inner Los Angeles and became hugely successful,
    though it eventually suffered setbacks.
 2. This usage of the term “slum” needs to be distinguished from the exclu-
    sively negative conventional understandings, whether in literature or in
    UN Habitat practice. The recovery of the term comes from leadership
230 Bridging Divides


      in some of the world’s major slums. “Slum” here is a knowing word
      choice. It is not the category of the observer, but the category of the
      actor inside the slum. I develop some of this in Sassen (2011a). See also
      Sassen (2011b).
 3.   Public Women: Gender Inclusive Planning Experiences in Catalonia
      (colectivopunto6@gmail.com).
 4.   Emphasis on this multiplication of partial assemblage contrasts with
      its treatment in much of the globalization literature, which tends to
      assume the binary of the global versus the national. In this literature,
      the national is understood as a unit. I emphasize that the global can also
      be inside the national—that is, the global city. The globalization litera-
      ture also tends to focus on the powerful global institutions that have
      played a critical role in implementing the global corporate economy
      and have reduced the power of the state. By contrast, I also emphasize
      that some components of the state have gained power because they have
      to implement policies necessary for a global corporate economy. This
      is another reason for valuing the more encompassing normative order
      that a city can (though does not necessarily) generate.
 5.   See Sassen (2008), ch. 6; see also chs. 4 and 5 for a diversity of other
      domains besides immigration.
 6.   This section is based on research in two previous works: Sassen (1999,
      2007).
 7.   Elsewhere I have documented the acts of violence, the hatreds we
      Europeans felt against those whom we today consider “one of us.” See
      Sassen (1999); for a more general discussion, see Appadurai (2006).


Bibliography
Afghanistan Ministry of Education. 2012. Terms of Reference: Conducting
   Social Marketing Survey, Providing Job and Life Skills Trainings,
   and Job Placement Service. Islamic Republic of Afghanistan. http://
   www.worldbank.org/projects/P116036/adolescent-girls-initiative-
   afghanistan?lang=en.
Akter, Tahera. 2010. Migration and Living Conditions in Urban Slums
   Implications for Food Security. Unnayan Onneshan. http://www.unnayan.
   org/index.php?option=com_content%26view=category%26layout=blo
   g%26id=27%26Itemid=163.
Appadurai, Arjun. 2006. Fear of Small Numbers. Durham: Duke University
   Press.
Falu, Ana, ed. 2009. Women in the City: On Violence and Rights. Santiago
   de Chile: Ed. Sur.
                                                        Saskia Sassen   231


Falu, Ana, and Olga Segovia, eds. 2007. Ciudades para convivir. Santiago de
   Chile: Ed. Sur.
Fitzgerald, Joan. 2009. “Cities on the Front Lines.” The American Prospect.
   http://prospect.org/article/cities-front-lines.
Fosado, Gisela, and Janet R. Jackson, eds. 2009. Valuing Domestic Work.
   Special issue of The Feminist and Scholar Online 8.1. http://www.barnard.
   edu/sfonline/work/index.htm.
German, Erik, and Solana Pyne. 2010. “The Dreams of Dhaka’s Garment
   Girls.” Global Post. http://www.globalpost.com/dispatch/asia/100831/
   bangladesh-megacities-part-two-garment-girl.
The Global Fund for Women. 2003. “Impact Report No. 1: Economic
   Opportunity Initiative.” San Francisco. www.globalfundforwomen.org/
   storage/images/stories/downloads/impact-report-1.pdf.
Gratz, Roberta Brandes. 2010. The Battle for Gotham: New York in the
   Shadow of Robert Moses and Jane Jacobs. New York: Nation Books.
Holmes, Rebecca, Nicola Jones, Rosana Vargas, and Fabio Veras. 2010.
   Cash Transfers and Gendered Risks and Vulnerabilities: Lessons from Latin
   America. Overseas Development Institute. http://www.odi.org.uk/
   resources/search.asp?type=Discussion%20papers.
Hong Kong Human Rights Monitor. 2001. Shadow Report to the United
   Nations Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination Regarding
   the Report of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the People’s
   Republic of China. http://hkhrm.org.hk.
Hong Kong Immigration Department. 2012. Quick Guide for the
   Employment of Domestic Helpers from Abroad (ID 989). The Government
   of Hong Kong Special Administrative Region. http://www.immd.gov.
   hk/ehtml/ID(E)989.htm.
Jaeckel, Monica, Andrea Laux, and Gabriele Brany. 2002. Mothers in
   the Center: Mother Centers. Self Published. http://www.mine.cc/files/
   ScreenMCBook.pdf.
Laux, Andrea, and Rut Kolinska. 2004. Building Bridges with the Grassroots:
   Scaling Up through Knowledge Sharing. World Urban Forum, Barcelona.
   http://ww2.unhabitat.org/cdrom/wuf/documents/Networking%20
   events/Added%20material/Building%20Bridges%20with%20the%20
   Grassroots/Case%20study%20Empowerment.pdf.
Marcuse, Peter. 2002. “Urban Form and Globalization after September
   11th: The View from New York.” International Journal of Urban and
   Regional Research 26 (3): 596–606.
Mother Centers International Network for Empowerment (MINE). 2012.
   “MINE Background.” http://www.mine.cc/node/17.
232 Bridging Divides


Sassen, Saskia. 1999. Guests and Aliens: Europe’s Immigrants, Refugees and
   Colonists. New York: New Press.
———. 2007. A Sociology of Globalization. New York: W.W. Norton.
———. 2008. Territory, Authority, Rights: From Medieval to Global
   Assemblages. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
——–—. 2010. “A Savage Sorting of Winners and Losers: Contemporary
   Versions of Primitive Accumulation.” Globalizations 7 (1–2): 23–50.
——–—. 2011a. “La Salada: The Largest Informal Market in South America.”
   Forbes, March 28. http://blogs.forbes.com/megacities/2011/03/28/
   la-salada-the-largest-informal-market-in-south-america/.
——–—. 2011b. “The Global City and the Global Slum.” Forbes, March
   22. http://blogs.forbes.com/megacities/2011/03/22/the-global-city-
   and-the-global-slum/#more-33.
——–—. 2012. “Urban Capabilities: An Essay on Our Challenges and
   Differences.” Journal of International Affairs 65 (2): 85–95.
Schwab Foundation for Social Entrepreneurship. “Social Entrepreneurs:
   Suraiya Haque.” http://www.schwabfound.org/content/suraiya-haque.
Social Institutions and Gender Index (SIGI). 2012. “Peru.” http://
   genderindex.org/country/peru#_ftn40.
Smith, Michael Peter and Adrian Favell. 2006. “The Human Face of Global
   Mobility: International Highly Skilled Migration in Europe, North
   America and the Asia-Pacific.” Special Issue. Comparative Urban and
   Community Research 8.
Stanton, Caitlin. 2012. “The Global Fund for Women Impact Report:
   Gender Equality in Asia & The Pacific.” Global Fund for Women, San
   Francisco. http://www.globalfundforwomen.org/storage/documents/
   impact/Global_Fund_for_Women_Impact_Report_Breaking_
   Through.pdf.
Swinney, Dan. 2009. “Chicago Green Manufacturing Network. Illinois
   Future: The Global Leader in Manufacturing the Products of the Future.”
   Center for Labor and Community Research, Chicago, IL.
UNICEF. 2002. Innocenti Digest No. 10: Poverty and Exclusion among Urban
   Children. 21.
Varia, Nisha. 2007. “Sanctioned Abuses: The Case of Migrant Domestic
   Workers.” Human Rights Brief 14 (3): 17–20.
Viswanath, Kalpana, and Surabhi Tandon Mehrotra. 2008. “Safe in the
   City?” http://www.india-seminar.com/2008/583/583_kalpana_and_
   surabhi.htm.
Whitzman, Carolyn, Crystal Legacy, Caroline Andrew, Fran Klodawsky,
   Margaret Shaw, and Kalpana Viswanath, eds. 2012. Building Inclusive
   Cities Women’s Safety and the Right to the City. Routledge.
                                                     Saskia Sassen   233


Weber, Max. 1921. The City. Reprinted in 1986. Glencoe, IL: Free Press.
World Bank. 2009. “Project Information Document: Adolescent
  Girls Initiative—Afghanistan.” Washington, DC. http://www-wds.
  worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/
  IB/2011/05/04/000001843_20110505180435/Rendered/PDF/
  Project0Inform1cument1Concept0Stage.pdf.
9


The Great Migration
Urban Aspirations


Michael Keith




The great 21st-century migration into cities will present both a major
challenge for humanity and a significant opportunity for global
economic growth. This chapter describes the diverse patterns that
define this metropolitan migration. It then lays out a framework
for understanding the costs and benefits of new arrivals through
migration’s externalities and the challenges and policy tradeoffs that
confront city stakeholders. The chapter concludes by suggesting ways
municipalities, by optimizing flexibility, can make migration more
productive and less destructive in shaping the “good city” and the
“smart city.”
   There are few paths to global economic growth that do not run
through cities—and even fewer that do not depend on growing the
city in population size, scale, and economic exchange. Historically,
cities have grown by concentrating the economic advantages of
number and density, the social potential of innovation, and the
cultural possibilities of newness. By bringing together the factors
of production—land, labor, capital, and enterprise—in ever more
                                                          Michael Keith    235


recombinant forms, cities offer the possibility of securing new eco-
nomic advantages and scaling them up.
   To realize these advantages—in 18th- and 19th-century indus-
trial cities as much as in today’s megacities and medium-size cities—
urban growth must integrate new populations into the metropolitan
machine. Urban demographic change can come from population
growth through longer life expectancies and from birth rates exceed-
ing death rates, but it can also come from a city’s appeal to people who
in turn drive further rounds of economic development. Journalist
and commentator Doug Saunders (2010) projects a massive demo-
graphic shift to urban areas:

  What will be remembered about the 21st century, more than any-
  thing else except perhaps the effects of a changing climate, is the great,
  and final, shift of human population out of rural, agricultural life and
  into cities. We will end this century as a wholly urban species. This
  movement engages an unprecedented number of people—2–3 billion
  humans, perhaps a third of the world’s population—and will affect
  almost everyone in tangible ways. It will be the last human movement
  of this size and scope; in fact, the changes it makes to family life, from
  large agrarian families to small urban ones, will put an end to the
  major theme of human history, continuous population growth. (p. 1)

The world is only becoming more urban. While Europe has 35 cities
of at least a million people, by 2025 China will have an estimated
225 cities and India’s number of cities will have grown from 42 to 68.
By 2030, some 350 million more people will live in Chinese cities.
And though growth in Indian cities is driven more by expanding
urban populations and the reclassification of formerly rural land,
the move to the city has already restructured traditional social and
economic relations.
   But the migration challenge for 21st-century cities is complex.
Alongside the urbanization of predominantly rural societies across
the world, other flows reflect changing demographics, new labor
market demands, family unification, and political upheaval. In
Europe, long-term demographic trends have led to shrinking cities
in some areas and a demand for migrant replacement populations
and new labor markets in healthcare sectors due to an aging
population. High-skilled labor migration has become one facet of
236 The Great Migration


globalization, while increasing human connectivity has forged links
across transnational family networks. Political upheavals generate
major forced migrations in conflict zones, geopolitical realities create
transit migrations, and countless people travel under the radar of
formal measurement—irregular migrations of a scale that authorities
can only estimate. Meanwhile, the old growth engines of cities in
the global north attract the hopeful and the skilled. In exceptions, such
as Japan and the Republic of Korea, states try to resist in-migration,
but strengthening labor demand remains on the policy horizon
for expanding economies. So the first challenge for 21st-century
cities is to understand that, while migration into cities is a global
phenomenon, both the causes and the consequences are complex
and varied.

What complicates the move to cities

The move to cities is central to development and growth, but the
arrival of migrants can trigger concerns about the impacts of migra-
tion. Indeed, potential competition for resources and opportunities
has frequently translated into populist sentiment.
   In February 2012, a national controversy erupted in China when
professionals in Hong Kong SAR, China, took out a newspaper ad
depicting incoming mainland Chinese as locusts and asking, “Are
you willing to pay 1 million HK dollars every 18 minutes to take
care of mainland children born in Hong Kong?” (China Daily
2012). In Mumbai in recent years, Raj Thackeray, founder of the
Maharashtra Navnirman Sena, has used concerns about competing
rural migrants—Biharis in particular—to drive populist campaigns
and secure political power. In the United Kingdom, even after the
2008–09 global financial crisis, migration remains a top political
concern, and in mainland Europe anti-migrant sentiment drove both
the rise of extremist parties and at times mainstream debates.
   So why is this? Why do economies and cities demand further
streams of migration while existing residents worry about incomers?
The answer is straightforward but challenging for mayors and policy
makers alike. The opposition to migration is not entirely irrational.
Cities need migration: migrants grow the economy, and migrant
niche economies frequently create innovation and dynamism. Some
                                                     Michael Keith   237


40 percent of Fortune 500 companies were started by migrants
or their children. But the costs and benefits of migration are not
distributed evenly. This concept needs to inform policy development.
    The benefits of migration accrue in the labor market (whether
defined by commuting distance or recruiting distance) and the
tax base. The integration of migrants into labor markets displaces
some people in competition for jobs; however, migrants themselves
generate demand, spend their own money, and in turn create new
employment opportunities. There is no “lump of labor” among
which city jobs are shared. Most analysts contend that migration to
the city will usually grow jobs and, consequently, the tax base and
overall benefits for society. But these benefits can accrue unevenly.
Migration’s unintended consequences—welfare externalities—
become most visible in neighborhoods, where people live rather
than work. In some areas, migration-related social change might lead
to pressures on public goods—environmental amenities, primary
schools, and subsidized housing (for rent or ownership).
    But importantly for policy makers, measuring these externali-
ties involves both normative and analytical categories. Externalities
generate policy tradeoffs for municipal governance in balancing the
permeability of a city’s economy with the integration of its society. As
cities strive to accommodate flows of people, different welfare systems
ration scarce public goods in different ways. These rationing systems
are frequently controlled nationally but managed locally. Pragmatic
demands on city managers often involve demographic realities that
do not align with national policy principles—as much in New York,
London, or Los Angeles as in Mexico City, Johannesburg, Shenzhen,
or Istanbul.
    New migrants’ access to health care is often regulated nationally,
though the controversial 2012 flows from the mainland to Hong Kong
SAR, China, for natal and perinatal care highlighted the uneven-
ness of national categorization. At other times, city mayors and local
governments determine access to public or semipublic goods like
primary education or subsidized accommodation. Accommodation
of migrants defines the permeability of residence in rental and pur-
chase markets and at times in the extemporized development and
settlement of unused metropolitan areas. And so rationing and regu-
lation depend heavily on whether new migrants are full citizens—
238 The Great Migration


whether they have the same rights as residents to public and private
goods.
   The arrival of people in a city often accelerates the growth of
informal settlements, overcrowded rental accommodations, and
“slumlords,” or landlords that exploit new arrivals. The ways that new
migrants access subsidized housing, dwell in regulated and inspected
rental sectors, or receive accommodation after displacement by slum
clearance or urban renewal schemes all nuance the absolute costs of
migration externalities with the moral classifications of eligibility
criteria (see Box 9.1).
   Some cases of migration’s welfare externalities challenge the con-
ventional measurement of its fiscal impacts. Within a static model
of the city, including new migrants in the rationing of public goods


    Box 9.1    Plural migrations and welfare externalities: social
                  housing eligibility in east London

  London is a global city structured by generations of migration. Its
  East End in particular has paradoxically provided both extreme social
  conflict and ideal migrant integration. The conflict and the community
  building have frequently revolved around competing eligibility defini-
  tions of migrants and locals.
      The white East End has given us exemplary moments of cultural
  fusion. The quintessentially British fish and chips emerged here from
  Jewish methods of preparing fish and the Huguenot tradition of fry-
  ing Irish potatoes. But the East End has also witnessed violent clashes
  between Catholic and Jewish migrants, marked in turf wars like the
  Battle of Cable Street in 1936, when the British Union of Fascists
  marched on the Jewish quarter. Even contemporary “whiteness”
  crumbles under scrutiny, highlighting old conflicts between Irish
  migrants who built the docks in the 19th century; Irish crime families
  still living in 21st-century east London; Jewish migrants forced from
  the Pale in the late 19th century, some of whom followed Rudolph
  Rocker’s Jewish cosmopolitan anti-colonialism; and people displaced
  from across Europe after World War II. From the 1970s on, migration
  focused principally on the Sylhet region of Bangladesh, amplifying old
  lascar seafarer connections with London’s docks but concentrating new
  arrivals in the restaurant and rag trade sectors.
                                                         Michael Keith   239



    Legal residents in the 1980s, Bangladeshi families were dispropor-
tionately offered the worst social housing, and the UK Commission for
Racial Equality moved against the local authority for overt discrimina-
tion. Bangladeshi rights to the city were also fought for rather than
given, with popular uprisings following the deaths of high-profile
victims of racist violence. But as rational allocation of social housing
came to the fore in the 1990s, some challenged the moral calculus
that privileged either those born locally or those with the greatest
immediate needs. The neighborhood, the borough, and the country
determine eligibility for subsidized rental housing in different ways.
How to mediate the “proper” democratic demands of “local” people
and the “rights” of those needing accommodation is an intractable
problem.
    Many applicants for social housing were born in Bangladesh. So
even after living in the United Kingdom for many decades, they are
formally migrants. This raises one of the central questions in calculating
migration’s welfare externalities: How do we regulate the welfare state in
a world structured by global flows of people and resources? Migration’s
social costs in housing shortages and ethnic competition focus on dense
city neighborhoods, even where the economic benefits of Bangladeshi
migration have been immense. Today, sink estates bought through
right-to-buy take-ups of old council rentals (by old Jewish and Irish
families and by Bangladeshi migrants) are let out to Lithuanians and
Russians, and Roman Catholic school enrollment is rising again. Who
has the right to demand welfare support in today’s globalized world?
Whose communities should be provided welfare?
    Theoretically, this might make us think about a tension between com-
munitarian belonging and sentimental transnationalism. Practically,
the most effective integration depended on three strategies to diffuse
eligibility-criteria conflict. First, strong policy planning increased
the social housing supply by extracting at least 25 percent of all new
private housing development for public amenity (and up to 50 percent
where accompanied by state subsidy). Second, transparent allocation
systems encouraged people to “choose” properties and see the results of
their preference in their place on the allocation queue. Third, eligibility
criteria explicitly addressed both social need and the queuing element
of waiting for social housing. Such practices focus on the eligibility
criteria of migrants to the city. They cannot eliminate social conflict
but can enhance a sense of progressive urban change in all sections of
the community.
240 The Great Migration


increases objective welfare costs. But some policy makers, consider-
ing a more dynamic model, might argue that excluding new migrants
from the rationing of public goods decreases the long-term benefits
of migration, as the new migrants’ potential contribution to the city
economy is not fully realized. Yet allowing newcomers access to state-
financed social inclusion (in schooling, health care, welfare services,
and housing) potentially undermines the solidarities of existing city
dwellers and may thus have social consequences.
   These dilemmas highlight two challenges for policy makers in
the 21st-century city governments. First, the great movement into
cities replicates a standard tradeoff in migration studies. Some
scholars believe that there might be a tradeoff between restricting
the numbers of migrants allowed into a country and extending
rights to new migrants (Ruhs 2013). In other words, it might be
easier for policy makers to increase the numbers of international
migrants in a country that restricts migrant rights than in a country
that immediately grants new migrants full citizenship. Second, the
immediate impacts of new migrants may focus on current labor
demand (a static model of the city economy), but the longer impact
may reflect labor demand beyond a single economic cycle and social
trends across several generations (a dynamic model).
   How well people sustain international connections also raises ana-
lytical and moral challenges for policy makers. In today’s societies,
where both mobility and international connection have increased
exponentially, migrants may sustain links between locations; “home”
may refer both to places where families arrive and to places where
families are rooted. As the distinction between permanent and tem-
porary migration potentially blurs as a result, maintaining longer term
transnational links takes on more meaning. In the 21st century, we
are already seeing countercyclical flows, as Brazilian and Colombian
migrants to Madrid and London return to the more dynamic Latin
American economies, and policy debates on marriage migration, as
one demographic chooses spouses from countries of origin rather
than country of arrival.
   Temporal dimensions further complicate the move into cities,
which often have neighborhoods and districts where several trends
operate simultaneously. In the early 20th century and after World
War II, we considered mass migration to global north industrial cities
                                                     Michael Keith   241


(for example, to the United States, Canada, and northern Europe)
permanent, with declining social and family connections with the
origin nation and assimilation into the new settlement site. But as the
world has become more connected, global travel has become cheaper,
easier, and faster, while Skype, Twitter, and Facebook can connect
us 24 hours a day. In the 20th century, migration was considered
generational, with the first-migration generation characterized by
arrival, the second by settlement, and the third by assimilation.
The 21st-century displacement of migration paradigms by mobility
paradigms—describing new, less rooted connections of people to
places—complicates these dynamics. And as origin nations’ econo-
mies grow, migration networks reconfigure.
   In the late 20th century, Spain, Italy, and Greece hosted steady
economic expansion that transformed Barcelona, Madrid, Rome,
Naples, and Athens from origin nations to migrant destinations. As
global economic dynamics shift even faster, migration networks will
continue to evolve geopolitically. For example, Kumkapi, a small
neighborhood in Istanbul, has hosted transnational trading networks
linking the former Soviet Union to its Ottoman penumbra, transit
migrants seeking access to European Union labor markets, and new
international labor migrants contributing to the fast-growing Turkish
economy. Migration consequently both exemplifies and reinforces
urban dynamism, as transnational connections inform commerce
flows, local economic innovation, and labor market flexibility. Policy
makers must understand these distinctive trends, whose cumulative
effects structure both causes and consequences of migration into cities.
Migration externalities are both positive and negative, introducing
new economic possibilities and challenging the ecological balance of
the urban fabric.
   Compounding these dilemmas, variations in skills and affluence
affect both adaptation and reception of new migrants. In economic
theory and longer term social history, growing city economies need
both unskilled and skilled migrants. When we calculate migration’s
welfare externalities, we should remember that both skilled and
unskilled migration in some senses “come cheap” to the host cities.
Crudely put, people cost society mostly in the early and late years
of their lives—when young, they need protection and education;
when old, they need support and more health care. Most migrants
242 The Great Migration


are adults and consequently arrive cost-free; their origin nations have
borne the costs of their early years (see Box 9.2). Highly skilled,
affluent migrants can provide for themselves in the short term
and have the purchasing power to affect local markets. During the
economic upturn of the NICE (non-inflationary consistently expan-
sionary) decade, some 56,000 migrants arrived in London each year.
But the new migration flows initially attracted little media attention,
as most migrants were highly skilled, affluent workers associated
with the booming financial sector, whose presence still largely deter-
mines property prices in some parts of the city.1 Equally, in situations
of political instability, the sheer scale of rapid change can displace
the “rational” policy development of both migration flows and
settlement integration. South Africa’s largest city, Johannesburg, has
3–3.5 million people and a greater area population at least twice
that. By late 2011, it was home to an estimated 450,000 asylum
seekers, predominantly from neighboring Zimbabwe, making it
one of the world’s largest refugee camps, with migrant presence
equally distorting both policy debate and metropolitan dynamics
(Dailymotion 2011).

  Box 9.2 Shenzhen Speed: city growth and migrant integration

  “Shenzhen Speed” captures the pace of economic development in the
  city just north of Hong Kong SAR, China. In 1979, some 390,000
  people held Shenzhen residential rights, or hukou. The municipal
  regions’ residential population are now an estimated 10–15 million.
  Liu Kaiming (2007) has delineated four phases of development of the
  city’s growth. In phase 1 (1979–85), large-scale urban infrastructure
  was built, driven by migrant workers from other parts of Guangdong
  Province. From 1983, the development of export-processing factories
  relied on the sanlai yibu system (three imports and one compensation).
  Affluence focused on a local synthesis of raw materials, components,
  labor, and land with a lump-sum compensation. The state led the model,
  but enterprises linked to (frequently Hong Kong SAR, China–focused)
  foreign direct investment, ever more flexible employment policies,
  and an increasingly female migrant labor force. In phase 2 (1986–92),
  more factories and enterprises appeared, developing a wider geographic
  focus but remaining largely within special economic zones. In phase 3
  (1992–2000) and phase 4 (2000–present), the city has displayed rapid
                                                        Michael Keith   243



restructuring—the factories and production systems have moved up
the value chain, factories relocated, and migrants improved their skills.
    Although the pattern has become more complex in recent years,
Shenzhen migrants live overwhelmingly in cheng zhong cun (villages in
the city), where rural property rights remain. Old village clans retain
much of their autonomy, negotiate with municipal government, and
shape residential development, sometimes with notoriously poor-
quality and poorly planned handshake apartments (wo shou fang) where
migrants live in overcrowded conditions and sometimes targeting the
skilled and affluent migrants in partnerships with real estate developers.
    A paradox rests at the heart of the Shenzhen integration machine:
formalized informality. Rural property rights over development in the
cheng zhong cun have sped reform-era urban growth since 1978 and
state-regulated urban property rights in the “rational” and planned
metropolis. The cheng zhong cun work as family-based limited stock
investment companies that have effectively incorporated the massive
migrant flows into the city, evolving rapidly as one wave of migrants
succeeds another. But the villages are sites of informality and creativ-
ity, as well as the means of selective incorporation and subordination.
Some villages, such as Da Fen, where major arts and cultural industries
linked to Hong Kong SAR, China, investment have clustered, have
specialized economically, while others negotiate directly with foreign
direct investment manufacturers from Japan. Yet others, such as Xia
Sha, have transformed from unskilled labor sites to rental housing
sites for skilled workers in local technology firms. Functionally, they
serve the city’s interests. Economically, they mediate migration welfare
externalities. Welfare net costs are borne by the hidden support systems
in the rural regions where children are sent home to be educated, the
partial and incomplete models of hukou-related “city-zenship” that
proffer provisional and partial membership and limited access to city
rights to new arrivals. In the parts of Shenzhen that have moved up
the manufacturing value chain, the villages have evolved rapidly. In
some villages, old handshake apartments have been renovated for more
upmarket tenants (Shenzhen-style gentrification). In other villages,
the development of commodity housing has created new leasehold
arrangements. In parts of the city with urban property rights, new
xiao qu residential complexes have created a different urbanism. The
plurality of regimes of property rights has so far worked pragmatically
as the municipality negotiates between the local government’s formal
powers and the company structures of the (informally zoned) villages.
244 The Great Migration


   Policy makers must mediate short-term pressures and long-term
gains and recognize the plural geographical scales of the metropolis.
Successful urban migration depends on a city’s permeability—its
ability to integrate new presence in an old fabric.

Policy agendas, agenda setting, and tradeoffs in
city governance

What makes a city permeable to migration? The anonymity of cities
like Lagos, New York, and Shanghai, with weak social bonds and
indifference to strangers, helps make urban neighborhoods more
flexible, suggesting that city freedoms sometimes self-regulate. But
exuberant urban growth gone unchecked can lead to city sprawl
that in its low densities rapidly becomes ecologically unsustainable.
Managing longer and shorter term pressures calls for understanding
the policy dilemmas of incremental but rapid urban change. This in
turn demands a facility for making sense of how migration affects
some parts of a city differently than others. This balancing of time
scales and geographic scales informs the policy agendas and tradeoffs
necessary for the 21st-century city.

Rights and the rational city

In November 2004, at the initiative of the Dutch Presidency, the EU
Council adopted the Common Basic Principles on Integration. The
principles were designed to promote a common European approach
toward migrant integration and to serve as a reference for imple-
menting and evaluating current and future integration policies. The
extent to which member states of the European Union have adopted
them is moot.
   But the framework could help city governments consider migrant
integration in both a global and European context. The Council
identifies economic, social, cultural, and political integration and
a commitment from the European Union to manage migrant
integration as a two-way process involving migrants themselves
and the institutions and societies where they arrive. This moves
policy practice away from an expectation that effective integration
depends entirely on the new arrivals assimilating themselves. It
                                                        Michael Keith   245


draws attention to the policies that successfully promote migrant
integration—a British model developed by Ager and Strang (2004)
to focus on policy interventions in employment, housing, education,
and health that are facilitated by ensuring both “language and cultural
knowledge” and the safety and stability of migrant settlement and
networks (Figure 9.1).
   The model is as useful for cities of the global south as it is for cities
of the global north—because it identifies a transition through which
specific interventions can enhance urban permeability. It points
policy formation toward the most effective integration interventions,
most notably through considering human capital and language skills
and protecting new arrivals’ safety and security (in criminal justice
systems and civil society).
   The focus on evolving integration also suggests how urban policy
making might prioritize dynamic social change within incremental
policy intervention. City perspectives often differ from those of
nation-states. Cities may reconcile the presence of illegal or irregular
migrants with their contribution to the city’s social and economic fab-
ric through migration amnesties or established paths to citizenship.
North American and European mayors are often more sympathetic
to such amnesties than central governments, keen on maximizing
and formalizing the employment conditions and tax contributions of
working migrants.




Figure 9.1   The indicators of integration framework
Source: Ager and Strang 2004.
246 The Great Migration


Recognition and belonging

To be inclusive, the changing city must continually build a sense of
community. Also, sustained links between homeland (or “diasporic”)
networks and the arrival cities can be mutually productive. The
American sociologist Alejandro Portes has long argued that such
networks enhance ethnic enclave and niche economies in the new
arrival cities and the potential for growing ethnic enterprises that help
upward mobility. This model is seen across the world—in migrants
from Wenzhou Province to Beijing and Shanghai; in the successful
social mobility of South Asian “twice migrants” expelled from Africa
during the decolonization period and succeeding in British cities in
the 1980s and 1990s; and in some “model minority” Korean and
Cuban settlements in the United States.
   However, recognizing the identity politics of new migrations pres-
ents policy makers with further dilemmas. Religious faith commonly
creates powerful social networks but can also challenge religion’s place
in the public square and its framing in social policy interventions. The
geopolitics of the early 21st century promoted particularly intolerant
debates about Islamic structures, institutions, and symbols serving
new migrant communities. The controversies around the Ground
Zero mosque in New York City, New York, United States the 1992
destruction of the Babri mosque in Ayodhya, Uttar Pradesh, India,
and the 2009 ban on mosque minarets in Switzerland demonstrate
how the urban landscape has become a contested arena of identity
politics. City governments not only regulate and license the visible
presence of new cultures but also structure their own institutions
in ways that either welcome and include new cultural demands or
ignore or exclude them.
   Self-help, grassroots welfare, and community organizations may
use migrant identities to organize religious schooling, two-way flows
of remittances, home and family support, and rural-urban links,
entrenching social divisions (and sometimes political power bases)
between migrant groups instead of bringing them together. The
social and political landscape of cities like Karachi or Cape Town or
(in different ways) London or Chicago demonstrate this patterning.
   Urbanism is both an inventive life form and one that regularly
defies government prerogative and rational organization. Formally
                                                      Michael Keith   247


suppressed articulations of culture, work, and life commonly find
the city plastic enough to support informal expression. This in turn
broaches two further arenas for migration policy consideration in
21st-century cities. The first considers the functionality of formally
recognizing the migrant presence. The second considers the possibil-
ity of planning and developing a flexible urbanism.

Formality and informality

States often try to control migration and then fail to suppress it. In
Los Angeles and New York, Berlin and London, Istanbul and Cairo,
Johannesburg and Nairobi, and Shenzhen and Beijing, national gov-
ernments in recent decades have at times attempted to prevent in-
migration. But some essential characteristics of the city—complexity,
anonymity, weak governance—enable people to avoid detection for
long periods of time (irregular migration). This can create tension
between city government and national government. Nation states
make policies that formalize the movement of people; municipalities
have to manage and mediate the informal realities that do not always
mirror the policies.
   Irregular migration is by definition hard to measure. But in many
cities—from Istanbul to New York to Shenzhen—migration realities,
rather than policy rhetoric, structure neighborhoods. Demonstrating
the tension between the formal and the informal city, irregular
migration informs the policy dilemmas for city stakeholders who
work simultaneously at the local, the metropolitan, and the central
government levels. Informal settlement challenges how we think
about balancing the rights of the migrant (particularly the “right” to
housing) with the proper regulation of the city.
   Particularly in the global south, some cities have settlements without
clear property rights, where established tenure does not correspond
with formal title and where informal occupation defies formal cadas-
tration. Such situations demand clear thinking about the economic
and moral calculus we use to develop the good city—reconciling
the plausible with the ideal, demographic settlement pressures with
rational organization of space, property rights with popular demands
for redistribution, and formal principles with informal realities.
248 The Great Migration


   Policy practice and city experience are developing to address
how migration affects more urban common pool resources, such as
occupied or informally titled land, and how “urban land tools” affect
the integration of a migrant community. Because migrants join com-
munities that may already be tenure insecure, local groups “can be
quick to abandon or change ways of tenure in the face of significant
migrant arrival, because there can be little reason to continue with
rules that others are not following” (Unruh 2004). Legitimacy, a
crucial component of protection against eviction, is complicated as
migrant groups shift, appropriate, and alter the premises for access to
land-based resources (Box 9.3) (Unruh 2004).
   Extensive research has been conducted on strategies to formalize,
integrate, and upgrade semi-permanent communities of poor rural-
to-urban migrants through an emphasis on promoting rights of use,


        Box 9.3     Migration settlement dynamics in the city:
                       inclusive exceptionalism

  Across the south, experiments are addressing the challenges of localized
  urban poverty through policy instruments that institutionalize territo-
  rial exceptionalisms from specific planning regulations. These strategies
  target regulatory conditions that may impede the growth and main-
  tenance of land tenure and livelihood arrangements, accommodating
  gradual growth through the incremental application of regulations
  over defined periods of time. Exceptional zoning, in some ways akin
  to special economic zones, can instead dampen the impacts of land
  speculation and planning codes to promote inclusive growth, protect-
  ing the fragile social capital on which much of the world’s urban poor
  and newly arrived depend.
      For example, in policy critiques of Texas’s colonias, low-wage migrant
  neighborhoods on the U.S.-Mexico border, researchers have noted a
  catch-22: urban infrastructure essential for upgrading a migrant’s home
  is often connected right up to the colonia’s edge but then withheld
  from most households due to rigid health and safety regulations (Ward
  1999). Implementing a regulatory exceptionalism might help unblock
  this bind, to the mutual benefit of migrants and the existing community.
  As the colonia develops, utilities might be connected preemptively.
  Health and safety standards might then be gradually applied in parallel
                                                         Michael Keith    249



with actual growth, affording the colonias a more stable tax base, better
integration into the labor force, and the retroactive payment of original
utility connections (Ward 1999). Ananya Roy similarly recounts
how homeless communities in the United States have occupied fully
disowned properties only to be evicted on health and safety grounds
(Roy 2003). This policy stance seems to contradict its own regulatory
logic, as homelessness itself presents a de facto health and safety risk for
the homeless and their surroundings.
    Brazil’s Special Zones of Social Interest, established in the mid-
1980s in Belo Horizonte, provide a concrete precedent of regulatory
exceptionalism over designated territories toward incremental urban
growth. These zones are low-income urban areas with softer planning
rules to promote legalization, legitimacy, and upgrading (Assies
1994). Participatory local governance policies applied to very low-
income districts promote occupation rules that differ from those of
the rest of the city, such as exemptions in land-use standards. But as
anthropologist Teresa Caldeira notes, the fully inclusive participatory
process may inadvertently reinforce acute social and class differences,
as the powerful lobbying potential of richer citizens comes to the
fore. This democratic imbalance may be described as a legalization of
inequality, with poorer areas marked as illegal, rather than extralegal,
by lower land-use standards (Nogueira Budny 2007). Many self-built
areas of Belo Horizonte were not acknowledged until the zones were
established. Integrating these areas in a planning regime lays the
foundation for a longer trajectory of acknowledgment within planning
practices (Nogueira Budny 2007).
    What are the possibilities for learning and applying strategic
exceptionalism and regulatory incrementalism to city areas with a high
density of migrants? Perhaps there are opportunities for addressing
the challenges migrants face to facilitate the livelihood networks that
prove so essential to new arrivals. Specific planning regulations and
infrastructure, if temporarily suspended or preemptively connected, can
complement more social aspects of the “city as integration machine,”
and strategically exceptional zones can be reframed for the commons.
Perhaps we can frame the needs and challenges migrants face as a
negative balance of resources, or as a common pool deficit rather than
a common pool resource. In this way, legislators and policy makers can
use the language of community rules engagement and positive criteria
for participation.
250 The Great Migration


cooperative ownership, and customary land rights to protect critical
livelihoods and social capital (Durand Lasserve 1998; Fernandes and
Varley 1998; Fitzpatrick 2005). But when differences in national
citizenship arise in urban land claims, and as tensions build between
existing urban poor and new arrivals, questions around an occupa-
tion’s legality invariably surface.
    Economically and ethically challenging new settlements occur
commonly at the frontier of development, in marginal lands, where
the state has not yet addressed land tenure, and where political
instability or insecurity has undermined land tenure. These criteria
fit neatly with many of the dense settings of the urban development
frontier, whether in inner city slums, in land zoned for commercial
or industrial use but now derelict through deindustrialization, or on
the urban periphery.
    In regions where major forced migrations structure national con-
texts (such as in many parts of Africa), international aid and service
provision for internally displaced peoples or refugees further com-
plicate rules of access and legitimacy. Unruh (2004) describes the
variability in assistance migrants can receive across local, regional,
national, and international institutional scales and the frequently
contentious nature of this aid with regard to a resource (such as land)
shared with local communities.
    Ostrom (1990) highlights legitimacy and rule shifts in the com-
mons as important for city thinking. Facts on the ground confront
city policy makers with options that demand pragmatic responses,
exemplified in an emerging policy priority area collaboration by the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the Cities
Alliance to address the rapid rise of urban refugees and the still unde-
fined need for urban protection spaces that foreground pressurized
neighborhoods (Cities Alliance 2011). Policy thinking on urban
protection spaces focuses on tenure arrangements for refugees and
migrants in cities and highlights the need to think creatively about
the relationship between the needs of the city as a whole and those of
specific neighborhoods with high in-migration.
    As the city grows, the balance among tenure, title, and occupation
can push city policy makers to trade the legal clarification of property
rights for the need to address housing demands. The analytical fram-
ing of the city commons can both clarify how policy makers might
                                                       Michael Keith   251


approach such tradeoffs and link what appears exceptional in global
south cities with sustainability in affluent metropolises.
   Ostrom’s focus on the legitimacy of questions that separate the
eligible from the ineligible generates a theoretical reconsideration of
mapping publics and commons in a city and practical possibilities
for a strategic exceptionalism (Roy 2005), developing city gover-
nance strategies that build on a community’s self-definition through
conflict or exclusion from land and other forms of the commons
(Box 9.4).



     Box 9.4    Geographic scale jumping and urban migration

  Across institutions, implementing urban upgrading in informal areas,
  with the subsequent possibility of eviction, has led to international
  cooperation on the right to fair resettlement that has jumped across
  local and global scales. Through the increased leverage afforded by
  broad shared-interest federations, groups of urban poor have managed
  to circumvent non-compliant city and national governments by
  lobbying international development organizations to withhold national
  infrastructure funding in response to rights violations. The most
  salient examples of institutional scale jumping toward accountability
  have come from international development organizations increasingly
  opening channels to federations advancing housing rights struggles,
  holding promise for the promotion of new channels to migrants’ rights
  federations.
      Since before 2005, the International Institute for the Environment
  and Development has recommended that development organizations
  promote the “creation of channels” to community-based organiza-
  tions and federations, built mostly around community savings groups
  and often managed by women, to ensure that investment is imple-
  mented most effectively and linked with rights-based accountabil-
  ity (Satterthwaite 2005). The institute argues that change comes not
  from physical improvements but from improvements in relationships
  between groups and agencies leading to physical improvements.
      In India, the National Slum Dwellers Federation, in combination
  with Mahila Milan and the Society for the Promotion of Area Resource

                                                                (contd.)
252 The Great Migration



  Box 9.4 (contd.)
  Centers, has organized more than 2 million slum dwellers and settle-
  ment for some 20,000 households. These resettlement schemes have
  been directed partly by the World Bank as a condition for transporta-
  tion loans to the government of Mumbai (Jamdar 2003 in Roy 2005).
  More recently, in Phnom Penh, Cambodia, where the Solidarity for
  the Urban Poor Federation has been active since 1994, a new wave of
  evictions from Boeung Kak Lake in 2011 led the World Bank to with-
  hold its $50–70 million annual loan to the country (Tran 2011).
      This cooperation between local grassroots organizations and global
  international development organizations to lobby national and city
  governments builds on the advancement of channels by development
  agencies to dialogue with local organizers. However, some qualities
  linking groups in the form of federations and determining interac-
  tion between federations and the state seem more likely to accom-
  modate effective leveraging against local governments. According to
  the International Institute for the Environment and Development,
  factors conducive to cross-scale accountability and resource manage-
  ment include autonomous organizations, social pressure on the state
  (including protest toward partnership), avoidance of political affilia-
  tion, and direct engagement with the state on collective consumption
  in forums that do not involve social movements (Satterthwaite 2005).
  With proper social coordination and a clear, resource-based dialogue
  that avoids political categorization, the right to fair resettlement that
  comes with any upgrading can forge a new cooperation that might
  even hold non-compliant or negligent national and metropolitan
  governments accountable for their citizens’ rights to shelter and basic
  services.
      Given this non-aligned imperative and the transnational nature of
  so many federations, what are the organizational and material assets, or
  commons, for migrants in the city? We can postulate opportunities to
  consolidate autonomous, transnational federations for city migrants,
  explicitly benefiting from a break with the rural-urban/international
  categorization of migrant human rights, and thus politically non-
  aligned despite tangible connections to the state. Clearly articulating
  shared material and social goals, as well as membership criteria and
  rules for lobbying initiatives or social movements, helps create new
  channels between the international and the local for holding city
  governments accountable for violations of urban migrants’ rights.
                                                    Michael Keith   253


   While a community invariably constructs and enforces new rules
of exclusion to avoid the tragedy of the commons (Ostrom 1990),
“migrants can derive their own forms of land access in reaction to
rules of exclusion from community, or … from institutions that
facilitate an equitable place in the local land tenure system” (Unruh
2004, 113). As internal migrant communities in Zambia and refugee
communities in Tanzania demonstrate, limited rights (and citizen-
ship) can enable the development of local rules and collectivity to
engage with urban land resources (Unruh 2004). This resonates with
other studies on possibilities for promoting temporally scaled regula-
tory exceptionalisms, as suggested by Peter Ward in the context of
Texan colonias for Mexican laborers (Ward 1999), or as an epistemo-
logical policy corollary to the exceptionalism of free enterprise zones
across the global south (Assies 1994).
   To address the problems many urban governments in the south
attribute (often unfairly) to migrants, we might consider a new form
of zoning that recognizes that some neighborhoods have special
pressures and need short-term and medium-term solutions to the
challenges of migrant arrival. A sensitivity to broader pluralisms
might forestall resource degradation in the city. To promote the idea
of a “city as integration machine,” other controlled pluralisms might
be exceptional, emphasized as possible strategies for building commu-
nities across migrant groups for the mutual benefit of the commons.
   In cities of informal urbanisms, income exclusion and migrant
mobility generate pragmatic and plural responses to the need to
accommodate new populations. But this problem goes beyond the
global south. Cities in the affluent north have long had to consider
how their longer term ecological sustainability depends on integrat-
ing their distinctive parts—a mix of function, form, and activity that
precludes extreme polarization and that increases urban densification
and reduces its ecological footprint. Migration dynamics again high-
light some unexpected continuities between the cities of the south
and those of the north. Trading off the rational city and the flex-
ible city: smart cities and the creativity of urbanism. The rationally
planned city can sit in tension with the flexible city, the smart city
learns but the creativity or urbanism may be found in the cramped
cities of the metropolis as much as in university laboratories and
architectural charrettes.
254 The Great Migration


    The ecologically sustainable city reframes externalities because
it questions how we define the commons in a rational, controlled,
planned city. Urban transformation and restructuring happen simul-
taneously with demographic change and migration. The flexible
city of the 21st century will need to reconcile the new demograph-
ics of change with the old instruments of shaping a city—through
planning, architecture, and real estate markets. As major urban
regeneration reshapes cities globally in the 21st century, the emerg-
ing city incorporates, excludes, or displaces new arrivals and old
communities.
    In the 21st century, city planners and designers need to consider
how to integrate new populations with old residential areas and cal-
culate what residential markets will provide and where state zoning
principles should limit or ration new residential development in
realizing sustainability, formalizing land rights, and alleviating exclu-
sion. This in turn calls for considering how to reconcile development
externalities and migration externalities through the metropolitan
governance structure. As we try to make the city more ecologically
sustainable, we must synthesize the new urban form and changing
city demographics, reconciling long-term negative externalities with
reasonable city growth.
    There are four ways to approach negative externalities, broadly
associated with well-known economic thinkers: taxing at marginal
cost (after Arthur Pigou), formalizing full property rights with costs
set and allocated among those causing the externality and/or those
affected (including future generations and migrants; after Ronald
Coase), creating institutions that bring those causing the externality
together with all those affected (after James Meade), and building
command and control systems (most often witnessed in socialist or
planned societies).
    These traditions inform the varying analytical approaches to
externalities. The focus on experimental forms of tenure and regu-
lation in the cities of the south is in part a return of the sorts of
institutional innovation sought by Meade in the face of challenges
to both Coasian orthodoxy and command economies. Recognition
of social pressures on economic development systems (see Box 9.4)
logically mirrors the increasing recognition in the global north that
                                                       Michael Keith   255


the social costs of metropolitan polarization demand alternative ways
of reconciling welfare externalities, such as new, flexible, and incre-
mental institutions.
   When London confronted its early 21st-century challenges, it had
to decide how to mediate the reinvention of its poorer former indus-
trial districts with the demands for housing and urban growth. The
British planning system, with an aspiration to generate high-density,
urban renaissance–style growth, promoted both social mix and zon-
ing patterns that synthesized housing-led urban regeneration and the
“value capture” of substantial social housing and public amenities
through private-led development. In some parts of east London, a
quarter or more of all new private housing development was passed
over at no subsidy for social use, a public amenity open to borough
residents with housing rights (even if they were migrants) and closer
to Meade than to Coase in its response to the welfare externalities of
migration. But in a multicultural city like London, this raises diffi-
cult questions about who is a migrant and about eligibility categories
that prioritize either measurable social need for housing or welfare
queuing for scarce rental resources (see Box 9.1).
   Similarly, New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg has tried to
use new forms of tax credit financing to build or preserve more than
100,000 units of affordable housing, developing such innovations as
inclusionary zoning and extending the term of affordability to make
sure there is housing for future generations and that taxpayer invest-
ment is not squandered. New York affordability mechanisms rest on
state assurance of calculable risk displacing the uncertainties of gentri-
fication and neighborhood change. For the city’s common good, using
new fiscal institutional mechanisms and land zoning internalizes the
externalities of property price inflation. Along with experiments in
land taxes, community land trusts, and migrant housing associations,
potential institutional responses can affect the scale disjunctures of
migration externalities—both spatially and temporally.
   Resistance to city change inevitably prompts responses from
minorities (including migrants) who oppose transformation and
play the system to optimize their own positions. Writing on a case
in Phnom Penh, Cambodia, Simone (2008) described the complex
forms of brokerage and mitigation that regulate commerce and
256 The Great Migration


production in an occupied modernist building. Amid an awareness
of the potentially unique efficacy of a “messy site” in a city that is
increasingly formalizing, everyday negotiators meet city officials to
protect their ad hoc community by framing it as a “culture and lei-
sure center.” Arbitrage between forms of belonging takes a back seat
to forward-looking collective negotiations to promote the site’s spon-
taneity by framing it in the language of formal eligibility. Informed,
complex, and strategic groups can therefore negotiate with the city
government. Techniques of reframing settlements explicitly to intro-
duce more uncertainty into the city through dominant regeneration
and planning paradigms offer possibilities for the flexible inclusion of
migration into global south cities.
   These examples of flexibility highlight the importance of city
governments mediating the contrasting and frequently incommen-
surable demands of new development, incoming migrant settlement,
and existing neighborhoods that will frequently contest the city’s
restructuring. The flexibilities involve a synthesis of different forms
of expertise—the economic hope value of land, the moral calculus
of city governance, the competing eligibility demands of new and
incoming migrant residence and the technocratic disciplines of
city-building land-use planning, development control densification,
architectural master planning, and ecological impact measurement.
They involve innovative and creative ways of working across the
old divisions of architecture, planning, and real estate. And they
point to a way of valorizing the interdisciplinary synthesis of city
expertise in structuring the future cities of 21st-century migration
(see Box 9.5).
   These tradeoffs will remain challenging, but there are some policy
formulations that promote a city flexible enough to integrate the
scale of future migration:

• Establish creative links among architects, planners, and real estate
  professionals that avoid the default development of unsustainable
  urban sprawl. Cities need piece-by-piece consideration and
  interdisciplinary master planning of neighborhoods with high
  in-migration to stretch the limits of formal zoning and land-use
  legacies that make the city inflexible. New models of land-use
  regulation and the propensity for local actors to reinvent their own
                                                         Michael Keith   257



    Box 9.5 From basic principles to policy instruments in
                    cities of migration

In 2007, the British government’s Commission on Integration and
Cohesion listed four principles through which locally structured policy
frameworks might synthesize integration of new migrants and local
development:
• Shared future, which focuses policy makers on becoming over being:
  shared ways of looking forward that recognize diverse histories,
  identities, and trajectories by emphasizing the collaborative fabric of
  the future urban form.
• Localized citizenship, which stresses that status and eligibility work
  at plural geographical scales and that rights and responsibilities play
  at the neighborhood, city, and national levels and work alongside
  transnational responsibilities.
• Ethics of hospitality, which value the stranger and the newcomer
  within a framework of mutuality and civility.
• Visible social justice, which appeals not only to equality of opportu-
  nity and outcome but also to transparency in decision making.
   The principles provide a useful framework for policy analysis. But for
21st-century development, we need to supplement them with flexible
policy tools that reflect good urban management. City management
works through the careful combination of incommensurable social
goods, possible only when we see the city simultaneously at different
geographic scales and through both static and dynamic models,
synthesizing synchronic and diachronic models of social change. A
neighborhood’s needs do not always align with the whole city’s, and
today’s demands do not always align with tomorrow’s.
   Translating these principles into policies entails recognizing the
pressures of urban migration. It calls for reconciling policy solutions for
the world today (as people move to the city) with those for the world
as we would want it tomorrow. The principles recognize tradeoffs—
between formality and informality, rights and numbers, and quantity
of policy making and quality.



neighborhoods can be reconciled with more experimental collabo-
rations of city professionals geared for ecological sustainability and
land-use densification.
258 The Great Migration


• Build innovative links between microfinance and big money for
  upgrading slums and improving neighborhoods. Cities need to
  harness the potential of individuals with the incentive to improve
  their neighborhoods and the innovations that increase the supply
  of affordable housing (for both residents and migrants). This
  involves thinking through institutional hybrids of state and private
  housing supply that engage in both neighborhood governance and
  housing development.
• Develop experimental forms of multilevel governance that recognize,
  mediate, and link the priorities of neighborhoods and the metropo-
  lis. Cities need to mediate the costs and benefits of migration
  by developing innovative neighborhood governance and zoning
  policies (normally over limited periods of time) and mitigating the
  migration pressure points in specific neighborhoods.
• Harness the dynamism of the informal city and the rational organiza-
  tion of the formal city. Cities need to recognize the significance of
  powerful family networks and gendered difference in promoting
  local resilience, human capital growth, community safety, and
  social mobility.

   Enhancing the positive impacts of migration to metropolises
involves developing informality’s creativities and formalization’s
structures, the planned state regulation of city professions and market
freedoms, the pluralization of tenure and title models, and a strong
sense of both the ethnographic present and the plausibility of a civic
future shared by migrants and settled members alike.

Note
 1. A study in the Financial Times found that “foreign buyers spent £5.2
    billion on property in central London in 2011, £1.5 billion more than
    in 2010, with most of the cash going to a small number of exclusive
    postcodes” (Collinson 2012).

Bibliography
Ager, Alastair, and Alison Strang. 2004. Indicators of Integration: Final
  Report. Home Office Development and Practice Report. London: Home
  Office.
                                                         Michael Keith   259


Assies, Willem. 1994. “Reconstructing the Meaning of Urban Land in
   Brazil: The Case of Recife (Pernambuco).” In Methodology for Land and
   Housing Market Analysis, edited by, Gareth Jones and Peter M. Ward.
   London: Taylor & Francis.
China Daily. 2012. “Mainland-HK Ties Challenged By Cross-Border Births.”
   July 6. http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/china/HK15th/2012-06/07/
   content_15483470.htm.
Cities Alliance. 2011. “The Urbanisation of Displaced People.” CIVIS Note
   5. http://www.citiesalliance.org/node/2552.
Collinson, Patrick. 2012. “House Prices Rise in London but Fall Elsewhere
   in UK—Survey.” The Guardian, July 10. http://www.guardian.co.uk/
   business/2012/jul/10/house-prices-rise-london-fall-uk.
Dailymotion. 2011. “Zimbabwean Refugees Flock to Johannesburg.” August
   11. http://www.dailymotion.com/video/xm7uks_zimbabwean-refugees-
   flock-to-johannesburg_news.
Durand Lasserve, Alain. 1998. “Law and Urban Change in Developing
   Countries.” In Illegal Cities: Law and Urban Change in Developing
   Countries, edited by, Edésio Fernandes and Ann Varley. London: Zed
   Books.
Fernandes, Edésio, and Ann Varley. eds. 1998. Illegal Cities: Law and Urban
   Change in Developing Countries. London: Zed Books.
Fitzpatrick, Daniel. 2005. “‘Best Practice’ Options for the Legal Recognition
   of Customary Tenure.” Development and Change 36 (3): 449–75.
Ghimire, Krishna. 1994. “Refugees and Deforestation.” International
   Migration 32: 561–69.
Jamdar, Avni. 2003. Civil Society Movements in the Informal Housing Sector:
   Examining SPARC as a Case Study in Mumbai. Unpublished master’s
   thesis. University of California, Berkeley, CA.
Liu, Kaiming. 2007. “Introduction: Eye on Migrant Workers.” The Chinese
   Economy 40 (3): 12–23.
Nogueira Budny, Daniel. 2007. “Democracy and the City: Assessing Urban
   Policy in Brazil.” Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars,
   Washington, DC. http://www.wilsoncenter.org/publication/democracy-
   and-the-city-assessing-urban-policy-brazil.
Ostrom, Elinor. 1990. Governing the Commons: The Evolution of Institutions
   for Collective Action. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
——–—. 2009. “Gemeingütermanagement—eine Perspektive für bürger-
   schaftliches [Governing a Commons from a Citizen’s Perspective].” In
   Wem gehört die welt? Zur wiederentdeckung der gemeingüter, edited by,
   Silke Helfrich. Munich: Oekom Verlag.
260 The Great Migration


Roy, Ananya. 2003. “Paradigms of Propertied Citizenship: Transnational
   Techniques of Analysis.” Urban Affairs Review 38 (4): 463–91.
——–—. 2005. “Urban Informality: Toward an Epistemology of Planning.”
   Journal of the American Planning Association 71 (2): 147–58.
Ruhs, Martin. 2013. The Price of Rights: Labour Immigration Policy and
   the Rights of Migrant Workers in High Income Countries. Princeton, NJ:
   Princeton University Press.
Satterthwaite, David. 2005. “Housing as an Asset and as an Arena for
   Developing Social Policy: The Role of Federations Formed by the Urban
   Poor.” Paper presented at the Arusha Conference, “New Frontiers of
   Social Policy,” Arusha, Tanzania, December 12–15. http://siteresources.
   worldbank.org/INTRANETSOCIALDEVELOPMENT/Resources/
   housingasasset.pdf.
Saunders, Doug. 2010. Arrival City: How the Largest Migration in History is
   Shaping Our World. London: William Heinemman.
Simone, Maliq. 2008. “The Politics of the Possible: Making Urban Life in
   Phnom Penh.” Singapore Journal of Tropical Geography 29 (2): 186–204.
Tran, Mark. 2011. “World Bank Suspends New Lending to Cambodia
   over Eviction of Landowners.” The Guardian, August 10. http://
   www.guardian.co.uk/global-development/2011/aug/10/world-bank-
   suspends-cambodia-lending.
Unruh, Jon D. 2004. “Migration Induced Legal Pluralism in Land Tenure:
   Implications for Environmental Change.” In Environmental Change and
   Its Implications for Population Migration, edited by, Jon Darrel Unruh,
   Maarten S. Krol, and Nurit Kliot. New York: Springer.
Unruh, Jon D., Lisa Cligget, and Rod Hay. 2005. “Migrant Land Rights
   Reception and ‘Clearing to Claim’ in Sub-Saharan Africa: A Deforestation
   Example from Southern Zambia.” Natural Resources Forum 29 (3):
   190–98.
Ward, Peter M. 1999. Colonias and Public Policy in Texas and Mexico:
   Urbanization by Stealth. Austin, TX: University of Texas Press.
10


Infrastructure
Doing More with Less


Jonathan Woetzel and Herbert Pohl




Adequate urban infrastructure can be expensive, but the costs of not
delivering housing, transportation, water, sewage, public facilities,
and other necessities are also high. Inadequate infrastructure slows
and even reverses economic growth, driving unemployment, crime,
and urban decay. It can fuel urban tensions by widening divisions
among ethnic or income groups or between long-time residents and
recent immigrants. And it can foster a general malaise that drains a
city’s vitality and spirit.
    What are the benefits of delivering infrastructure? One study in
Africa showed that the return on investment for infrastructure was
about 50 percent, based on contributions to gross domestic product
(GDP), and that if investments were optimized, the return would
be closer to 150 percent. This value is delivered through increased
productivity and job creation, among other channels. Social ben-
efits from improved public services and living standards are also
substantial.
262 Infrastructure: Doing More with Less


    All too often, funding shortfalls are cited for failures in delivering
the needed infrastructure. But our experience and research around
the world has shown that performance gaps in governance, institu-
tions, processes, and capabilities are just as damaging. In addition, a
systematic approach to key questions, such as whether existing infra-
structure is being used effectively and whether new infrastructure
can be delivered more efficiently, can compensate for much of the
perceived funding shortfall.
    Without a doubt, financial gaps are a concern. In an era of tighter
lending practices and austerity at all levels of government, public
officials find it more difficult and, in some cases, more expensive to
meet the needs of their constituents. The McKinsey Global Institute
(MGI), the business and economic research arm of McKinsey &
Company, estimates that the annual physical capital investment
needed in cities globally will double from about $10 trillion today
to more than $20 trillion by 2025. The bulk of this need will be
in cities in emerging economies. The 440 or so emerging market
cities with the most dynamic economies, for example, will need an
estimated 44,000 square kilometers in new commercial and residen-
tial floor space by 2025. They will also need to invest an estimated
$190 billion to meet demand for container port capacity and about
$200 billion for water supply and wastewater treatment systems.
    In emerging markets, inadequate infrastructure can be a substantial
barrier to growth. In Latin America, where urbanization is progress-
ing rapidly, many of the largest cities emerged from the 1980s debt
crisis to establish solid fiscal positions. But infrastructure spending
failed to keep up with growing needs. As a result, inadequate hous-
ing, urban planning, and transportation networks became obstacles
to growth. For the past two decades, economic growth rates for
most of the region’s 10 largest cities have been below the national
growth rate.
    Not a luxury, adequate infrastructure is a necessity for growth
and many other municipal economic and social objectives. Adequate
infrastructure reduces costs, supports economic activity, increases
factor productivity in cities, and connects cities to domestic and
international markets. It also creates jobs directly in construction and
maintenance and indirectly by boosting economic activity generally.
And it underpins social development and sustainability by increasing
                                 Jonathan Woetzel and Herbert Pohl   263


intra- and interregional trade and improving relationships, providing
health, education, and housing, encouraging environmentally sound
practices, such as switching from road to rail, and offering many
other benefits.
   But funding is not the only obstacle to adequate infrastructure
in the world’s growing cities. Funding committed to building infra-
structure in Africa from all sources rose from $38.9 billion in 2009
to $55.9 billion in 2010, but over the same years the share of these
funds actually dispersed dropped from 48 percent to 38 percent.
Altogether in both years, about $55 billion was available for needed
projects—but not used. Investors cited difficulty in identifying
appropriate projects and shortages of technical capacity and other
skills within governments among the reasons.
   Quite simply, with the staggering demand for infrastructure in
emerging economies, officials will need to continue gathering as
much funding as possible to meet their needs. They must also become
smarter about how they approach infrastructure development. Some
cities around the world have found ways to ensure that finite funding
delivers the greatest possible impact.
   Whether creating new systems or upgrading existing capacity,
urban leaders have considered four fundamental questions often
overlooked in infrastructure development planning:

•   Are we building the right infrastructure?
•   Are we using existing infrastructure most effectively?
•   How can we deliver infrastructure more efficiently?
•   How can we benefit from working with private partners?

    Finding the right answers to these questions will help urban leaders
meet their growing infrastructure needs more effectively, more effi-
ciently, and more quickly. Ignoring these questions can lead to costly
and wasteful mistakes. For example, during Japan’s “lost decade,” the
1990s, the country overbuilt infrastructure with no clear strategy,
squandering billions of dollars with little impact. In one instance,
17 bridges were built for three expressways to connect the main
island of Japan to Shikoku, an island with about 3 percent of the
country’s population. The costs reached $29 billion.
264 Infrastructure: Doing More with Less


    By improving governance systems, institutions, processes, and
internal capabilities, urban leaders can build reliable infrastructure
for their populations and squeeze more value from their expendi-
tures. They rarely have the time or expertise to evaluate the details
of individual projects. Judging, for example, the effectiveness of a
sewer system, the thoroughness of a bridge-building contract, or the
estimates included in a transportation plan are usually beyond their
abilities. But urban leaders can create the right set of governance
structures, credible institutions, and robust processes—and develop
local capabilities. By doing so, they can go far to compensate for
funding shortfalls and move their infrastructure systems forward.
    The rest of this chapter looks closer at the infrastructure needs
of cities in emerging markets, based on the most recent MGI
analysis. Next, it offers practical suggestions on how to answer fun-
damental questions facing any government trying to get the greatest
impact from limited infrastructure funds. And before concluding,
it examines how cities worldwide have improved governance, insti-
tutions, processes, and capabilities to help close the infrastructure
funding gap.

Patterns of urban growth

By 2025, the physical capital investment in the world’s cities is
expected to have doubled, from about $10 trillion today to more
than $20 trillion. This growth includes expenditures on buildings,
infrastructure, machinery, and other equipment. The bulk of the new
capacity is expected to be built in emerging market cities.
   This surge in urban development, particularly in emerging coun-
tries, can be a mixed blessing. Densely populated urban areas tend
to use resources more productively than rural areas or more sparsely
settled cities. Bus systems enjoy heavier ridership, for instance, and
rail becomes a reasonable option. Water and sewage systems serve
more people per kilometer of pipeline and canal. But rapid urbaniza-
tion also puts a heavy strain on global natural and capital resources,
and unless infrastructure keeps pace with growth, many of the
potential benefits of urbanization—economic, environmental, and
social—could be reduced.
                                 Jonathan Woetzel and Herbert Pohl   265


   The June 2012 MGI report on global urbanization, Urban World:
Cities and the Rise of the Consuming Class, looked closely at three areas
of infrastructure need in developed and developing cities: demand
for commercial and residential floor space, municipal water systems,
and container port capacity. These areas were chosen because of
their diversity and because credible data were readily available at the
municipal level. That allowed us to examine historical patterns and
to estimate future demand—and to offer an illustrative overview of
infrastructure demands triggered by rapid urbanization.
   We paid particular attention to a group we call the Emerging 440,
which comprises the 443 cities in emerging markets included in the
world’s top 600 in expected contribution to global GDP growth
to 2025. The Emerging 440 will be a powerful force in the global
economy. They will likely account for almost half the world’s eco-
nomic growth over 2010–25, and more than 600 million people in
these cities will gain access to discretionary spending and join the
consumer class.
   Among the Emerging 440, 20 are megacities (populations of
more than 10 million), while the remainder have populations of
at least 200,000. And though 57 countries are represented in the
Emerging 440, more than half the cities are in China, underscoring
the country’s predominance in this era of rapid urbanization.
   As would be expected, patterns of estimated demand differed
sharply. Global demand for container port capacity should show
the most significant growth, driven by the sharp rise in the global
consumer class. Most of the world’s consumer products, as well as
intermediate manufacturing goods, are shipped in containers, and
we expect demand for container capacity to grow at a compound
annual rate of 7.2 percent over 2010–25, much faster than the
4.4 percent compound annual GDP growth estimated for cities
during this period. Meeting this demand would almost triple today’s
capacity at global container terminals.
   Demand for commercial and residential space and municipal
water is also expected to grow significantly, if more slowly than global
GDP. Many cities have already begun massive building programs to
meet the growing needs, and these efforts are likely to continue as
cities accommodate projected growth. Over 2010–25, cities around
266 Infrastructure: Doing More with Less


the world will need to build more than 80,000 square kilometers of
commercial and residential floor space, including replacement space.
At a compound annual growth rate of 3.8 percent, available urban
floor space will expand by more than 40 percent during this period.
    Of the three infrastructure components examined closely, demand
for municipal water is expected to show the slowest growth over the
next decade or so, but it will still outpace population growth almost
twofold. We expect demand for urban water to rise at a compound
annual growth rate of 1.8 percent over 2010–25, compared with
1.0 percent for population growth. The difference is partly a result of
a trend toward smaller households. The number of urban households
is estimated to grow at a compound annual rate of 1.7 percent, well
above the population growth rate.
    We also found significant differences between cities in developed
and developing countries (Figure 10.1). Following current trends,
about 60 percent of the growth in these three categories will come
from cities in emerging markets. And with the majority of the
Emerging 440 in China, it comes as little surprise that a large portion
of the growth across all categories will be centered there. China alone
is expected to account for 38 percent of the global growth in demand
for commercial and residential floor space, 28 percent for container
port capacity, and 27 percent for municipal water.
    Other regions—India, Latin America, and the Middle East and
Africa—will also account for a significant portion of this new demand.
India and the Middle East and Africa, for example, will each account
for a greater share of the new global demand for municipal water
than North America, with Latin America not far behind. Each of
these three emerging regions will need two to three times more new
container port capacity than North America over 2010–25. Only for
floor space will the demand in North America be greater than that
individually in India, Latin America, and the Middle East.

Population, income growth behind demand for floor space

Demand for floor space in cities will soar in the coming years, with
three-quarters likely to arise in the Emerging 440. Of the 80,000
square kilometers of floor space needed, we estimate that 77 percent
must be built in developing countries, primarily for residential
                                      Jonathan Woetzel and Herbert Pohl        267


               Contribution to urban growth, 2010–25 (percent)




Figure 10.1 All regions contribute to growth in urban demand, but China’s
share is highest in key categories
Source: McKinsey Global Institute Cityscope 2.0.
Note: Other developed and emerging regions account for 16.0 percent of growth in
population, 17.4 percent of growth in GDP, 16.0 percent of growth in demand for
floor space, 19.8 percent of growth in demand for municipal water, and 18.6 percent
of growth in demand for containers. Growth in demand for floor space includes
replacement floors.
       a. GDP measured at expected real exchange rate.



use, and China—with about 40 percent of total demand—will be
the center of activity. Our estimates comprise new construction,
representing about 60 percent of the demand, and replacement floor
space. The cumulative cost to meet this need through 2025 is about
$80 trillion.
    Residential construction will make up roughly three-quarters of
this demand, and the focus will be in developing countries. Already,
a little more than half the world’s residential floor space is in develop-
ing countries, and that proportion should increase significantly as
new demand is met. Our study suggests that the increase in demand
will equal about 90 percent of current stock. This estimate comprises
new construction and replacement space needed to compensate for
deteriorating buildings.
268 Infrastructure: Doing More with Less


   A critical factor in this growing demand is the rising number
of households, especially in developing countries. Because average
household size is shrinking in most emerging markets, the number
of households is growing faster than the population. Demographics
and behavioral shifts are the main reasons behind this trend. In some
areas, young adults are moving alone to the cities, while in others the
population is aging, and seniors tend to live in smaller households. In
addition, the demand for floor space by individual households rises
with incomes, and GDP per capita is growing fastest in developing
countries.
   About 80 percent of the global demand for new or replacement
housing over 2010–25 will occur in emerging cities. China and
South Asia together will likely account for about 60 percent of the
demand, or 34,000 square kilometers.
   The brunt of available commercial space will remain in developed
markets, which today account for about two-thirds of global com-
mercial floor space. Demand for services, a primary user of commer-
cial space, is greatest at the highest incomes. But even in commercial
space, demand for new and replacement construction will be high-
est in emerging markets. About 60 percent of the demand for new
space will be in cities in developing countries, led again by China.
China will need about 5,700 square kilometers of new commercial
space over 2010–25, or 30 percent of total new demand. Demand in
China will be just higher than that in North America, whose need is
an estimated 5,200 square kilometers in the coming years.
   All told, about $35 trillion of investment will be needed to
satisfy demand for residential and commercial floor space in cities in
emerging markets, with China alone needing $25 trillion.

Ports, water illustrate need for a range of improvements

Beyond residential and commercial floor space, cities will need to
invest in a broad range of infrastructure projects to meet growing
demand. From basic services such as water supply and wastewater
treatment to the basics of growing economies such as transportation
and communication networks, urban centers in developing countries
will account for the vast majority of this demand.
                                 Jonathan Woetzel and Herbert Pohl   269


   For example, the number of cars in use globally is expected to
double to about 1.7 billion by 2030. By far, most of this new traffic
will be in developing countries. Modern road networks will need
to be built or improved to accommodate this massive fleet, even as
urban density encourages a switch from cars to metro rail. Another
estimate suggests that air traffic will increase 5 percent annually
over 2010–25. The demand for new terminals will focus on cities in
developing countries, which will see expanding passenger and cargo
traffic as their economies and incomes continue to grow. China, for
example, is expected to build about 100 civil airports over the next
decade. Information technology networks, including connections to
broadband, and electricity supplies are among the other areas likely
see significant growth pressure.
   Our study focused on water supply and wastewater treatment and
on container port capacity as two aspects of infrastructure develop-
ment that illustrate the overall expected demand in diverse areas. The
two areas were also selected because some data were available at the
municipal level, allowing more accurate analysis.
   About $480 billion in urban infrastructure investment will be
needed globally by 2025 to finance growing demands for water sup-
ply and wastewater treatment. A potable water supply is the most
basic responsibility of cities to their residents. Water supply is so
fundamental to a developing country’s needs that it is included in
the United Nations’ Millennium Development Goals, a blueprint
for fighting poverty and improving health standards. Indeed, cities
in developing countries will account for more than 80 percent of the
growth in overall water services.
   Global demand for urban water supply should increase from about
190 billion cubic meters annually to about 270 billion. Growing
urban populations and increasing incomes trigger a parallel rise in
the demand for water. Of the total increase of 80 billion cubic meter,
the Emerging 440 will account for about 67 billion, or more than
80 percent. The imbalance is largely because cities in developed markets
have near-universal water availability, and their needed investments
will focus primarily on system improvements and organic demand
increases. In Sub-Saharan Africa, water and sanitation accounts for
almost 25 percent of overall annual infrastructure investment need.
270 Infrastructure: Doing More with Less


   While cities in emerging markets will focus largely on meet-
ing water supply needs, they will also face significant demand for
improved wastewater treatment. Water supply investment in the
Emerging 440 will represent about 80 percent of water infrastructure
spending through 2025, with wastewater treatment accounting for
the remaining 20 percent, while the split will be more even in cities
in developed countries. Altogether, demand for increased wastewater
treatment facilities will grow about 18 billion cubic meters in the
Emerging 440, spread fairly evenly across regions.
   Container port capacity illustrates the growing demand for higher
level infrastructure in cities in developing countries. A sharp rise
in the number of households with discretionary income has lifted
hundreds of millions of people into the consumer class, and because
about 90 percent of consumer goods are shipped by ocean-going
containers, demand for port capacity will increase in turn. Growth
will also be pushed by increased demand for manufacturing inputs,
which also are generally shipped in containers.
   Global container traffic—incoming and outgoing—will grow
more than 2.5 times over 2010–25, the equivalent of 24 new
ports the size of Shanghai’s facilities, the largest in the world today.
More than 90 percent of this new capacity will be needed in cities
in emerging markets. Investment to develop these facilities would
amount to more than $200 billion during this period, with China
alone accounting for about 30 percent.
   Along with the investment in physical assets, improvements will
also be needed in port superstructure, intermodal systems, equip-
ment, and information technology systems. And many existing
facilities will need to be upgraded or replaced.

Significant pressure on natural, capital resources

The factors behind rapid urbanization present significant challenges
to better managing natural and capital resources. Rising incomes
and increased consumption are putting pressure on these resources,
including those once considered abundant and unthreatened.
   The market stimulus brought by infrastructure projects world-
wide will inject needed energy into the global economy, especially if
                                Jonathan Woetzel and Herbert Pohl   271


augmented by the resulting growth in consumer spending in
emerging markets. Beyond the immediate stimulus, these projects
accelerate economic growth and in many ways represent deferred
consumer spending. Roads are built with the expectation that con-
sumers, among others, will travel them. Apartments will need to be
furnished and filled with appliances.
    At the same time, the growing demands of an expanding con-
sumer class will add considerable strain to global natural and capital
resources, already stretched thin. The challenges facing municipal
leaders in the Emerging 440 will be unlike those faced in cities that
matured during the Industrial Revolution, when natural resources
were fairly abundant. Fortunately, new technology and ideas can
help cities in developing countries meet these challenges using attrac-
tive and efficient solutions to deliver modern infrastructure to their
residents.
    The surge in demand for natural resources signaled by the
expected growth in the consumer class coincides with growing
scarcities. Local shortages of resources once taken for granted, such
as fresh water, are becoming more common in both developed and
developing countries. Prices have risen dramatically since 2000, and,
with markets increasingly interlinked, a surprise in one can send
shockwaves through others. Throughout the 20th century, prices of
basic resources—energy, materials, food, and water—trended down,
falling on average about 0.7 percent a year and supporting global
economic growth. Amazingly, the gains of those 100 years were
wiped out by the unprecedented price increases of the past decade.
Despite recent easing of some prices, volatility will likely continue.
    Because of higher incomes in cities, per capita consumption of
energy and other resources tends to grow faster in cities than in over-
all country populations. But the concentrated populations in urban
centers also have efficiencies that conserve resources and enable
technology-related options. For countries part of the Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), urbanites
travel 20–30 percent less than suburbanites, substantially reduc-
ing emissions and the demand for fuel. Urban environments allow
technology-driven solutions that save energy, such as variable pricing
for parking and congested areas, which reduce vehicle use. Urban
272 Infrastructure: Doing More with Less


density also enables public transportation options, which create
further savings. And because urbanites live in smaller homes, they
consume 20–30 percent less energy than suburbanites.
    Indeed, some cities may find that by allowing higher densities they
may avoid pressure for costly road improvements that ease greater
use of private cars, bringing in turn increased fuel consumption and
pollution. The savings can be used to expand urban rail systems, which
higher densities also support. Such tradeoffs can be made only at the
city level, where officials can more closely compare economic costs
and benefits, as well as the likely impacts on economic development,
society, and the environment.
    MGI research has shown that cities can slow the growth in energy
demand by half and cut 20 percent from their projected energy
needs by 2020 by employing current energy-efficient technologies
effectively. These systems can quickly pay for themselves through
energy savings that would benefit urban households and businesses.
Deployed correctly, these solutions can cut the investment for energy-
supply infrastructure and reduce public and private energy costs
for decades.
    One study has shown that by 2030 greater energy efficiency in
buildings—better insulation, modern lighting, and other measures—
could reduce global energy demand by 31 quadrillion British thermal
units, 20 percent greater than the energy used now by shipping and
air transport combined. Improved energy efficiency in residential
and commercial buildings could contribute about a fifth of the $2.9
trillion in potential savings identified from more productive use of
natural resources, with the majority captured by cities.
    Similarly, demand for capital resources has been growing over
the past decade, and needs have been exacerbated by the aftermath
of the 2008/09 global economic and financial crisis, which left
capital scarce. Before the crisis, global investment rates rose from
20.8 percent of global GDP in 2002 to 23.7 percent in 2008,
boosted in part by growth in urban capital needs. Despite a sharp
drop in 2009, MGI analysis suggests that investment rates should
rise again, reaching about 25 percent of global GDP by 2025, with
urban infrastructure needs fueling some of the growth.
    When the global recovery takes root, the increased demand for
capital will likely lead to higher capital costs. This should further
                                 Jonathan Woetzel and Herbert Pohl   273


compel cities in developing countries to use available funds as effec-
tively as possible, channeling them to the most productive projects.
Countries can also contribute to the effort by implementing policies
that create deep and stable domestic financial markets. Such mea-
sures could, for instance, work to gather national savings and direct
them toward rational investments. McKinsey estimates that globally
2.6 billion adults do not have a bank account, and, especially in
emerging markets, financial institutions serve only a small portion
the national market.
   The most recent MGI research has underscored the growing
demand for infrastructure development and improvements in cities
around the world, particularly in developing countries. Failure to meet
these needs could dampen urban economic growth and contribute to
an array of other problems. Financing infrastructure development
will always be a priority for municipal officials, and whether starting
from scratch or improving existing assets, more value can be squeezed
from available resources by carefully considering the four crucial
questions on each project.

Optimizing existing and new infrastructure

Infrastructure funding is finite, but value for money may not be.
By optimizing value, officials can create greater capacity from their
projects and deliver greater benefits to their constituents. This can be
done by assuring that the right infrastructure is being built, existing
infrastructure is used effectively, infrastructure projects are delivered
efficiently and private partners are included.
    Spending time to examine these aspects of value creation, rather
than relying on gut instinct or popular opinion, can help municipal
officials deliver the greatest benefits from finite resources. With a
less vigorous approach, officials may be tempted to overbuild infra-
structure, wasting money and other resources on projects with more
capacity than needed under reasonable predictions, erecting show-
case pieces as political status symbols, or building redundant assets in
the absence of interagency coordination. Underbuilding can also be a
problem, perhaps associated with a lack of transparency and corrup-
tion. An open, systematic approach to infrastructure investment can
mitigate these problems.
274 Infrastructure: Doing More with Less


   In many cases, cities can cut 40–50 percent from infrastructure
costs by exploring these questions vigorously, freeing funds for further
improvements. Asking them can help avoid unnecessary projects that
offer benefits to few compared with their cost and that deliver only
marginal gains compared with other infrastructure options.
   By systematically considering these questions when drawing
up infrastructure programs, governments can produce substantial
returns on their investments. Well-delivered infrastructure can pro-
duce returns on investment of up to 50 percent, measured as GDP
gains against cost, and when optimized the return is much higher.
We have often seen that in developing countries cities enjoy GDP per
capita as much as six times higher than that of rural areas. Quality
infrastructure is a primary factor behind the difference.

Building the right infrastructure

When making infrastructure decisions, government officials are
often bombarded from all sides. They face piles of information on
the technical minutiae of a project and competing—and occasionally
petty—political factors. Projects can be windfalls for landowners and
contractors, and lobbyists are quick to promote their views of a proj-
ect’s importance. At the same time, city planners can deliver reports
totaling hundreds of pages covering, for instance, traffic forecasts,
financial and risk analyses, technical specifications, estimated envi-
ronmental impacts, and potential social and economic impacts—all
supported by arcane calculations beyond the understanding of most
non-experts.
   Fact-based decisions are difficult when faced with a flood of unfil-
tered data and opinion. But municipal officials in many developing
countries have found solutions that allow them to focus efforts and
resources on the right infrastructure for their situation, projects whose
benefits justify their costs and that contribute to clear economic or
social objectives. They have done this by embedding infrastructure
development into their broader social and economic development
strategy, creating portfolios of infrastructure options, and evaluating
the options rigorously and objectively.
   Cities can segregate and categorize the information from their
portfolio of options to get a clearer view of the true costs and benefits
                                 Jonathan Woetzel and Herbert Pohl   275


of major projects and make better decisions. In a Middle East city,
we helped officials rank their infrastructure needs by looking at
nine core aspects of each project, which covered about 90 percent
of the task. The examination covered the financial health, economic
impact, social welfare, and strategic fit of proposed infrastructure
investments. For example, it asked what contributions to GDP were
expected from the investment and what fundamental needs were
addressed. The tool was so easy to use that it could be installed on
tablet computers, giving officials online access to the analysis, even
during cabinet meetings.
   Such tools cannot offer a “correct” answer to whether a project
should be approved. Beyond the data analyzed, subjective consider-
ations are always relevant. While stretching water or electric services
to the areas of a city that are hardest to reach may cost more per
household, health and other benefits could easily outweigh the costs.
Such tools offer analyses consistent across projects and allow officials
to set priorities more effectively. Projects that rank high are given
a boost, and if projects that rank lower are approved, the tradeoffs
needed are more transparent.
   In the Middle East effort, officials were struggling to rank numer-
ous infrastructure proposals in areas ranging from roads and bridges
to power generation and from schools to hospitals. Weighing the
benefits of a new road against those of a new hospital, for example,
can seem like comparing apples and oranges. As is often the case,
officials were presented with volumes of data on projects and assump-
tions that were commonly unclear or inflated. For example, potential
GDP impact would be double- or triple-counted across projects to
create stronger business cases.
   To clear the fog and help choose the right infrastructure invest-
ments for their city, officials reclassified the projects from more than
20 different asset classes to just 3: those with expected financial
returns, such as hotels; those with economic returns, such as roads;
and those with social returns, such as schools and hospitals. They
looked at each project’s financial health, economic health, social
health, and contribution to the city’s strategic objectives and stan-
dardized the assumptions and definitions across all project proposals.
For example, impact on GDP was clearly delineated by such direct
effects as employment gains and productivity improvements. The
276 Infrastructure: Doing More with Less


process was meant not to deliver the correct technical answer but to
support a debate based on crucial facts that clarified the implications
of competing investment decisions.
   The results of the analysis gave officials comparisons that made
it easier for them to make better decisions and move forward with
the right infrastructure choices. A web-based tool provided officials
with ready access to, for example, matrices that compared projects by
their scores across various benefits, as well as key data on individual
projects. The government also established an investment review unit
to manage and maintain the transformation and build the necessary
internal skills.
   The Republic of Korea pursued an approach that systemati-
cally linked its infrastructure program to official social and economic
development objectives. As part of the effort, the government
established institutions that in 2005 became the Public and Private
Infrastructure Management Center, which developed a standardized
methodology and reviewed all major projects. The center has helped
translate national economic and social objectives into a multiyear
infrastructure program, saving an estimated $60 billion in infrastruc-
ture costs.

Using existing infrastructure effectively

A robust infrastructure development program must also consider
whether existing infrastructure is being used most effectively. Officials
and planners often harbor biases toward new projects, which offer
the chance to be creative, the challenge of building something from
scratch, and the potential to deliver substantial improvements. By
contrast, maintaining and improving operations for existing infra-
structure is less captivating.
   But getting more use and benefits from existing infrastructure is
essential as city leaders seek to invest infrastructure funds more effec-
tively. In transportation, for example, measures should be considered
to steer residents from road to rail, to optimize urban planning to
balance traffic flows, and to adjust fees and other restrictions to bal-
ance usage with social costs. London and Singapore, for instance,
control private traffic in the city center to reduce congestion and
encourage residents to use bus and rail systems.
                                 Jonathan Woetzel and Herbert Pohl   277


   Windhoek, Namibia’s capital, has an exceedingly dry climate, and
demand for water increased about 7 percent a year over 1992–99.
To meet this challenge, city officials focused on a rehabilitation pro-
gram that featured a variety of measures. They emphasized repairs
to the current system, established regular leakage-detection proce-
dures and water audits to identify inefficiencies, and increased use of
underground storage capacity, an alternative to dam storage (where
evaporation losses were high). In addition, they promoted the use
of gray water and semi-treated water for industrial and agricultural
purposes and brought usage fees closer to the true costs of collection
and distribution. And they launched a community education pro-
gram that included training local plumbers and gardeners how to use
water efficiently. The result: a 40 percent reduction in the city’s water
consumption per capita, accommodating significant urban growth
and extending the city’s projected “run dry” date by six years.
   In an example from a developed country, California launched an
electricity demand management program in response to the 1973–74
oil shock, which more than quadrupled global oil prices. Measures
included adjusting electricity prices based on consumption, regulat-
ing efficiency standards for appliances, and introducing a slate of
programs to promote energy efficiency. The efforts were a success,
and the state’s 2010 consumption per capita was about 40 percent
below the national average, having been steady for more than three
decades.

Delivering infrastructure efficiently

Delivering infrastructure more efficiently must focus on improving
productivity in construction. For most major infrastructure projects,
construction costs represent a substantial portion of investment. Yet
globally, unlike almost every other commercial sector, the construc-
tion industry has shown no substantial productivity improvements
in recent decades, and in some markets, such as the United States,
productivity has declined. Occasional improvements in the industry
have been the result of new materials rather than significant changes
in operations.
   A look at the drilling operations in a tunnel project illustrates
the problem (Figure 10.2). Among the problems were work delays
Figure 10.2   Deliver infrastructure productively—lean construction reduced construction costs 10 percent and completion times 40 percent
Source: McKinsey & Company analysis.
                                Jonathan Woetzel and Herbert Pohl   279


because of a series of minor stoppages, crew or materials that were not
available when needed, equipment that was not available because of
maintenance, and equipment that was simply idle. Many industries
have adopted lean manufacturing approaches to their needs, and the
construction sector would be wise to do the same. Lean emphasizes
eliminating as much waste as possible in a process, say by shuffling
the sequence of work, scheduling maintenance in a way that does not
slow the process, and ensuring that equipment is used to full capacity.
We estimate that introducing lean practices at the drilling operation
could cut completion times 40 percent and costs 10 percent.
   As large consumers of construction services, governments—and
ultimately taxpayers—are paying a heavy price for these continuing
inefficiencies. Cities have substantial market power and can encourage
their contractors to address the waste in their operations. Among the
measures they can use are contractual terms that oblige companies
to work with officials to streamline project delivery, initiatives to
explore new sources of materials and other resources (from low-cost
countries, for instance), and programs to introduce lean construction
in all projects. McKinsey estimates that an average productivity
increase of about 30 percent is possible in the medium term if these
or similar measures are followed.
   Lean principles helped the Swedish Transport Administration cut
production costs in its construction program 10–15 percent and
increase productivity 2–3 percent a year. Lean measures, such as par-
allel activities during construction and ample support to allow pavers
to operate efficiently, were estimated to save as much as 40 percent
of work time, depending on the operation. Careful planning allowed
the administration to reduce the need for earth to be excavated and
hauled, as well as the need for hot mix for road surfacing. Increasing
the slope slightly in some sections of roadway reduced the need for
excavation and asphalt surfacing almost 18 percent, with no expected
impact on traffic or safety. Using prefabricated elements and sourcing
from low-cost countries were other elements of their program.

Getting value from public-private partnerships

Public-private partnerships (PPPs) have become a growing trend in
infrastructure development across the world. The potential of using
280 Infrastructure: Doing More with Less


private investment to supplement public funding is very attractive.
It is also risky, as governments and operators witnessed with the
Eurotunnel between France and the United Kingdom, Melbourne’s
CityLink toll road, and many other projects in both developed and
developing countries. Business plans are easily undermined by hostile
political pressure, overly optimistic traffic estimates, and even com-
peting infrastructure projects. And when a PPP goes wrong, it leaves
a trail of litigation and, more often than not, the public picking up
the tab.
   Despite the risks, however, PPPs can be a valuable part of a city’s
infrastructure development program. Private companies can bring
many advantages to the partnership, including a clearer sense of the
sturdiness of the business plan and experience squeezing costs out of
capital projects and operations. Governments with little experience
working with private partners should begin with smaller projects,
such as design-and-build contracts, before attempting more elabo-
rate, revenue-generating programs. Countries like Canada, with very
successful PPP programs, have built their achievements on decades
of experience.
   Our work and research has shown that four factors can contribute
to the success of PPPs:

• Consolidated organization. Many cities have combined all their
  PPP projects into a single unit, rather than leaving them under
  the control of various agencies. Centralization allows consistent
  processes that can lower transaction costs and builds experience
  and expertise within the PPP unit. Once a department approves a
  PPP project, it hands over responsibility to the PPP unit.
• Critical mass. Cities have also driven PPP programs effectively by
  creating pipelines of similar projects. By focusing efforts on, say,
  road maintenance or power generation, the city builds a critical
  mass that can lower overall costs. One-off projects are generally
  more expensive than a collection of projects that can spread start-
  up costs among different efforts and gain economies of scale.
• Defined process. A clearly defined process also contributes to the
  chances of success. Cities and their private partners write detailed
  process descriptions that include explicit milestones, documenta-
  tion requirements, and transparent contractual terms. This effort
                                 Jonathan Woetzel and Herbert Pohl   281


  builds capabilities and experience within city agencies and creates
  trust with the private partners.
• Start slow. Cities should also expect to move slowly up the learning
  curve. Initial PPP projects should follow reasonably simple busi-
  ness models that are easy to evaluate, monitor, and administer. As
  city administrators gain experience, they can pursue partnerships
  with more complicated structures and more sophisticated risk
  allocation mechanisms.

    Successful PPP projects can deliver extensive value to all sides of
the partnership. Over 1993–2001, Chile awarded 21 toll-road con-
cessions to private partners totaling about $5 billion. Starting with
the simplest projects first, the country eventually improved more
than 2,000 kilometers of highway, including urban routes ringing
the capital of Santiago, which were tendered later in the program.
Fees for driving on the Santiago ring are based on time of day, to
manage congestion and electronic payment systems and ease entry
and exit from the network.
    One estimate suggests that the government has captured about
$150 million in revenues from the PPP system, while only one
concession partner has filed a claim under the system’s minimum-
use guarantees. In addition, one study of road users and local and
national leaders gave the system a score of 6 on a 7-point scale.
Following the success of the toll-road projects, the country expanded
its PPP program to include prisons, hospitals, public buildings, and
public transport infrastructure.

Opportunities to close the infrastructure gap

Addressing the four crucial questions will help officials craft an infra-
structure program that better meets the needs of their community
with the money available. To create even more value, officials must
review the structure and character behind the delivery system. In
many cases, opportunities to stretch limited resources can be realized
by improving governance, processes, institutions, and capabilities.
   The gap between available funds and needed investment in
infrastructure will not disappear, but beyond gathering the funds to
finance infrastructure programs, municipalities must also improve
282 Infrastructure: Doing More with Less


how they govern their programs, create appropriate institutions
to manage and maintain their infrastructure, implement the right
processes to increase productivity, and build capabilities in public
services. Together, these efforts can help compensate for perceived
funding gaps and ensure that projects are planned appropriately,
completed efficiently, and maintained and operated effectively.

Governance

City leaders have neither the time nor the expertise to microman-
age projects or even judge the details of individual proposals made
by agencies and ministries that own infrastructure assets. For most,
it is beyond their capabilities to evaluate the quality of technical
engineering specifications, review the rigor of environmental impact
statements, challenge assumptions behind demand and usage esti-
mates, or scrutinize the details of an engineering, procurement, or
construction contract.
   Infrastructure discussions often focus on outcomes once projects
are completed. These postmortems either celebrate progress in eco-
nomic and social development or lament cost overruns and delays
that added years to the project’s schedule. While interesting, such
discussions alone do little to help cities build infrastructure better.
Instead, leaders should explore the factors behind the achieve-
ments and failures and create the right conditions to make successes
more likely.
   One promising approach is to create independent institutions
that oversee infrastructure investment and provide clarity and bench-
marks on overall spending. The unit can help top municipal officials
match a city’s infrastructure development program with its strategic
objectives. By creating a governance structure staffed by experts with
the appropriate skills, city leaders create conditions that increase the
probability of successful infrastructure development. Credibility,
trust, and competence are critical components of a working gover-
nance structure.
   Some cities, for example, have an investment review unit. From
our experience, such units can offer independent assessments of
planned and ongoing infrastructure projects because they operate
outside the structure of agencies or ministries that own and manage
                                  Jonathan Woetzel and Herbert Pohl   283


individual assets. They also report directly to political leaders and
decision makers, allowing them to offer unfiltered analyses and
conclusions.
   Investment review units are commonly led by individuals with
a keen understanding of infrastructure assets, an ability to discuss
programs with a wide range of stakeholders, and the credibility to
participate in high-level decision making. They are often supported
by a small team comprising infrastructure specialists with expertise in
specific asset classes, planners who can reconcile priorities with overall
capital allocation concerns, and data analysts responsible for tools,
databases, and other aspects of information technology support.
   Along with improvements in institutional efficiency, better gov-
ernance can increase the effectiveness of infrastructure programs. In
South Africa, officials created a competition regulatory authority,
particularly to govern practices in the construction sector. The agency
focused on eliminating anticompetitive behavior and helped achieve
substantial cost savings in new, large capital projects.

Institutions

Strong national and municipal institutions are the foundation of a
successful infrastructure program. They build capabilities to support
programs even as individual experts come and go from the adminis-
tration. As projects begin contributing noticeable and cost-effective
improvements to city living, they gain valuable credibility among
constituents, contractors, private partners, political leaders, and
other public bodies.
   The Rwandan government established several administrative
bodies, including the Ministry of Infrastructure, to rebuild infra-
structure lost during its tragic civil war and to initiate new projects.
The ministry, given the mandate to lead the national effort, had
responsibility for implementing and coordinating the activities of
other ministries and public agencies. It monitored quality and cost
standards, launched programs to improve capabilities, and looked
after the sustainability of the program, among other tasks.
   The ministry’s efforts contributed greatly to the country’s stellar
achievements, which included a 40 percent increase in electricity
generation over 2008–11 and a more than twofold increase in the
284 Infrastructure: Doing More with Less


number of people with access to electricity over 2006–10. More than
a third of the nation’s road network was also brought up to accept-
able conditions, including a large majority of district roads. At the
same time, GDP growth averaged 8.3 percent a year over 2005–10,
compared with 4.3 percent just five years earlier.
    Sweden witnessed similar successes after creating the Swedish
Transport Administration in 2010. The measure merged the for-
mer road and rail administrations to save administrative costs,
lower construction costs, and improve planning coordination among
transportation networks—road, rail, sea, and air. Altogether, the
6,500 employees at the administration were charged with managing
100,000 kilometers of road and 12,000 kilometers of rail.
    Despite constrained public finances, the administration had to cope
with rail and road traffic growing 1–2 percent annually, significant
congestion, and maintenance backlogs. To meet these challenges,
the administration focused on better planning and coordination
across all modes of transport, improved productivity in investments
and maintenance, and increased operational and administrative
efficiencies. As the new administration gained traction, it identified
potential savings, for example, by reducing the excavation needed
for roadbeds, increasing recycling and the reuse of switches, and
optimizing and standardizing road surface material selection.
More use of design-build contracts and greater internal capabilities
are expected to allow 800 full-time consultants to be replaced by
400 in-house professionals, with financial savings to match.
    Creating an effective institution to oversee Sweden’s transporta-
tion network also helped officials implement productivity programs
throughout the administration. The administration has begun
applying measures expected to reduce internal costs for administra-
tion, facilities, and information technology more than 20 percent.
Potential savings in investments have been identified to reduce con-
struction costs 10–15 percent. And more rigorous fact-based analysis
is deciding whether to maintain or replace deteriorating assets and is
presenting capacity-constraint forecasts and other vital information
to government budget makers. With ambitious improvement targets,
the administration is seeking to become much more effective—a
catalyst for improving productivity in the Swedish construction
sector.
                                 Jonathan Woetzel and Herbert Pohl   285


Processes

Standardized processes are vital components of making infrastructure
work harder. Uniform processes save time and allow economies of
scale. They also make performance management easier by establish-
ing clear metrics that can be compared across individuals, locations,
and units. And the act of codifying these processes helps identify
ways to save costs, time, and other resources. In addition, processes
enable due consideration of a project, countering political pressure to
move a project forward too quickly and potentially waste resources.
   Faced with serious problems, Tanzania’s Dar es Salaam Port
applied process improvements focusing on operational equipment
effectiveness practices to turn around a deteriorating situation. At the
outset of the project, the port, which handled incoming and outgo-
ing goods for seven countries, was operating at just 85–90 percent
capacity. Unnecessarily long container clearances and ship turn-
around times were causing the port to lose market share to others in
the region.
   Among the process improvements were computerized customs
services, dedicated inland container depots, and extended operating
hours. Combined with global standards for operational equipment
effectiveness, these new processes helped the port increase its number
of ships berthed by 40 percent and its container traffic by 16 percent.
In addition, container clearance time was cut from 24 days to 8 days,
and ship turnaround time from 19 days to 4 days. The project was
estimated to have saved $500 million in capital investments.
   The decision-making process is another area where changes
can speed projects and lower costs. Instead of initially focusing on
specific expenses, such as construction costs, decision makers should
discuss in more detail the business plan of the project proposal
under consideration, looking at such aspects as who will benefit and
how. If approved, the project could be revisited following a detailed
feasibility study and, after completion, initial assumptions should be
compared against outcomes to increase confidence going into future
projects. Decision makers at this level should approve or disapprove
project plans or business plans, as well as the overall budget, but
they should not necessarily become involved in preapproving specific
expenditures within the project, even large outlays.
286 Infrastructure: Doing More with Less


   Adjusting the process can accelerate decision making by allowing
leaders to focus on the bigger picture without becoming stuck in
details that they might not be able to handle properly. At the same
time, offering incentives, increased responsibilities, and accountabil-
ity to experts within the projects encourages them to use resources
more productively and find ways to minimize costs without affecting
quality.
   Processes can be implemented fairly quickly, and once approved
they can be in place within about two months. A “soft launch,” in
which the new and old processes are run in parallel, can help isolate
bugs that must be corrected and increase confidence in the new
system.

Capabilities

Globally, most city administrations responsible for planning and
managing infrastructure development are understaffed and lack the
necessary expertise, especially in relation to the capital at risk and
benchmarks in the private sector. As a result, budget overruns and
missed deadlines are common, leading to increased frustration among
city officials and residents. As pressure mounts to finish quickly, addi-
tional costs can be massive, especially in a project’s later stages.
   Part of the solution is to build the capabilities of city staff handling
infrastructure programs and to populate the administration with the
right number of experts in various disciplines as quickly as budgets
allow. Technical skills in such areas as project management, planning,
design, maintenance, and operations are clearly necessary. Capability
improvements are usually needed at all phases of infrastructure pro-
grams, from project proposal through construction and into ongoing
maintenance.
   Our experience helping cities build their capabilities suggests that
several areas can support more efficient and effective infrastructure
programs:

• Project and performance management. Many cities, including
  London, New York, and Rio de Janeiro, have specific departments
  or offices with project management capabilities that are responsible
  for understanding the city’s goals, working with various agencies
                                Jonathan Woetzel and Herbert Pohl   287


  to reach those goals, and presenting their findings to top city lead-
  ers. These cities and others are putting greater emphasis on perfor-
  mance management—for example, by attaching key performance
  indicators to their strategic objectives. In some cases, as in Rio de
  Janeiro, responsibilities for project and performance management
  are allocated to separate departments. Together, these capabilities
  allow city leaders to monitor progress clearly. The capabilities
  needed go beyond gathering data to include understanding the
  dynamics behind the metrics and interpreting whether goals are
  on track. The result: better informed decisions.
• Information technology. Some cities are elevating information tech-
  nology to an integral part of their development strategy, not just
  as an enabler that supports initiatives managed by various depart-
  ments. New York and Boston each have municipal chief infor-
  mation officers, who champion efforts to modernize their city’s
  information technology systems and use social media, geographic
  information system (GIS), open source platforms, and other new
  technologies to help accomplish their city’s objectives. This new
  approach requires investment in building internal capabilities but
  can unleash substantial returns in greater efficiencies. Traffic man-
  agement systems, such as electronic road pricing and smart traffic
  lights that optimize vehicle flow, can dampen the pressure on road
  expansion and reduce travel time, emissions, and energy use.
• Communication. Cities are also building communications capa-
  bilities, often focusing on disseminating information to the public
  and within the administration more effectively. Hong Kong SAR,
  China; Paris; and Seoul have worked on improving how they
  visually present their ideas and plans. By making higher qual-
  ity maps, three-dimensional virtual models, and physical scale
  models of their plans, they have encouraged better informed and
  more focused public debate and internal policy discussions. As a
  result, decisions can take less time, and misunderstandings can
  be avoided.
• Predictive modeling. As cities are under increasing pressure to
  justify investments and policy decisions, credible capabilities in
  predictive modeling have become more important. Infrastructure
  proposals are supported by a wide variety of estimates surrounding
  future events, such as population growth, transportation demand,
288 Infrastructure: Doing More with Less


  and economic growth. Reliable modeling is an essential founda-
  tion for these estimates. While many cities rely on outside expertise
  for these services, some, including Chicago, London, New York,
  and Paris, have built significant internal capabilities in this area.

   Capability building is often part of a program that introduces new
tools and processes as well. In one example, a Middle East govern-
ment was struggling to rank its infrastructure projects. Part of the
problem was linked to internal capabilities. Project proposals and
funding requests often included insufficient or poor quality data,
especially on business plans and expected impacts. Public planners
and analysts did not have the training or tools to provide the level
and quality of information to make good decisions. As seen, part of
the solution included developing a tool that automated some of the
analysis and provided a fact base that helped officials rank poten-
tial investments. Tailored formats for inputting the necessary data
on each project improved the quality of information, and a scoring
engine within the tool created a fact-based comparison of investment
options. In addition, staff members went to workshops and other
activities to improve their personal capabilities.
   South Africa also turned to capability building as part of a strate-
gic performance improvement initiative centered on capital expendi-
tures. A lack of skills among public servants planning and executing
large capital projects was exacerbating capacity and capital shortages
in the country’s power system. The country’s skill-building program
emphasized lean construction techniques to reduce building costs,
helping reduce capital costs for new construction 12 percent and
creating more than 11,500 jobs.
                                 ***
Around the world, roughly 2–6 percent of GDP is spent on infra-
structure improvements, and developing countries in Africa, Asia,
and Latin America are spending at the high end of the range. As
urban populations continue to grow, so too will the demand for
infrastructure. Mayors and other city leaders in developing countries
face the daunting challenge of meeting these expanding needs with
finite funding.
                                 Jonathan Woetzel and Herbert Pohl   289


    But our work and research has shown that funding, while
important, is not the only obstacle to developing strong urban
infrastructure. Improvements in governance, institutions, processes,
and internal capabilities are often neglected as officials bemoan their
funding challenges. Focusing on these areas can close the funding
gap considerably, allowing cities to deliver greater benefits from their
investments.
    In addition, cities must be smarter about how they approach
their infrastructure development programs. Officials must carefully
consider whether they are building the right infrastructure, getting
the most benefit for existing infrastructure, and delivering projects
efficiently—and whether PPPs can deliver additional benefits.
    Cities that progress in their infrastructure programs despite the
current challenges will be those with leaders who look beyond fund-
ing to find ways to serve their citizens effectively with the resources
available.
11


Urban Transport
Can Public-Private Partnerships Work?


Eduardo Engel and Alexander Galetovic




Cities exist, grow, and prosper because they take advantage of scale
economies and specialization wrought by agglomeration. But output
growth inevitably stresses transport infrastructure because production
requires space and mobility. Similarly, on the demand side, wealthier
people use more space, buy more cars, and are more mobile.
   To prevent congestion from crowding out agglomeration benefits
and to expand the supply of urban land, cities must invest in transport
infrastructure. Yet balancing the growing demand for infrastructure
with its supply is often difficult. Poor street and highway maintenance,
excessive congestion, and slow capacity expansion are endemic in
cities the world over.
   Many urban commentators find that slow capacity expansion is
not the problem, blaming congestion instead on an irrational prefer-
ence for car travel—a harmful part of urban life akin to excess noise
or pollution. They argue that building more infrastructure, especially
highways, just fosters sprawl and fails to reduce congestion—that
people respond to more capacity by driving more and wasting even
                              Eduardo Engel and Alexander Galetovic 291


more time (Mogridge 1997). In this view, a central task for policy
makers and planners is to curb the preference for cars. Proponents
of this view advocate subsidizing public transportation; enacting
taxes and restrictions to raise the costs of owning and driving cars;
and establishing zoning regulations to foster compact living, shrink
the spatial distribution of activities, and reduce the number of
vehicle trips.
   We assert, by contrast, that space and mobility are both factors of
production and consumption goods with positive income elasticity
and that the conventional provision of transport infrastructure suffers
from three important shortcomings. Heggie and Vickers (1998, 19)
describe one compellingly:

  [Roads] are not managed as part of the market economy with its
  formidable pricing dynamic. There is no clear price for roads, road
  expenditures are most often funded from general tax revenues, and
  the road agency is not subjected to any rigorous market discipline.
  This biases managerial incentives. Roads are managed like a social
  service with multiple goals. Road users pay taxes and user charges,
  but the proceeds are almost always treated as general tax revenues.
  Instead of being financed through user charges, roads are thus financed
  through budget allocations determined as part of the annual budget-
  ary process. These allocations bear little relationship to underlying
  needs … or to users’ willingness to pay. There is … no direct link
  between revenues and expenditures …, there is no price to ration
  demand …, and expenditures are not subjected to the rigorous tests
  of the marketplace ….

Second, many cities lack the funding to maintain and expand
streets and urban highways. And third, because streets and urban
highways are interconnected networks, planning at the city level and
coordination among jurisdictions (for example, among municipalities
or between local and regional or national authorities), is lacking. Yet
urban planners often lack formal and real authority to cut through
the bureaucratic web of multiple authorities and jurisdictions. Can
public-private partnerships (PPPs) deal with these problems better
than conventional public provision and ensure proper maintenance,
timely expansion, and less congestion?
292 Urban Transport


Public-private partnerships: what they can do and what
they need to work
What is a public-private partnership?
When delivering infrastructure, governments face three challenges:
deciding what to build and when, building cost-effectively, and ensur-
ing proper maintenance and service quality once the infrastructure
is built. Until recently, highways were considered public goods and
were thus built by governments, funded with budget appropriations,
and managed by ministries or public agencies. But many countries
have since introduced the PPP, a new contractual agreement used
extensively around the world to build roads, bridges, and tunnels.
    A PPP bundles finance, construction, and operation into a long-
term service contract between the government’s procurement authority
and a standalone private firm—the special purpose vehicle (SPV; see
Figure 11.1a). The SPV takes charge of building and operating a
legally and economically self-contained project for 10–30 years.
    On the financing side, it pledges the cash generated by the project,
which can come from tolls or government payments, to pay back
both equity and debt financiers.1 The SPV’s narrow focus leaves little
room to divert funds to other divisions, and PPP deals are usually
highly leveraged.
    On the production side, the SPV hires a firm to build the facilities
and then operates the project and maintains the infrastructure. When
the contract ends, assets revert to the government.
    Compare PPPs with conventional provision, where the govern-
ment deals directly with financiers, the builder, and the operator
(Figure 11.1b). Under conventional provision, the project is financed
with public debt and budget appropriations; a government agency
hires the builder and then the operator. This basic structure has many
variations, often influenced and sometimes determined by country,
regional, and city laws and institutions. Sometimes the whole process
is taken on by a single public institution (for example, a central gov-
ernment ministry or a city authority), with tasks split among agencies,
among layers of government, or even within the same government
institution. PPPs normally enter the conventional provision structure
inheriting many of its shortcomings—and cities are unlikely to adopt
radical institutional reform to change that.
                              Eduardo Engel and Alexander Galetovic 293


   Figure 11.1 omits the source of funding—tolls or government
transfers—because both PPPs and conventionally procured projects
may rely on one or both. There are many public toll roads around the
world; conversely, many PPPs are funded with budget appropriations.

When?

The appeal of PPPs stems from the glaring shortcomings of public
provision. When PPPs began to spread around the world, many
believed that private participation in infrastructure would by itself
improve performance. To some extent, this prejudice is warranted.




Figure 11.1 Contracting under public-private partnerships and conventional
provision
294 Urban Transport


Public agencies in charge of infrastructure projects (for example,
ministries of public works, city governments, or municipalities) tend
to have many objectives and are accountable to multiple principals,
weakening incentives. Moreover, management practices in the public
sector are more rigid, and public agencies are constrained by annual
budgets—for good reasons. Public managers can neither use the
earnings of their organization to reward employee’s performance nor
freely allocate factors of production. Indeed, constraints imposed
by the legislature and the administration limit hiring, purchasing,
contracting, and organizational structures (see Wilson 1989, ch. 7).
These constraints also imply that the design of institutions that
manage infrastructure is seldom concerned with efficient scale and
scope. Thus, while many projects are large enough to assign tasks
to specialized service providers—such as construction companies
or maintenance contractors—public agencies tend to manage all
the infrastructure of a jurisdiction (sometimes the whole country),
whose size far exceeds the efficient scale of operation. Poor street and
highway maintenance is just one shortcoming stemming from the
excessive scale of the institutions.
    PPPs, by contrast, are the opposite type of organization. Because
each project is managed by an SPV, their focus is narrow and incen-
tives naturally sharp. Moreover, because SPVs are private firms,
management is not constrained by public sector rigidities, and their
goal is private gain. Last, it is far easier to pitch each PPP to its
efficient scale of operation. All in all, PPPs substitute private manage-
ment practices, incentives, and focus for public sector rigidities, weak
incentives, and excessive scale.
    In retrospect, however, it is easy to see that the view initially held
by many that “privatization” through PPPs would work as liberaliza-
tion of, say, international trade or goods markets, was naïve. Contrary
to liberalization, PPPs do not relieve governments of most of their
duties. Indeed, with single-project firms and temporary concessions,
the government retains discretion to plan and coordinate network
expansion as demand grows over time. Just as with public provision,
performance depends heavily on the quality of project selection and
appraisal. Moreover, public authorities must still manage externali-
ties, ensure rights of way so that projects can be built, enforce project
                              Eduardo Engel and Alexander Galetovic 295


delivery and monitor contract execution thereafter. Thus, while PPPs
take some responsibilities off the government’s shoulders, at the same
time they make the task of public authorities even harder because
they have an additional agent to deal with.

How?

A central economic characteristic of transport infrastructure is the
large, mainly exogenous demand risk: predicting initial use and
growth rates is next to impossible. Demand forecasts depend on
estimates of the macroeconomic cycle, which are tied to economic
performance, and on estimates of microeconomic conditions, which
reflect local demand fluctuations. Risk can also stem from uncertain-
ties—about changes in the income elasticity of demand for motor
vehicles and, when tolls are charged, about the toll elasticity. Either
uncertainty can throw off demand forecasts, which are usually inac-
curate in the short term (three to five years) and all but useless in the
long term.
   Consider the Dulles Greenway, a 14-mile (22.5-kilometer) road
joining Leesburg, Virginia, with Washington-Dulles International
airport, near Washington, DC. When the contract was granted in
the mid-1990s, two consulting companies independently forecast
that, with a toll of $1.75, the Greenway would serve roughly 35,000
vehicles a day. Actual traffic turned out to be just 8,500 vehicles a day,
because the public dislikes tolls and Virginia widened its non-tolled
State Route 7, which serves the same users. In this case, demand
risk was policy related, but it was also beyond the firm’s control and
thus exogenous.
   High demand risk makes risk sharing essential in PPP contract
design. Consider PPPs that can be funded with tolls. Despite high
demand uncertainty, tolls often pay for the project eventually; the
question is only how long it will take. Even though the initial demand
for the Dulles Greenway was much lower than expected, toll revenue
eventually will pay for capital and operating expenses. For projects
that will eventually pay for themselves, a present-value-of-revenue
(PVR) contract offers many attractive properties. Under the flexible
PVR contract, the regulator sets the discount rate and toll schedule,
296 Urban Transport


and firms bid the present value of toll revenue they desire. The firm
with the lowest bid wins, and the contract lasts until the winning
firm collects the toll revenue it demanded in its bid.
   A PVR contract reduces risk. When demand is lower than
expected, the franchise period is longer; when higher than expected,
the period is shorter. Assuming the project turns profits in the long
run so that it will eventually be paid for, all demand-side risks are
eliminated, reducing the risk premium to far lower than what the
firm would demand with fixed-term concessions.2 This should attract
investors at lower interest rates than those offered by fixed-term
PPPs. Each franchise generates the same toll revenue per year, but
the PVR contract offers a variable franchise term. If demand is low,
the franchise holder of a fixed-term contract may default; by contrast,
a PVR contract extends until user-fee revenue equals the bid, ruling
out default. The PVR bondholders do not know when they will be
repaid, but that is better than not being paid at all. Reducing demand
risk also mitigates the winner’s curse and bids become more cost-
oriented (Tirole 1997).
   The flexibility of PVR contracts works well for urban highways,
because setting the right toll for highways is difficult. Unless traffic
estimates are accurate—a rare event—the tolls will likely be either
so low that they create congestion or so high that the highway is
underused. In a PVR franchise, the regulator could set tolls effi-
ciently to alleviate congestion without distorting the concessionaire’s
incentives.
   When tolls are not an option, the government can pay a fixed
periodic fee, contingent on the service quality standard being met—
the availability contract. Availability contracts have become more
popular in many countries, including France, the United Kingdom,
and the United States. Under these contracts, the government selects
an SPV to build public infrastructure. In exchange for the project
services, the government remits the SPV a unitary payment, which
covers principal and interest on the debt plus a return to the SPV’s
shareholders, known as the sponsors or the private party. The SPV
receives an amount to cover the costs of operations, maintenance, and
service provision. The government guarantees the quality of service
specified in the contract by making regular payments conditional on
the contracted service being available.
                             Eduardo Engel and Alexander Galetovic 297


    Availability contracts, optimal if no tolls are charged, are often
awarded to the firm requiring the lowest annual payment, so that
demand risk is minimal. Availability payments cover the upfront
investment, and the concessionaire profits on it regardless of actual
demand.
    Availability contracts can also maintain a network. For example,
in summer 2007, Missouri’s Department of Transportation selected
a consortium to rebuild or replace 800 bridges and maintain them
for at least 25 years. The costs were an estimated $400–600 million,
with the state making annual payments once the work was done. The
contract provides strong incentives for the consortium by finessing
it if contract specifications are not met: $500 a day for each bridge
for delays beyond the original construction deadline, $2,000 a day
for closing, and $2,000 a day for each structure that fails to meet
the quality standards set out in the contract. Similarly, cities could
allocate street maintenance to a concessionaire in exchange for meet-
ing service standards.

The role of institutions

PPPs cannot exist unless certain preconditions are met. Most
important, property rights, including those arising from contracts
with the government agency, must be protected. Otherwise, private
firms will not commit large upfront investments to be paid by future
revenue flows (tolls and availability payments); even if they do,
they will demand a prohibitively high premium to bear the risk. A
well-developed financial market helps PPPs because it allows firms
to securitize the project locally after it is built without paying high
premiums to compensate for exchange rate uncertainty and country
risk. Where property rights are poorly protected, PPPs are not an
option. Governments in those areas should thus strive to improve
public infrastructure provision.

Pitfalls of public-private partnerships
Public finance
PPPs, contrary to misconceptions, do not free up public funds.
Indeed, they affect the inter-temporal government budget in
298 Urban Transport


much the same way as public provision. With a PPP, the current
government saves the initial investment outlay, but it then relin-
quishes either future user-fee revenue (if the PPP is funded with
tolls) or future tax revenue (if the PPP is funded with government
payments).
    Confusion about the inter-temporal nature of PPPs underlies one
of the most glaring and widespread defects of PPP programs: their
use to anticipate spending. Because fiscal accounting rules keep most
PPPs off the balance sheet, governments use PPPs to sidestep the
normal budgetary process, just as off–balance sheet vehicles helped
banks elude capital requirements and prudential regulation, igniting
the 2008–09 global financial crisis.
    Similarly, some governments have used PPPs to sell the cash flows
from existing infrastructure, financing current expenditures with part
of the proceeds. This danger looms large in cities, as the Chicago
Skyway shows (Based on Cheng 2010). The Chicago Skyway, a
7.8-mile (12.6-kilometer), six-lane, median-divided toll road linking
downtown Chicago to the Indiana state line, was developed by the
city in 1959, with bond financing linked to toll revenue. But the city
could not raise tolls enough to pay off the debt and was ordered by
the courts to increase tolls. Even with the increased tolls, however,
the first principal payment (after paying off all interest due) was not
made until 1991, when the project’s financial situation improved as
nearby non-tolled roads became more congested. After retiring the
original bonds in 1994, the city made no further toll adjustments
until it leased the project in 2005.
    From then on, the city used the Skyway revenue to fund other
transportation projects and anticipated these revenues by issuing
bonds in 1996 for the same purpose. In 2004, the city issued a
Request for Qualifications, which brought in five qualified bidders
for a 99-year lease of the Skyway. Three bidders competed to fund the
highway’s operations and maintenance in exchange for toll revenues
according to a predetermined toll schedule, with an undisclosed
reservation price estimated at $700–800 million. Cintra-Maquarie’s
winning bid of $1.83 billion, roughly twice its competitors’ bids of
well under a billion dollars, left it with the “winner’s curse.” Under
all reasonable demand scenarios, Cintra-Maquarie paid too much for
the project (Cheng 2010).
                              Eduardo Engel and Alexander Galetovic 299


   Three points stand out from this case study. First, major toll
increases were delayed until after the mayor’s term. Second, Chicago
procured in advance an exemption from leasehold taxes for the
Skyway, thus raising its value at the expense of future revenues. Finally,
the initial lease term was 55 years, but the actual lease extended for
99 years at the insistence of potential bidders, perhaps for the tax
advantages. Indeed, a private entity with a long lease gains asset
ownership and can claim depreciation as an expense for federal tax
returns. And over 2009–10, Cintra-Maquarie reported $18.9 million
in depreciation expenses for the Skyway.3 The PPP was financially
advantageous for the city, because only under implausibly optimistic
expectations of traffic growth and an undemonstrated ability to raise
tolls could it have generated the revenue it collected from the winning
bid (Cheng 2010). Private management has other potential efficiency
gains (more efficient maintenance and operations), but their impacts
are small (operating costs fell 11 percent, a gain of $1 million a year,
for example), so they should have an equally small impact on the
overall valuation of the Skyway.
   The short-term political benefits of the PPP were important. Part
of the debt was used to retire Skyway bonds and city debt, and $500
million was put into a long-term reserve. The remaining $475 million
went into discretionary funds, of which the city had spent 83 percent
by the end of 2009.
   How can we prevent spending anticipation and accounting
shenanigans? Fiscally, PPPs should be treated much like public
projects (see Engel et al. forthcoming [b]), following whatever
accounting rules conventional provisions follow. But few national
governments, if any, have sound accounting rules, and cities keen
to experiment with PPPs are not likely to either, keeping spending
anticipation a driver of PPPs.

Renegotiations

PPP contracts are routinely renegotiated, often to the detriment of
the public purse. True, circumstances can change over the life of a
contract, but renegotiations usually occur shortly after contracts
are awarded, and they tend to favor concessionaires. For example,
78 percent of the amounts awarded in Chilean PPP renegotiations
300 Urban Transport


have been brokered during construction, shortly after the contract
was awarded (Engel et al. 2009). And most renegotiations imply
paying more for the works than set out in the contract. Thus, in
principle renegotiations allow governments to expropriate conces-
sionaires after they have sunk their investments, but in practice the
private partner benefits the most.
    Contract renegotiation is justified when all parties gain, including
the public, such as when the environment changes, new information
arises, or design errors are discovered. In other cases, however, con-
tracts are modified strictly to benefit the procuring authority (expro-
priation of the PPP, for example), the project sponsor (by helping a
failing project, offering a term extension, or lowering technical stan-
dards), or both—at user or taxpayer expense. In practice, it is difficult
to distinguish the justifiable negotiations from the unjustifiable. And
even when renegotiations are justifiable, the new agreement might
not be fair, as contracts are renegotiated in a bilateral monopoly.
    To snuff out opportunistic renegotiations, an independent panel of
experts should ensure little to no change in discounted profits result-
ing for the concessionaire from any proposed contract renegotiation.
A recent wave of legislative reforms in Latin American countries has
implemented proposals along these lines.

Flexibility—adapting to changing circumstances
As stated above, circumstances change over the life of a long-term
contract. If demand grows faster than expected, the PPP facility
might need expanding; if the user-fee schedule proves inadequate, it
might need amending. In these cases, the regulator should have the
flexibility to change the contract or, perhaps, even to terminate it.
This would facilitate regulatory takings, however, so many contract
clauses restrict discretion to protect concessionaires.
   A recent PPP concession highlights the tension of protecting the
concessionaire from regulatory takings while avoiding the costs of
inflexibility. In 1995, the California Department of Transportation
(Caltrans) awarded a 35-year contract for a 10-mile segment of the
four-lane Riverside Freeway (State Route 91), between the Orange-
Riverside county line and the Costa Mesa Freeway (State Route 55),
to the California Private Transportation Corporation. Motorists take
                             Eduardo Engel and Alexander Galetovic 301


the express lanes to avoid congestion in the non-tolled lanes, paying
up to almost $11 round trip. The concessionaire raised tolls several
times to relieve congestion. But by the late 1990s, 33,000 daily trips
brought the express lanes to the brink of congestion at peak times,
turning the concession into a financial success. At the same time and
for the same reasons, the non-tolled public lanes were congested,
and expansion became urgent. The contract included a non-compete
clause, however, that prevented Caltrans from raising capacity with-
out the corporation’s consent. Caltrans, in an attempt to sidestep the
clause, argued that expansions were necessary to prevent accidents,
but the corporation filed a lawsuit. The settlement stated that the
contract’s non-compete clauses ensure the corporation’s financial
viability, restricting Caltrans’s right to adversely affect the project’s
traffic or revenue—to build new lanes.
   Protracted negotiations ensued, and eventually the Orange
County Transportation Authority negotiated to buy the tolled lanes.
But the toll road’s value was disputed; it would have equaled the
present value of profits from the State Route 91 express lanes had
the franchise continued as planned. Although the lanes cost $130
million to build, the company’s value was initially set at $274 million
in an unsuccessful buyout attempt by a non-profit affiliated with the
county. After several years of negotiations and continuing congestion,
the authority bought the lanes for $207.5 million in January 2003.
The purchase was enabled by the state legislature, which allowed the
authority to collect tolls and pay related financing costs and elimi-
nated non-compete provisions in the franchise agreement to allow
State Route 91 to be improved.
   In principle, the government should be able to unilaterally buy
back the concession, provided that it pays fair compensation for the
profits forgone by the franchise holder—that is, the expected pres-
ent value of future profits had the concession continued under the
original terms. However, with a fixed-term concession, as with State
Route 91, the value cannot be deduced from accounting data and is
thus highly subjective. Here, neither discretion nor bilateral bargain-
ing leads to an efficient solution.
   Engel et al. (2003) have shown that either a PVR contract (for
projects funded with tolls) or an availability contract can be struc-
tured so that the government retains almost full flexibility while
302 Urban Transport


protecting the concessionaire against arbitrary takings. For example,
it suffices to add a clause in PVR contracts allowing the regulator to
buy out the franchise by paying the difference between the winning
bid and the discounted value of collected toll revenue at the time of
repurchase (minus a simple estimate of savings in maintenance and
operations expenditures due to early termination). An availability
contract can offer similar compensation. And in both cases, the gov-
ernment bears the risk of early termination—desirable because this
risk is beyond the concessionaire’s control. Termination under either
contract is independent of future demand and therefore verifiable.
Thus, the winning bid minus the payments already received by the
concessionaire equals the fair compensation. The government cancels
the contract only if doing so is efficient. The government’s ability to
cancel the contract at its discretion prevents protracted or inefficient
renegotiations.

Coordination, multiple jurisdictions, and decentralization

Urban regulation developed in industrialized countries during the
19th and early 20th centuries to control negative externalities. In
principle, externalities can be mitigated in several ways, such as with
taxes, regulations, private bargaining, and contracts. But in practice,
externalities are managed almost exclusively with top-down controls
and regulations. The resulting system of laws, controls, and planning
regulations specifies what can be done and where and is in charge of
many authorities, including national, regional, municipal, and local
governments. Sometimes, even authority within a level of govern-
ment is dispersed among agencies. Conflicts across jurisdictions are
thus quite common.
   So, PPPs face a stiff challenge. No general rules prescribe how to
deal with this preexisting system—the distribution of power varies
by country—and tensions with urban regulations and institutions
persist. An effective PPP requires long-term public planning. And
a planner must have the authority to implement and execute it. But
the plan’s execution will inevitably involve other agencies and various
levels of government. Many times these agencies will have a say in
what can be done, when, and how; sometimes they will be pivotal to
a project’s execution. Moreover, the interests of each local authority
                             Eduardo Engel and Alexander Galetovic 303


might clash with community interests, especially when one jurisdic-
tion bears the infrastructure costs but few of the benefits.
   Inter-jurisdiction coordination, hard enough under conventional
provision, is even harder with PPPs, as the long-lived contractual
obligation with the concessionaire adds another constraint to the
agreements that different authorities can reach. PPPs can also stand
in tension with decentralization, as the need for planning and coor-
dination can require local governments to surrender part of their
authority to the agency in charge of the PPP.

The public-private partnership premium

PPPs have been roundly criticized for costing more per dollar of
financing than public debt—the so-called PPP premium. The num-
bers quoted for this cost difference vary widely. Yescombe (2007)
shows that the cost of capital for a PPP, once 200–300 basis points
higher than the cost of public funds, has doubled since the credit
crisis. He also shows that the spread over the lender’s cost of funds
is roughly 75–150 basis points, with highway projects on the upper
limit (Yescombe 2007). So, when governments decide between pub-
lic provision and PPPs, the argument goes, they trade off a lower
cost of funds under public provision against a PPP’s supposed higher
efficiency.
    Other authors, like Klein (1997), question whether there is a PPP
premium. One argument claims that bondholder risk under public
provision is subsumed under general government default risk—that
public debt is cheaper because the public implicitly absorbs the risk
through potentially higher taxes or less government spending in case
of imminent default on all government debt.
    Financial economists distinguish systematic risk—which varies
with the market or the economy—from project-specific risk. The
project’s systematic risk cannot be diversified and should affect
public and private financing costs equally. Can the public sector
diversify exogenous, project-specific risks better than PPP financiers?
Probably not.
    Both PVR and availability contracts assign all exogenous risk
to the government. A PPP shifts endogenous risks to the conces-
sionaire to prevent moral hazard and strengthen incentives to cut
304 Urban Transport


costs and provide adequate service quality. Unless risk-neutral, the
concessionaire will charge for bearing that risk. Moreover, these risks
cannot be diversified in the capital market; otherwise, there would be
no incentive to improve performance and the agent might indulge
in moral hazard. The question is thus whether shifting risks to
the concessionaire buys an improvement in performance that justifies
the higher cost of risk.
   Should the government use an incentive contract to improve per-
formance under public provision, it would have to transfer risks to
an agent and pay accordingly. The cost of preventing moral hazard
under public provision—a risk premium—should then be added to
the public sector cost of financing. Of course, such an adjustment is
never done before comparing—hence the PPP premium.

A case of prescient planning and successful
implementation of public-private partnerships

Between 2000 and 2008, a 225-kilometer (140-mile) system of
urban highways was built in Santiago, Chile’s capital (shown in the
bold lines in Map 11.1).4 The system was divided among eight PPP
concessions. Most of the funding to pay for the $3 billion investment
will come from toll collections over the next 20–30 years. Tolls are
charged by use and time of day through an electronic device attached
to each car. Each month, users receive a bill and pay it like any other
utility. Tolls vary by congestion and were fixed in each PPP contract.
   How did Santiago build this system in less than a decade? The PPP
program was planned and executed by a division in the Ministry of
Public Works, which has authority over streets and highways across
several municipalities. Urban PPPs were part of a broader national
plan to upgrade Chile’s urban highways through PPP concession.
The program began in the early 1990s, along with studies to build
urban highways. A law was passed to regulate concessions in 1996,
and PPPs were put to tender between 2000 and 2005.
   Yet the system’s origin dates to the late 1950s and early 1960s.
In 1960, the Ministry of Public Works issued its Santiago plan,
PRIS (a Spanish acronym for inter-communal urban regulation
plan). Planners anticipated that Santiago’s rapid growth, which had
begun in the 1940s,5 would eventually transform it into a polycentric
                             Eduardo Engel and Alexander Galetovic 305




Map 11.1   Urban Highways in Chile



city covering a substantial, ever-expanding area. It was thus crucial
to plan and build streets connecting metropolitan sub-centers and
municipalities, avoiding trips passing through the city center. The
plan anticipated the necessary transport investments, reserved strips
of land for roads, and gradually executed the investments to put the
306 Urban Transport


plan to work. When PPPs came 40 years later, most roads had already
been built, though they were in need of substantial upgrading.

                                 ***
PPPs can help improve street and highway maintenance, relieve
excessive congestion, and ensure timely capacity expansion, but they
cannot substitute for good government. Indeed, PPPs can make
government tasks more difficult and demanding.
   PPPs can go a long way toward ensuring that transport infra-
structure is well maintained. Their long-term contracts force the
government to fund the SPVs in charge of the infrastructure. If the
contract specifies adequate maintenance and service standards and
punishes non-compliance, the concessionaire will be motivated to
comply.
   In addition, PPPs foster productive efficiency, because the conces-
sionaire is a private firm free of the typical constraints that a public
manager must obey. The concessionaire can freely choose factors of
production and reward them contingent on performance. Moreover,
SPVs have a narrow focus, answer to only one principal, and can
adjust their scale and scope to fit the task at hand.
   PPPs need not be funded with tolls, but they offer an opportu-
nity to make tolls politically acceptable. Because free-flow tolling is
now feasible, tolls can be charged to reduce congestion, ensure an
adequate mix of public and private transportation, and help finance
maintenance and new infrastructure. Indeed, there is no good
argument against charging for transport infrastructure: congestion
abounds, streets and highways are rival goods, and technology now
makes them excludable. Also, making users pay for infrastructure is
good public finance. Perhaps we should pay for using streets just as
we pay for water, electricity, or garbage collection.
   Of course, tolls need to be regulated by a public body. Moreover,
SPVs cannot ensure proper and timely expansion of transport net-
works because planning, a long-term endeavor, must be handled by a
public body with authority to achieve inter-jurisdiction coordination
and ensure rights of way. Also, public bodies must take charge of
delivering projects, monitoring contract compliance, and enforcing
service standards. If these preconditions are met, PPPs can build,
operate, and maintain urban highways. They can also maintain
                              Eduardo Engel and Alexander Galetovic 307


streets—a city can be divided into sectors, each delegated to a firm in
charge of maintaining it under a long-term contract.
    Cities should take care when developing a PPP program, noting
at least three precautions. First, PPPs should be chosen only if they
improve efficiency, and not for fiscal reasons, because they have the
same impact as conventional provision on the inter-temporal budget.
So far, few countries (if any) have modified their accounting rules to
acknowledge this fact, and city governments probably will not either.
The temptation to use PPPs to anticipate spending is strong and casts
doubts on their desirability.
    Second, in a PPP the concessionaire’s expenses are front-loaded,
while revenue collection is back-loaded. Private firms will invest only
if they know that revenue streams will not be expropriated—that is,
if rules of law and property rights are strong. Without this assurance,
only traditional, less risky, public infrastructure provision is feasible.
This insight suggests that PPPs are unattractive to low-income
countries with weak institutions and governments.
    Last, PPPs need even more sophisticated governance and public
intervention than does conventional provision: planning and project
delivery, contract monitoring and enforcement, and inter-jurisdic-
tion coordination. These tasks are performed imperfectly today,
and just adopting PPPs will not improve institutions. Experience so
far has exposed many pitfalls, and inadequate governance has been
the rule.

Notes
 1. This financing technique is known as project finance. See Yescombe
    (2002, 2007).
 2. For example, by an amount equal to a third of the upfront investment
    in the case considered in Engel et al. (2003) and by an even larger
    amount in the case considered in Albalate and Bel (2009).
 3. For the Indiana Toll Road, depreciation expenses for 2009–10 totaled
    $73.6 million.
 4. According to the 2011 census, 6.2 million people live in the Santiago
    metropolitan area (Gran Santiago), and the city covers 711.2 square
    kilometers (71.1 hectares or 274.6 square miles). Densities are 8,700
    inhabitants per square kilometer, 87 per hectare, or 22,578 per square
    mile. Gran Santiago is divided into 37 municipalities.
308 Urban Transport


 5. Between 1940 and 1960, Santiago’s population roughly doubled, from
    about 1–2 million. Santiago’s surface area doubled too, from about
    100 square kilometers to 200 (10,000 hectares to 20,000, or 38 square
    miles to 77). By 1970, the population had increased by another million
    and surface area by another 100 square kilometers.


Bibliography
Albalate, Daniel, and Germà Bel. 2009. “Regulating Concessions of Toll
   Motorways: An Empirical Study on Fixed vs. Variable Term Contracts.”
   Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice 43: 219–29.
Cheng, John. 2010. “The Chicago Skyway Concession.” Senior thesis, Yale
   University.
Engel, Eduardo, Ronald Fischer, and Alexander Galetovic. 2003. “Privatizing
   Highways in Latin America: Is It Possible to Fix What Went Wrong?”
   Economia 4: 129–58.
——–—. Forthcoming (a). The Economics of Public-Private Partnerships: A
   Basic Guide. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
——–—. Forthcoming (b). “The Basic Public Finance of Public-Private
   Partnerships.” Journal of the European Economic Association.
Engel, Eduardo, Ronald Fischer, Alexander Galetovic, and Manuel
   Hermosilla. 2009. “Renegociación de concesiones en Chile.” Estudios
   Públicos 113: 151–205.
Heggie, Ian G., and Piers Vickers. 1998. “Commercial Management and
   Financing of Roads.” Technical Paper 409, World Bank, Washington,
   DC.
Klein, Michael. 1997. “The Risk Premium for Evaluating Public Projects.”
   Oxford Review of Economic Policy 13: 29–42.
Mogridge, Martin J.H. 1997. “The Self-Defeating Nature of Urban Road
   Capacity Policy.” Transport Policy 4: 5–23
Tirole, Jean. 1997. “Comentario a la propuesta de Engel, Fischer and
   Galetovic sobre licitación de carreteras.” Estudios Públicos 65 (Winter):
   201–14.
Wilson, James Q. 1989. Bureaucracy: What Government Agencies Do and
   Why They Do It. New York: Basic Books.
Yescombe, Edward R. 2002. Principles of Project Finance. Burlington, MA:
   Academic Press.
——–—. 2007. Public-Private Partnerships: Principles of Policy and Finance.
   Waltham, MA: Butterworth-Heinemann.
12


Sustainable and Smart Cities

Matthew E. Kahn*




Environmental progress in developing cities is daunting. When
millions of people and thousands of firms choose to locate near each
other and share air, roads, and rivers, pollution tends to rise unless
polluters have an incentive not to pollute.
   To mitigate pollution, government intervention is the textbook
solution. But government officials face conflicting goals as they
promote economic growth with limited information about polluter
activities. In developing nations officials often face severe resource
constraints that limit their ability to credibly monitor polluters—
inhibiting their ability to implement fines and environmental
regulations.
   Despite these challenges, the World Bank’s environmental econo-
mists have been optimistic about the potential for developing cities
to generate less pollution during times of growth. Dasgupta et al.
(2002) emphasize that the choices of urban citizens, firms, policy
makers, regulators, and non-governmental organizations all interact


  * I thank Julianne Baker and Aubrey Michi for several useful comments.
310 Sustainable and Smart Cities


to determine whether a city can refute the traditional pessimistic
outlook that economic growth causes environmental degradation.
    This chapter explores the challenges and opportunities that gov-
ernment officials face in designing coherent “rules of the game” for
achieving urban sustainability during times of growth. Sustainability
is judged by three criteria. The first involves elements of day-to-day
quality of life, such as having clean air and water and green space.
The provision of these public goods has direct effects on the urban
public’s health and productivity. The second focuses on the city’s
greenhouse gas emissions. Developing cities are investing in new
infrastructure, from highways and public transit systems to electric-
ity generation and transmission. They are building water treatment,
water delivery, and sewage disposal systems. Residents of these cit-
ies are simultaneously making key decisions about where they live
and work and whether to buy such energy-consuming durables as
private vehicles and home air-conditioning units. Given the long-
lived durability of the capital stock, short-term decisions will have
long-term effects on the city’s carbon footprint. The third criterion is
a city’s resilience to natural disasters and extreme weather events. This
subsection focuses on how the urban poor can be better equipped to
adapt to the anticipated challenges of climate change.
    The cities that have performed well on these three criteria will
enjoy several benefits. Their people will be healthier and more pro-
ductive. Reduced exposure to pollution increases the likelihood that
children are healthy and learn more in school and thus become more
productive citizens. The adults in a low-pollution, resilient city will
enjoy a higher quality of life, and the mobile skilled will be attracted
to move there. Cities that provide a safe, clean, healthy environment
are more likely to be home to citizens who enjoy a higher quality of
life. Consequently, children in these cities are more likely to become
able-bodied and productive adults. Improvements in environmental
quality will help slow morbidity and mortality risk, and this will
reduce the demand for costly health care. In this sense, investment in
“sustainable cities” helps produce a richer future society. Cities that
become “low-carbon” cities will help mitigate global climate change.
And if a global carbon treaty is agreed on, such low-carbon cities will
have an edge in complying with its terms.
                                                   Matthew E. Kahn   311


   This chapter proceeds by first investigating how the industrial,
transportation, and household sectors contribute to urban sustain-
ability challenges. Each sector has policy suggestions that could
significantly mitigate local and global pollution. Exposure to this
pollution depends on where goods are produced and where urbanites
live. For instance, the urban poor tend to live in the most polluted
and dangerous parts of the city. Several suggestions are offered for
reducing this vulnerable group’s exposure to risk and enhancing envi-
ronmental justice in cities. The final section builds on this theme by
discussing urban resilience in the face of climate change.

Reducing the pollution costs caused by the
industrial sector

Few cities feature an industrial base that mirrors the country’s over-
all industrial shares (Glaeser 2011; Moretti 2012). Individual firms
will locate in the city where they can expect the highest profits.
For example, labor-intensive industries might seek a city where the
market price of labor (wages) is low; electricity-intensive industries
might seek areas where electricity is cheap, such as near coal deposits.
The geographic distribution of industries across cities has important
environmental implications. Some cities will have an industrial base
featuring heavy industry, others a low-pollution service industry.
Cities that specialize in heavy industry—such as steel production,
chemical production, and paper manufacturing—face a more dif-
ficult sustainability challenge than cities that specialize in services.
Industrial cities suffer from higher local air and water pollution and
tend to be major consumers of electricity for production.1
    Government officials face tradeoffs in choosing how to reduce
manufacturing pollution. They will be well aware that manufacturing
offers fairly high wages for low-skill workers. In the United States, the
service sector’s share of employment has grown sharply as manufac-
turing’s share has fallen. Labor economists have documented the large
reduction in wages for workers displaced from manufacturing (Neal
1995). Officials must also be aware that heavy industry contributes
to ambient particulate and ozone and elevates water pollution (Cai
et al. 2012). When such activity takes place in city center locations,
312 Sustainable and Smart Cities


this pollution creates “hot spots” that affect millions of people living
in densely populated nearby neighborhoods. In such areas, quality
of life declines, as do land prices due to spillover pollution. High
pollution has direct impacts on the affected population’s health and
can have significant effects on children’s development (Currie 2011;
Currie and Neidell 2005; Currie and Schmieder 2009).
    One fairly inexpensive way for government to reduce manufactur-
ing’s pollution costs is to encourage the sector to move to dedicated
industrial parks. China’s government has created special economic
zones—areas where urban planners seek to concentrate production
activity and install infrastructure to increase industrial productiv-
ity. If such production areas are selected so that fewer people live
downwind, urban planning can break the link between pollution
production and residential area pollution exposure. Concentrating
industry in a small space may also reduce auditing costs for regulators
monitoring these polluters.
    Over the long run, many manufacturing industries choose to
move away from city centers, a dynamic that has played out from
the United Kingdom to the United States and from the Republic of
Korea to China (Henderson et al. 2001). Land is expensive at the
center of cities, and manufacturing is land intensive. As national and
urban governments invest in transport infrastructure, the suburban-
ization of manufacturing accelerates, posing a pollution tradeoff for
urban governments. Suburbanization offers the benefit of reducing
industrial pollution exposure for millions of people who live in the
city center, but it also encourages the population to live closer to these
suburban jobs. This attracts the industry’s supply chain (intermediate
goods suppliers) to the suburbs, causing further suburbanization.
    In the short run, governments have policy tools for reducing the
emissions from industry. Several governments, including that of the
United States, employ “command and control” regulation, requiring
new factories to deploy state-of-the-art emissions control equip-
ment. Such an approach raises production costs for new factories
but does little to reduce the emissions from older ones. In fact, it
encourages industry to rely longer on older, higher polluting factories
to delay paying new regulatory costs associated with building new
factories. Economists frown on an incentive system that implicitly
rewards keeping old factories running and that imposes a regulatory
                                                  Matthew E. Kahn   313


tax on building and operating new factories. New factories tend to
have much lower emissions per unit of output because they embody
cutting-edge engineering techniques.
   Urban officials seeking a vibrant employment base will worry about
overregulating industries. If one city adopts regulation to reduce pol-
lution while a rival city does not, some factories in the city with high
regulation might shut down and move to the city with lax regulation.
In such a “race to the bottom,” firms seek geographical areas that
reduce their regulatory costs. In this case, the high-regulation city
would be “rewarded” for its efforts by job loss and falling incomes
(Jaffe et al. 1995). This outcome would be less likely if the city that
enacts the regulation has other attractive attributes, such as a good
transportation system or a large home market that helps economize
on other production costs.

Trading pollution permits

The ugly scenario of regulation-induced job loss highlights the
importance of being smart about designing regulation. An equitable
allocation of pollution permits can achieve the dual goals of pollu-
tion mitigation and continued industrial production (Stavins 1998).
The pollution-permit market approach to industrial regulation starts
with the government declaring a cap on total tons of pollution that
may be released by industry in a given area surrounding the city. The
pollution cap could be set in consultation with public health experts
and atmospheric chemists, who would help quantify the social
benefits of limiting urban pollution.
   Once the cap is selected, polluting firms would bid for the per-
mits. The market price for this new commodity would be set by the
intersection of the aggregate demand curve for the right to pollute
and the vertical supply curve. At this price, aggregate demand just
equals aggregate supply. For example, suppose this price is $22 per
ton of sulfur dioxide released. Every polluting firm that creates a
ton of sulfur dioxide must buy a $22 permit to release that amount
of pollution.
   This regulatory approach creates an incentive for firms not to
pollute, and they will respond by looking closer at their production
processes to economize on pollution. As shown by the United States’
314 Sustainable and Smart Cities


experience with the sulfur dioxide trading market, the net effect
will be lower pollution at minimal cost, as those firms with an edge
in abating pollution will be rewarded for doing so (Schmalensee
et al. 1998).
   The pollution permit system can add millions of dollars of govern-
ment revenue if it requires polluters to purchase the permits. The
government’s alternative to keeping all this revenue is for it to freely
allocate some of the permits to the affected industries. A skeptic can
argue that if one city unilaterally starts such a market and does not
freely allocate the permits, “leakage” can result as factories will be
more likely to migrate to a city without regulation. In cities with a
large informal industrial sector, such regulation in the formal sec-
tor could encourage more firms to join the informal sector, making
them less likely to be regulated under the emissions cap. The extent
of this “leakage” remains an empirical question, but regulators have
an incentive to anticipate this effect—and a simple solution. Local
governments can freely allocate the permits to industrial firms and
then give them the right to sell them to each other at the market
price.
   If the government can keep some of the pollution permit rev-
enue, its fiscal resources will increase. Environmental economists
have argued that, with the revenue collected from pollution permit
auctions, other distorting taxes (such as labor taxes) can be reduced
(Metcalf 2007). The famous “double dividend” motto is to “tax
waste, not work.”

Disclosing information

A second policy for reducing industrial pollution is for the state to
collect and disseminate information about industrial polluter activ-
ity. Information is a public good, and governments’ unique powers
give them a cost advantage in requiring firms to report their emis-
sions and in auditing the veracity of these reports. After the 1984
Union Carbide chemical disaster in Bhopal, India, the United States
created the Toxic Release Inventory dataset, requiring manufacturing
firms to publicize their emissions released to air, water, and land.
Developing countries, such as Indonesia, have followed a similar
path, and research suggests that this informal information regulation
                                                   Matthew E. Kahn    315


has been effective (See López et al. 2004; Pargal and Wheeler 1996).
Such trusted information helps create accountability among those
who used to keep information about their polluting activities private.
   As education attainment rates rise in developing cities, local
communities will be empowered to take action (Kahn 2002). Even
in China, microblogs are active sources of information about envi-
ronmental issues. In July 2012, The New York Times provided a case
study of the power of environmental protest in China’s cities.

  China has long been known as a place where the world’s dirtiest mines
  and factories can operate with impunity. Those days may not be over,
  but a growing environmental movement is beginning to make the
  most polluting projects much harder to build and operate. Large and
  sometimes violent demonstrations against the planned construction
  of one of the largest copper smelting complexes on earth prompted
  local officials in southwestern China’s Sichuan Province to continue
  backpedaling furiously on Wednesday. The local government of
  Shifang, the planned site of the smelter, announced in a statement
  that the construction of the $1.6 billion complex had not only been
  suspended but also permanently canceled. (Bradsher 2012)

In cities with greater demand for environmental news, the media will
invest more resources to investigate. Media reports create account-
ability and improve local governance (Banerjee et al. 2011; Besley
and Burgess 2002). They level the playing field in the competition
between industry (which seeks to avoid regulation) and the millions
of people exposed to pollution but who face transaction costs in
banding together to change the status quo (Olson 1965).

Transportation infrastructure and the rise of car cities

Cities in developing countries are making major investments in urban
transportation infrastructure—investments that will determine a
city’s urban form and its ability to move goods and people around
the metropolitan area. This section focuses on the environmental
consequences of these investments and offers some policy suggestions
for minimizing the associated pollution costs.
   As urbanites grow richer, they tend to use public transit less and
private vehicles more—because private vehicles are convenient, high
316 Sustainable and Smart Cities


status, and time saving (Glaeser et al. 2008). This transport substitu-
tion is relevant for urban environmental performance because public
transit tends to have much lower air pollution and greenhouse gas
emissions than private vehicles. Buses and subways feature econo-
mies of scale, with fossil fuel consumption per mile of travel much
lower than for private vehicles.
    Government officials will recognize that vehicle use offers private
benefits to households: greater personal freedom and more possible
trading partners in the city. But driving imposes social costs that
self-interested households will ignore because the urban air is pub-
lic property, resulting in a “tragedy of the commons.” No one who
chooses between public transit and a private vehicle has an incentive
to consider such environmental costs when choosing a commuting
mode.
    The rising demand for private vehicles in developing cities is
well known. Richer people tend to travel by private vehicles, which,
though expensive, are faster and offer greater convenience than pub-
lic transit. Transportation economists have broadly agreed that a 10
percent increase in income is associated with a 10 percent increase in
per capita vehicle ownership (Ingram and Liu 1999). In 2010, Cairo
had 7.4 private vehicles per 100 people (Ahram Online 2011). And
with its roughly 8 million people, a 10 percent increase in per capita
income would mean 59,200 more vehicles owned.2
    Increased private vehicle and truck use creates an urban heat-island
effect due to running cars and the construction of more paved road.
Pollution costs from transportation scale up with private vehicle and
freight truck mileage. The environmental impact can be mitigated by
regulations that reduce emissions per mile and government policies
that encourage greater fuel economy (more miles per gallon).
    Transportation’s environmental impact can be shown with simple
multiplication. Consider a city that is home to 1 million people and
in which 10 percent of the population owns vehicles—so 100,000
vehicles are running in the city. If each vehicle runs an average of
5,000 miles a year, 500 million miles are driven in the city each year.
Suppose that the average vehicle creates 2 units of pollution and
consumes 0.1 gallons of gasoline per mile (10 miles per gallon). The
annual environmental impact would be 1 billion units of pollution
and 50 million gallons of gasoline consumed.
                                                   Matthew E. Kahn   317


   Government policy can affect each of the four margins sketched
above. In studying total transportation emissions, this section focuses
on vehicle ownership, use, and emissions per mile driven. It describes
the tradeoffs that government officials face in choosing a transporta-
tion system. Such a system needs to allow millions of urbanites to
move at fairly high speeds around the city, without creating high
levels of pollution and while minimizing the fiscal costs of supplying
infrastructure.
   Almost all economists would advocate taxing carbon emissions
as a direct way to reduce vehicle pollution. Such a tax would influ-
ence the likelihood that a household purchases a vehicle, the type of
vehicle it purchases, and the use of this vehicle. But in 2012, Australia
was one of just a few countries to introduce a carbon tax (Packham
and Massola 2012). Political partisanship has precluded the United
States from taking the global lead in reducing greenhouse gas emis-
sions (Cragg et al. 2012). These facts make it necessary to consider
second-best policies to reduce the cost of pollution.
   The most direct way to curb the growth of vehicle ownership is
to raise its costs. Cities could follow Singapore and introduce a high
vehicle-registration tax. Such a tax would be especially effective at
reducing pollution if its rate could be set according to the vehicle’s
model year and fuel economy. Older vehicles tend to have much
higher emissions per mile than newer vehicles; many developing
countries import older vehicles from richer nations (Davis and Kahn
2010). A differentiated registration tax would discourage the import
of older, fuel-inefficient vehicles.
   A second strategy to discourage vehicle purchases is a gasoline
tax, which would collect revenue for the government and discourage
driving. Parry and Small (2005) examine the traffic congestion, traffic
safety, and environmental consequences of driving and conclude that
the optimal gasoline tax would be between the low U.S. gasoline tax
and the higher Western European tax. In 2012, gasoline in Nigeria
cost $2.32 a gallon, while in the Arab Republic of Egypt it cost $1.73
a gallon and in Pakistan $3.55 a gallon (Randall 2012). A higher tax
in Egypt would collect new government revenue that could be used
in part to provide higher quality public transit.
   A third strategy for discouraging city driving is to price the use of
public roads and increase public parking rates. London’s city center
318 Sustainable and Smart Cities


charges roughly £8 per vehicle entering during rush hour. Information
technology improvements have greatly reduced the costs of such a
system (Leape 2006). In a similar spirit, Shoup (2005) advocates
time-of-day pricing so that parking is more expensive when demand
is high. The local government would collect more revenue from this
scheme, and traffic congestion and pollution would decline because
fewer vehicles would be cruising at low speeds for parking spots.
   Urban drivers who could be induced by these public policies to
drive less would be more likely to use public transit. In London, a
perhaps surprising consequence of road congestion pricing is that
many middle-class households that once drove are now using public
transit—flexing their political clout to demand better service. If this
new rider constituency can lobby government for more frequent and
better service, public transit will be more competitive with private
driving (Leape 2006). But in developing cities, the government is
likely to face financing constraints. The World Bank, along with
private international capital, is more likely to invest in projects with
clear evidence of high demand.
   Government investment in transportation infrastructure plays a
major role in determining total urban emissions. In China and the
United States, the construction of highways contributes to subur-
ban growth (Baum-Snow 2007; Baum-Snow et al. 2011). Simply
stated, by lowering transportation costs, areas farther from the city
center become more valuable because the time cost of commuting
there declines. Encouraging more people to live farther from the city
center offers housing benefits but has environmental consequences:
increased vehicle use and larger homes that require more water and
electricity.
   Subway investment tends to encourage city center development
(Zheng and Kahn 2012). Beijing is investing in local infrastructure.
Over the last 10 years, it has built new subways and Olympic Park,
which played a pivotal role in the successful 2008 Summer Olympics.
Four new subway lines were built over 2000–09, for a total investment
of 50.3 billion yuan. Olympic Park cost 20.5 billion yuan to build
over 2003–08.3 These place-based investments were concentrated
in some of Beijing’s less desirable areas, triggering complementary
private investment in new residential housing towers and new private
restaurant chains (Zheng and Kahn 2012). Real estate prices have
                                                    Matthew E. Kahn   319


since increased near the subway infrastructure and Olympic Park,
highlighting that gentrification can result from public investments
that improve local quality of life. Downtown Beijing is both a major
employment center, as major government offices are there, and a
center of culture and shopping destinations.
   Subways offer fast transport, but given the huge costs per mile it is
likely to be cost-effective only in cities with an extremely high density.
For decades, transportation economists have argued that too many
cities build costly subways (Meyer et al. 1965; Pickrell 1992). They
argue that subway advocates often overstate the expected ridership
to obtain funding for the project and that projects rarely deliver the
ridership promised. Since subways are enormous irreversible invest-
ments, transportation economists advocate instead for investments
in rapid buses that stop infrequently and have dedicated bus lanes.
Such buses would offer the speed of a car and the environmental
benefits of public transit.
   Bogotá did this with TransMilenio, choosing bus routes targeted
to the fastest growing areas.4 Despite the investments in dedicated
bus lanes, full service bus stations, and a pay-and-park system, pri-
vate vehicle use has been increasing 12.3 percent a year (Suzuki et al.
2011).
   Governments can reduce total emissions by enacting regulations
that reduce emissions per mile, and countries the world over focus
their regulatory efforts on new vehicles. The United States first
implemented emission control regulations in the early 1970s. Such
regulations require that manufacturers produce vehicles that meet a
given emissions standard and install specific equipment, such as a
catalytic converter.
   These regulations are easy to enforce but have several consequenc-
es. First, in nations with an older vehicle fleet, they might begin
to reduce average emissions only years after being implemented.
Suppose that a city’s vehicle stock features vehicles that range in age
from 0 to 33 years. Suppose also that 3 percent of the fleet is replaced
each year with new vehicles. If only new vehicles face more stringent
regulation, only years after the regulation is enacted will the fleet’s
average emissions decline. An unintended consequence is to encour-
age households to keep their old cars running longer, delaying the
effects of the regulation (Stavins 2005).
320 Sustainable and Smart Cities


    The good news is that trends in air pollution across India’s cities
suggest that the phase-in of such emission control regulations has
reduced urban air pollution. Greenstone and Hanna (2011) exploit
the fact that different cities in India phased in catalytic converter
regulation at different times. For example, the number of cities with
such regulation increased from 4 in 1997 to 22 in 1998. Large reduc-
tions in vehicle emissions start roughly five years after regulations
are adopted.
    Stringent new regulations will not reduce the emissions from the
stock of older vehicles. Based on remote-sensing data from the United
States, engineer Donald Stedman has argued that a small share of
the vehicle stock is the cause of most of the vehicle emission pollu-
tion.5 To address this social externality, economists have advocated
that police issue “pollution tickets” similar to speeding tickets. Such
policing could sharply reduce used vehicle emissions. Those caught
releasing high emissions would be fined a substantial sum, inducing
households to invest in more vehicle maintenance. The approach
could also regulate diesel trucks. An additional advantage is that it
can substitute for a costly inspection and maintenance program for
used vehicles.
    Another strategy for reducing vehicle emissions is to mandate
cleaner gasoline. One major public health success has been to require
unleaded gasoline, which richer nations are more likely to do (Hilton
and Levinson 1998). Urban lead emissions have declined sharply in
richer nations, improving public health by reducing lead’s negative
impacts on child development. Until recently, leaded gasoline was
the key source of widespread exposure to lead in urban Africa. With
its elimination from all of Sub-Saharan Africa in 2007, ambient lead
emission levels will continue to decline, offering direct health benefits
for children and the exposed population (Nweke and Sanders 2009).
    Today, environmentalists are counting on the widespread pur-
chase and use of electric and hybrid vehicles. At first glance, one
would assume that these vehicles have a smaller carbon footprint and
lower net environmental impact. However, the net environmental
impact of these “cleaner” vehicles hinges on the source of electricity
that powers them. If the electricity is generated by a coal-fired power
plant, the electric vehicle can hurt the environment more than the
conventional gasoline vehicle. But if it is generated using renewables
                                                  Matthew E. Kahn   321


or natural gas, the rise of the electric vehicle fleet is more likely to
offer urban environmental benefits.

The household sector

Households choose where to live in each city, with implications
for urban pollution and their own pollution exposure. In any city,
different income groups live in different neighborhoods and homes.
In some, such as Beijing and Paris, the very rich live downtown in
the high-amenity walking center. Many richer households also seek
out the suburbs for cheaper, newer housing (Brueckner et al. 1999;
Margo 1992; Zheng et al. 2006).
   The suburbanization of households offers private benefits but
imposes social costs, as the spread out population drives more and
uses public transit less. Suburbanites are more likely to own a vehicle
and use it more than city center residents. Relative to urbanites in
city centers, where the price of land is higher per square foot, subur-
banites have larger homes that require more air conditioning and use
more electricity and fossil fuels for heating.
   Poor urban households tend to locate where housing is cheapest
and riskiest. The risks they face are from spikes in air and water pol-
lution, natural disasters caused by flooding and landslides, exposure
to infectious disease due to high population density, and unreliable
electricity and access to clean water. A policy objective should be to
quantify the actual environmental risk that the urban poor face. This
exposure will have higher social costs if the individuals who choose
to live there are misinformed or have false perceptions about the
negative effects on their health. In many developing countries, the
urban poor live in informal areas with no basic public services, such as
sewers and drains. The lack of sanitation and waste disposal amplifies
the negative impacts of small-scale hazards.6 Without access to clean
water and electricity, the poor are at greater risk of disease epidemics
and exposure to extreme heat.
   Given that exposure to air and water pollution poses morbidity
and mortality risks, it also reduces worker productivity and the
capacity for children to learn in school—and increases a household’s
demand for costly medical treatment (Currie 2011; Zivin and
Neidell 2012).
322 Sustainable and Smart Cities


    The urban poor also face the challenge of increased rural-to-
urban migration in their cities. Farmers move to the city when their
expected urban standard of living exceeds their standard of living
in the countryside. As they move to cities, they increase population
density in urban slums, raising rents and lowering wages for those
already there.
    In designing “good” housing policies for protecting the environ-
ment, it is important to distinguish policies to reduce the social costs
of suburbanization of the middle class and wealthy from those to
improve the quality of life of the urban poor by reducing their pollu-
tion exposure.
    Public policies that relax controls on city center land use and
enhance the quality of life can help reverse the suburbanization
trend. Over the last 20 years, an active urban economics literature
has sought to identify policies that encourage households and firms
to aggregate at high density near the city center against those that—
either intentionally or unintentionally—deflect activity to the fringe
of the greater metropolitan area. City centers with low crime and
good schools and other public services are more likely to attract resi-
dents; those offering a high-amenity “consumer city” will be more
successful (Glaeser et al. 2001).
    An ongoing housing debate focuses on the costs and benefits of
limiting tall buildings in city centers (Glaeser et al. 2005). In India’s
cities, limits on floor-area ratios (FARs) increased suburban growth
because urban development cannot “go vertical” and is deflected to
the periphery (Brueckner and Sirdhar 2012). Good urban planning
would consider the benefits of allowing tall buildings near major
public transit nodes. Cities could also create a market where they
sell extra FAR to real estate developers, allowing taller building
zones near bus rapid transit nodes (Suzuki et al. 2011). Ahmedabad,
India, earned about $26 million from the sale of FAR bonuses
in 2011, 4.5 percent of the city’s revenue and 5 percent of its invest-
ment budget.
    As new housing is built to accommodate urban growth, cities are
more likely to become low-carbon cities if new buildings comply
with energy efficiency standards, such as the United States’ Energy
Star standard.7 Where electricity prices are high and expected to
rise, the operating expenditure savings from such buildings can be
                                                     Matthew E. Kahn     323


large. Energy-efficient buildings demand less electricity, reducing the
probability of blackouts and the need for (polluting) power plants
(Davis 2011).
   Millions of urban poor live in low-quality informal housing—that
is well known. Arnott (2008, 16) offers a sketch of the fundamental
tradeoffs that the state faces in dealing with this:

  The limited fiscal capacity of developing country governments makes
  the provision of urban infrastructure, including transportation, water,
  electricity, solid waste disposal, sewage, fire and police protection,
  schools, and medical facilities, more difficult. In informal settle-
  ments, these problems are compounded by the government’s poor
  knowledge of their current state and inability to control their future
  development. Furthermore, even a benign government faces a policy
  dilemma in deciding on the quality of infrastructure to provide infor-
  mal settlements. On one hand, if it turns a blind eye to violation of
  regulations and provides the same level of services to informal as to
  formal settlements, it encourages the development of more informal
  settlements in the future. This problem is particularly acute for squat-
  ter settlements, since the government is naturally loath to implicitly
  endorse settlements that were established through the expropriation
  of government or private property. On the other hand, informal
  settlements contain the bulk of poor households, who would benefit
  considerably from the provision of at least basic public services. Also,
  not providing informal settlements with basic services encourages
  crime and contagion, externalities that hurt all residents, and pro-
  duces neighborhoods that will remain blighted for years to come.

   The World Bank (2011) highlighted recent trends in Dar es
Salaam and São Paulo. In Dar, the population is growing roughly
6 percent a year, so its total population doubles every 12 years. Dar’s
urban poor face heavy rainfall, flooding, and drought. And about
70 percent of the city’s population lives in low-quality, risky housing
featuring weak infrastructure with little access to clean water and
sanitation. Drainage channels are regularly blocked, flooding houses
with sewage-infested wastewater and enabling water-borne diseases
to come into direct human contact. Roughly 40 percent of the city
is below sea level. In São Paulo, the main hazards include heavy
rains, flooding, landslides, and washouts. More than 85 percent of
high-risk households (890,000) are in slums. Of those households,
324 Sustainable and Smart Cities


52 percent lack access to sanitation facilities, 33 percent lack access
to paved roads in their neighborhoods, and 20 percent lack proper
sewage treatment.
   To protect the urban poor from hazardous environmental chal-
lenges, cities will need a new revenue source. For instance, cities
could increase their property taxes. A property tax offers a consistent
revenue stream, and this stability would help government officials
plan capital expenditures into the medium term (Bahl and Martinez-
Vazquez 2007). If property ownership is concentrated among a few
large land owners, such a tax will be progressive. It can also improve
economic efficiency if the money is used for productive local public
goods, such as roads and basic infrastructure.
   Assuming the government invests in improving public goods in
slums, who will be the real beneficiaries? Will the urban poor’s qual-
ity of life improve, or will the value of these improvements become
capitalized into local land prices so that land owners would be the
winners? If housing rents are determined in a competitive market,
land owners will gain most of these benefits. But if there are barriers
like rent control, those who already live in the area will benefit.

Urban adaptation to climate change

A third criterion for judging a city’s environmental performance is its
resilience in the face of climate shocks. Residents in many develop-
ing cities face significant flood risk, disrupted electricity supply, and
intense heat waves. Increased migration to these cities increases the
number of urbanites at risk, and climate change will only intensify
the risks. For these anticipated challenges, the goal for public policy
is to implement “no regrets” policies.
    While there are many unknowns about climate change, ongoing
economic research highlights direct impacts on the urban sector and
indirect impacts on agriculture.
    Higher temperatures have large, negative effects on economic
growth, but only in poor countries, where a 1º Celsius increase in a
given year reduces that year’s economic growth about 1.1 percentage
points (Dell et al. 2009). In rich countries, temperature changes have
no discernible effect on growth. Perhaps surprisingly, both agricul-
ture and the urban sector suffer in hotter years. And poor countries
                                                   Matthew E. Kahn   325


produce fewer scientific publications in hotter years, suggesting that
higher temperatures impede innovation.
   If climate change is expected to significantly reduce farmers’
profits, and if they are unable to substitute and produce another
agricultural product, they will have strong incentives to move to
cities—accelerating urbanization (Wang et al. 2010). As millions of
farmers urbanize, they are likely to be poor and to live in the riskiest,
cheapest parts of the city. Their arrival will increase urban density,
raise rental prices in slums, and reduce wages for incumbents. The
net effects include fewer consumption opportunities for the incum-
bent poor, more heavily taxed basic services, and greater risk of
infectious disease. Such migration will also lower the incomes of the
incumbent poor, leaving them with fewer resources to cope with
climate shocks.

Policy suggestions

In nations with few cities, migration within a metropolitan area
offers one strategy for protecting the population. While migrating
within a city is unlikely to reduce extreme heat exposure, World Bank
researchers have emphasized the importance of reducing the number
of people living in areas at high risk of natural disasters. Lall and
Deichman (2010) argue that zoning enforcement must attempt to
prevent settlement of the most risky areas. This is not easy. Informal
settlements can spring up overnight and, once established, are dif-
ficult to relocate. Tools like Google Earth can be used regularly to see
if informal communities are reemerging in risky areas.
    Government zoning can reduce the number of people living in
areas whose locations and attributes put them at significant risk.
Whether zoning is enforced depends on the government’s resources.
If safer areas of the city can be identified, encouraging greater density
in such areas would promote adaptation.
    If informal area residents are given formal title to the land
they occupy, households will have stronger incentives to invest in
their communities and their property (Fields 2005). In return for
receiving formal title, such communities would become part of the
city’s jurisdiction and be offered such basic services as water and
electricity—but they would be expected to pay for the services, as
326 Sustainable and Smart Cities


well as property taxes. Whether informal residents would consider
this a good deal remains an open question. Government officials
could conduct small pilot studies to see how sweet an offer must be
to encourage informal communities to integrate into the city.
   Access to electricity is an important adaptation step, because it
allows urban households to cool themselves and refrigerate perish-
able goods. It also reduces mortality risks associated with heat waves
(Greenstone and Hanna 2011). And it raises the poor’s quality of life
(Dinkelman 2011).
   Flexible electricity pricing can mitigate future climate change
impacts. On extremely hot days, demand for power will soar. If
cities do not implement peak-time pricing, there will likely be broad
blackouts. U.S. research has documented that both the residential
and commercial sectors respond to announcements of higher elec-
tricity prices by reducing consumption (Wolak 2010). If consumers
respond to higher prices by reducing consumption, developing cities
will need to build fewer power plants to cope with rising electricity
demand and can instead rely on dynamic pricing. The rise of “smart
meters” and real-time information about electricity consumption
and pricing allows cities to be “smart” about how they encourage
consumers to change their behavior.
   When urban households and firms know that the price of water
and electricity can fluctuate, they have strong incentives to invest
in durables and to economize on scarce resources. If such cities are
experiencing population growth, water and electricity prices should
rise to reflect the growing scarcity. By contrast, when governments
protect urban households and firms by setting price ceilings for water
and electricity, self-interested decision makers have little incentive to
conserve. If cities can solve the political problem of allowing utility
prices to fluctuate with underlying demand conditions, they will
be much less likely to suffer from water and electricity shortages,
especially during extreme weather shocks.
   Such variable pricing can inflict real costs on the poor. An increas-
ing block tariff rate with a low bottom rate for households that con-
sume a low level of electricity or water would allow them to afford
basic necessities.
   Can a low-carbon city be resilient, or does increasing its adaptabil-
ity to climate change always increase carbon production? The answer
                                                    Matthew E. Kahn    327


hinges on how power is created. Increasing electricity consumption
while reducing carbon emissions requires cities to reduce their emis-
sions per unit of power generated. One way to do this is to transi-
tion from coal to natural gas or to renewables. China and India have
sharply increased their exports of renewable power equipment (wind
turbines, solar panels) (Sawhney and Kahn 2012). If these countries
reduce their cost of renewable power generation, domestic consum-
ers could benefit from purchasing such products.

Anticipating the rise of the fat tail

Extreme weather events are increasing in frequency and intensity.
Some areas are suffering from extreme rainfall, others from persis-
tent drought. Relative to historical probabilities, some very unlikely
events are taking place. Consider the July 2012 mass flooding in
Beijing. The city had not invested in a costly drainage system to
handle such heavy rain. Had the rain fallen in Dalian or Tsingdao,
which have higher design standards, the  consequences would have
been manageable. But because Beijing’s government and residents
have little experience in handling flood conditions, the consequences
were catastrophic. This heavy rain is a “fat tail” event. And as climate
change unfolds, the likelihood of these low-probability but poten-
tially catastrophic events increases.
   In poorer cities, climate events exacerbate pre-existing public
health challenges. One example is Freetown, Sierra Leone, where a
cholera epidemic has broken out due in part to an exceptionally rainy
season that flooded shantytowns. The New York Times reports:

  Cholera, transmitted through contact with contaminated feces, was
  made worse this year by an exceptionally rainy season that flooded
  the sprawling shantytowns in Freetown and Conakry, the capitals
  of Sierra Leone and neighboring Guinea. In both countries, some
  two-thirds of the population lack toilets, a potentially lethal threat
  in the rainy season because of the contamination of the water
  supply … Aid workers said the number of cases of the highly
  contagious disease continued to increase, particularly in Freetown,
  where most live in slums and children swim in polluted waters.
  (Nossiter 2012)
328 Sustainable and Smart Cities


   Investments in drainage systems are a type of insurance. But it
is highly unlikely that the city will need a costly drainage system.
So, urban officials face a tough tradeoff in choosing how to allocate
scarce public funds to invest in “climate proofing” their city.

But moral hazard lurks

“Climate proofing” a city will likely increase in-migration and slow
out-migration. Consider New Orleans. After Hurricane Katrina,
some argued that encouraging more people to leave New Orleans
would be a good strategy for improving many people’s quality of life
(Glaeser 2005). The U.S. government did not follow this strategy
and instead made an enormous, irreversible place-based investment
in rebuilding New Orleans. While New Orleans’s population has
shrunk in recent years, its population would have fallen even more
without such place-based investments.
    Government investment in sea walls and other defensive barriers
is likely to attract private investment in hotels and other components
of urban infrastructure that attract households and firms. While this
might stimulate economic activity, it also puts more assets and people
at risk from the next natural disaster. And it can lull individuals
into a false sense of security as engineers climate-proof cities and
reassure the general public of the soundness of these structures.
But the consequences of underestimating nature can spell disaster
if these government investments fail, causing even more death and
destruction.

Pro–economic growth

City policies that encourage economic growth actually facilitate
climate resilience. As individuals grow wealthier, they gain access
to a broader range of private market strategies for protecting them-
selves from risk. Examples include eating higher quality food, using
better health care, and occupying sturdier housing. “An emerging
conclusion is that the key to adaptation among the urban poor
is to continue to address the basic poverty reduction and sustain-
able development agenda in cities to improve the livelihoods and
resilience of the poor—ensuring adequate and effective delivery of
                                                   Matthew E. Kahn   329


health care, education, water, energy, public transport, and waste
management; providing safety nets and increasing food security;
upgrading facilities and infrastructure in slums and other informal
settlements; and providing security of tenure and property rights”
(Hoornweg et al. 2011, 11).
                                  ***
As cities grow, the urban poor’s population density will likely increase,
and they will likely concentrate in the most precarious parts of the
city. The urban poor are moving to cities seeking a better life, and the
sources of many jobs tend to be in polluting industries. As urbanites
grow richer, they consume more electricity and are more likely to
pursue private vehicles. These individually rational choices have seri-
ous social consequences.
    Given these facts, how can “smart” sustainable cities arise? An
optimist can point to the successes of New York and London, high-
lighting that urban areas can make sharp environmental progress
in just a few decades. Such progress requires a delicate balance of
urban planning and leveraging market forces to send proper signals
of resource scarcity. Improvements in information technology and
advances in knowledge of how to mitigate pollution and the health
benefits of such steps suggest that more cities will pursue “smart”
sustainable growth. Urban officials now have real-time information
about the subgroups of their constituents most at risk and the tech-
nology to connect with them more efficiently.
    Cities that can improve their environmental performance will
benefit from having a healthier, more productive populace that enjoys
a better quality of life. Clean air, clean water, and low risk facilitate
the development of human capital for the young and increase the
likelihood that they will become productive adults. Because human
capital is the engine of economic growth, urban policies that encour-
age “greenness” promote the population’s health. Ensuring the popu-
lation’s health is not merely an aesthetic choice—it is a cornerstone
for a productive society.

Notes
 1. In India, for example, Ankleshwar, Gujarat, focuses on chemical
    production (see World Bank’s Growth Poles). The industrial plants in
330 Sustainable and Smart Cities


      Ankleshwar process large quantities of basic chemicals, solvents, acids,
      and fuels to manufacture more than 25 percent of Gujarat’s (5 percent
      of India’s) pharmaceuticals, chemicals, pesticides, and dyes (Kathuria
      and Sterner 2006).
 2.   This expected growth in vehicles is calculated based on (0.074) × 1.1 ×
      8 million–0.074 × 8 million.
 3.   The official exchange rate used here is 6.5 yuan per dollar.
 4.   For an excellent series of case studies documenting success stories, see
      Suzuki et al. (2011).
 5.   “Fuel Efficiency Automobile Test Data Center,” University of Denver,
      www.feat.biochem.du.edu/.
 6.   In Santo Domingo’s largest slum, 45 percent of houses near a river flood
      when it rains. Housing prices reflect this risk with the poorest living in
      the lowest quality housing in the areas most at risk. In Caracas and Rio
      de Janeiro, poor families occupy steeply sloped land prone to landslides
      (Lall and Deichmann 2010).
 7.   “ENERGY STAR for Multifamily Housing,” U.S. Environmental
      Protection Agency and U.S. Department of Energy, http://www.
      energystar.gov/index.cfm?c=multifam_housing.bus_multifam_
      housing.

Bibliography
Ahram Online. 2011. “Egypt Vehicles Up 13.5 Per Cent in 2010, New
  Figures Show.” August 4. http://english.ahram.org.eg/NewsContent/
  3/12/18085/Business/Economy/Egypt-vehicles-up--per-cent-in-,-new-
  figures-show.aspx.
Arnott, Richard. 2008. “Housing Policy in Developing Countries: The
  Importance of the Informal Economy.” Working Paper 13, World Bank,
  Commission on Growth and Development, Washington, DC.
Bahl, Roy, and Jorge Martinez-Vazquez. 2007. “The Property Tax in
  Developing Countries: Current Practice and Prospects.” Working Paper
  07RB1, Lincoln Institute of Land Policy, Washington, DC.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Selvan Kumar, Rohini Pande, and Felix Su. 2011. “Do
  Informed Voters Make Better Choices? Experimental Evidence from
  Urban India.” Working Paper, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
  Cambridge, MA.
Baum-Snow, Nathaniel. 2007. “Did Highways Cause Suburbanization?”
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (2): 775–805.
Baum-Snow, Nathaniel, Loren Brandt, J. Vernon Henderson,
  Matthew Turner, and Qinghua Zhang. 2011. “Roads, Railways and
                                                    Matthew E. Kahn    331


   Decentralization of Chinese Cities.” 1st European Meeting of the Urban
   Economics Association, Barcelona, Spain, August 30–September 3.
Besley, Timothy, and Robin Burgess. 2002. “The Political Economy
   of Government Responsiveness: Theory and Evidence from India.”
   Quarterly Journal of Economics 117 (4): 1415–51.
Bradsher, Keith. 2012. “Bolder Protests against Pollution Win Project’s
   Defeat in China.” The New York Times, July 4. http://www.nytimes.
   com/2012/07/05/world/asia/chinese-officials-cancel-plant-project-
   amid-protests.html.
Brueckner, Jan K., and Kala S. Sridhar. 2012. “Measuring Welfare Gains
   from Relaxation of Land-Use Restrictions: The Case of India’s Building-
   Height Limits.” Working Paper, University of California, School of
   Social Sciences, Irvine, CA.
Brueckner, Jan K., Jacques-Francois Thisse, and Yves Zenou. 1999. “Why
   is Central Paris Rich and Downtown Detroit Poor? An Amenity-Based
   Theory.” European Economic Review 43 (1): 91–107.
Cai, Hongbin, Yuyu Chen, and Qing Gong. 2012. “Polluting Thy Neighbor:
   The Case of River Pollution in China.” Peking University Working Paper,
   Peking University, Beijing.
Cragg, Michael, Yuyu Zhou, Kevin Gurney, and Matthew E. Kahn. 2012.
   “Carbon Geography: The Political Economy of Congressional Support for
   Legislation Intended to Mitigate Greenhouse Gas Production.” Economic
   Inquiry. doi:10.1111/j.1465-7295.2012.00462.51(2): 1640-1650.x.
Currie, Janet. 2011. “Inequality at Birth: Some Causes and Consequences.”
   American Economic Review 101 (3): 1–22.
Currie, Janet, and Matthew Neidell. 2005. “Air Pollution and Infant Health:
   What Can We Learn from California’s Recent Experience?” Quarterly
   Journal of Economics 120 (3): 1003–30.
Currie, Janet, and Johannes F. Schmieder. 2009. “Fetal Exposures to Toxic
   Releases and Infant Health.” American Economic Review 99 (2): 177–83.
Dasgupta, Susmita, Benoit Laplante, Hua Wang, and David Wheeler. 2002.
   “Confronting the Environmental Kuznets Curve.” Journal of Economic
   Perspectives 16 (1): 147–68.
Davis, Lucas W. 2011. “The Effect of Power Plants on Local Housing Prices
   and Rents.” Review of Economics and Statistics 93 (4): 1391–402.
Davis, Lucas W., and Matthew E. Kahn. 2010. “International Trade in
   Used Vehicles: The Environmental Consequences of NAFTA.” American
   Economic Journal: Economic Policy 2 (4): 58–82.
Dell, Melissa, Ben Jones, and Ben Olken. 2009. “Temperature and Income:
   Reconciling New Cross-Sectional and Panel Estimates.” American
   Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 99 (2): 198–204.
332 Sustainable and Smart Cities


Dinkelman, Taryn. 2011. “The Effects of Rural Electrification on
    Employment: New Evidence from South Africa.” American Economic
    Review 101 (7): 3078–108.
Fields, Erica. 2005. “Property Rights and Investment in Urban Slums.”
    Journal of the European Economic Association Papers and Proceedings
    3 (2–3): 279–90.
Glaeser, Edward L. 2005. “Should the Government Rebuild New Orleans,
    Or Just Give Residents Checks?” The Economists’ Voice 2 (4): 1–6.
——–—. 2011. The Triumph of the City: How Our Greatest Invention Makes
    Us Richer, Smarter, Greener, Healthier, and Happier. New York: Penguin
    Books.
Glaeser, Edward L., Joseph Gyourko, and Raven Saks. 2005. “Why is
    Manhattan So Expensive? Regulation and the Rise in House Prices.”
    Journal of Law and Economics 48 (2): 331–70.
Glaeser, Edward L., Matthew E. Kahn, and Jordan Rappaport. 2008. “Why
    Do the Poor Live in Cities? The Role of Public Transportation.” Journal
    of Urban Economics 63 (1): 1–24.
Glaeser, Edward L., Jed Kolko, and Albert Saiz. 2001. “Consumer City.”
    Journal of Economic Geography 1 (1): 27–50.
Greenstone, Michael, and Rema Hanna. 2011. “Environmental Regulations,
    Air and Water Pollution, and Infant Mortality in India.” Working Paper
    2011-014, Center for Energy and Environmental Policy Research,
    Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA.
Henderson, J. Vernon, Todd Lee, and Yung J. Lee. 2001. “Scale Externalities
    in Korea.” Journal of Urban Economics 49 (3): 479–504.
Hilton, F. G. Hank, and Arik Levinson. 1998. “Factoring the Environmental
    Kuznets Curve: Evidence from Automotive Lead Emissions.” Journal of
    Environmental Economics and Management 35 (2): 126–41.
Hoornweg, Daniel, Mila Freire, Marcus J. Lee, Perinaz Bhada-Tata, and
    Belinda Yuen, eds. 2011. Cities and Climate Change: Responding to
    an Urgent Agenda. Vol. 1. Washington, DC: World Bank, Urban
    Development and Local Government.
Ingram, Gregory, and Zhi Liu. 1999. “Determinants of Motorization
    and Road Provision.” In Essays in Transportation Economics and Policy:
    A Handbook in Honor of John R. Meyer, edited by José Gomez-Ibanez,
    William B. Tye, and Clifford Winston, 325–63. Washington, DC:
    Brookings Institute Press.
Jaffe, Adam, Steven R. Peterson, Paul R. Portney, and Robert N. Stavins.
    1995. “Environmental Regulation and the Competitiveness of U.S.
    Manufacturing: What Does the Evidence Tell Us?” Journal of Economic
    Literature 33 (1): 132–63.
                                                    Matthew E. Kahn    333


Kahn, Matthew E. 2002. “Demographic Change and the Demand for
   Environmental Regulation.” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management
   21 (1): 45–62.
——–—. 2005. “The Death Toll from Natural Disasters: The Role of
   Income, Geography, and Institutions.” Review of Economics and Statistics
   87 (2): 271–84.
——–—. 2006. Green Cities: Urban Growth and the Environment.
   Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
——–—. 2010. Climatopolis: How Our Cities Will Thrive in the Hotter
   Future. New York: Basic Books.
Kathuria, Vinish, and Thomas Sterner. 2006. “Monitoring and Enforcement:
   Is Two-Tier Regulation Robust?—A Case Study of Ankleshwar, India.”
   Ecological Economics 57 (3): 477–93.
Lall, Somik V., and Uwe Deichmann. 2010. “Density and Disasters:
   Economics of Urban Hazard Risk.” World Bank Research Observer
   27 (1): 74–105.
Leape, Jonathan. 2006. “The London Congestion Charge.” Journal of
   Economic Perspectives 20 (4): 157–76.
López, Jorge García, Thomas Sterner, and Shakeb Afsah. 2004. “Public
   Disclosure of Industrial Pollution: The PROPER Approach for
   Indonesia?” Discussion Paper 04-34, Resources for the Future,
   Washington, DC.
Margo, Robert A. 1992. “Explaining the Postwar Suburbanization of
   Population in the United States: The Role of Income.” Journal of Urban
   Economics 31 (3): 301–10.
Metcalf, Gilbert. 2007. “A Proposal for a U.S. Carbon Tax Swap.” Hamilton
   Working Paper, Brookings Institution, Washington, DC. http://www.
   brookings.edu/~/media/research/files/papers/2007/10/carbontax%20
   metcalf/10_carbontax_metcalf.
Meyer, John, John Kain, and Martin Wohl. 1965. The Urban Transportation
   Problem. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Moretti, Enrico. 2012. The New Geography of Jobs. New York: Houghton
   Mifflin Harcourt.
Neal, Derek. 1995. “Industry-Specific Human Capital: Evidence from
   Displaced Workers.” Journal of Labor Economics 13 (4): 653–77.
Nossiter, Adam. 2012. “Cholera Epidemic Envelops Coastal Slums in
   West Africa.” The New York Times, August 22. http://www.nytimes.
   com/2012/08/23/world/africa/cholera-epidemic-envelops-coastal-
   slums-in-west-africa.html.
Nweke, Onyemaeschi, and William H. Sanders. 2009. “Modern
   Environmental Health Hazards: A Public Health Issue of Increasing
334 Sustainable and Smart Cities


   Significance in Africa.” Environmental Health Perspective 117 (6):
   863–70.
Olson, Mancur. 1965. The Logic of Collective Action: Public Goods and the
   Theory of Groups. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Packham, Ben, and James Massola. 2012. “Australia to Have Carbon Price
   from July 1, 2012, Julia Gillard Announces.” The Australian, January 23.
   http://www.theaustralian.com.au/news/gillard-to-reveal-climate-policy-
   today/story-e6frg6n6-1226011223441.
Pargal, Sheoli, and David Wheeler. 1996. “Informal Regulation of Industrial
   Pollution in Developing Countries: Evidence from Indonesia.” Journal of
   Political Economy 104 (6): 1314–27.
Parry, Ian W., and Kenneth A. Small. 2005. “Does Britain or the United
   States Have the Right Gasoline Tax?” American Economic Review 95 (4):
   1276–89.
Pickrell, Don. 1992. “A Desire Named Streetcar Fantasy and Fact in Rail
   Transit Planning.” Journal of the American Planning Association 58 (2):
   158–76.
Randall, Tom. 2012. “Highest & Cheapest Gas Prices by Country.” Bloomberg,
   August 13. http://www.bloomberg.com/slideshow/2012-08-13/highest-
   cheapest-gas-prices-by-country.html#slide56.
Sawhney, Aparna, and Matthew E. Kahn. 2012. “Understanding Cross-
   National Trends in High-Tech Renewable Power Equipment Exports to
   the United States.” Energy Policy 46 (C): 308–18.
Schmalensee, Richard, Paul L. Joskow, A. Denny Ellerman, Juan Pablo
   Montero, and Elizabeth M. Bailey. 1998. “An Interim Evaluation of
   Sulfur Dioxide Emissions Trading.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 12
   (3): 53–68.
Shoup, Donald. 2005. The High Price of Free Parking. Washington, DC:
   American Planning Association.
Stavins, Robert N. 1998. “What Can We Learn from the Grand Policy
   Experiment? Lessons from SO2 Allowance Trading.” Journal of Economic
   Perspectives 12 (3): 69–88.
——–—. 2005. “Vintage-Differentiated Environmental Regulation.”
   Discussion Paper 05-59, Resources for the Future, Washington, DC.
Suzuki, Hiroaki, Robert Cervero, and Kanako Iuchi. 2011. “Transforming
   Cities with Transit: Transit and Land-Use Integration toward Sustainable
   Urban Development.” Working Paper, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Wang, Jinxia, Robert Mendelsohn, Ariel Dinar, and Jikun Huang. 2010.
   “How Chinese Farmers Change Crop Choice to Adapt to Climate
   Change.” Climate Change Economics 1 (3): 167–85.
                                                    Matthew E. Kahn   335


Wolak, Frank. 2010. “An Experimental Comparison of Critical Peak and
   Hourly Pricing: The PowerCentsDC Program.” Working Paper, Stanford
   University, Department of Economics, Stanford, CA.
World Bank. 2011. Climate Change, Disaster Risk, and the Urban Poor.
   Washington, DC: World Bank.
Zheng, Siqi, Yuming Fu, and Hongyu Liu. 2006. “Housing-Choice
   Hindrances and Urban Spatial Structure: Evidence from Matched
   Location and Location-Preference Data in Chinese Cities.” Journal of
   Urban Economics 60 (3): 535–57.
Zheng, Siqi, and Matthew E. Kahn. 2012. “Does Government Investment
   in Local Public Goods Spur Gentrification? Evidence from Beijing.” Real
   Estate Economics. doi:10.1111/j.1540-6229.2012.00339. 41(1): 1–28.
Zivin, Joshua G., and Matthew Neidell. 2012. “The Impact of Pollution
   on Worker Productivity.” American Economic Review 102 (7): 3652–73.
13


Housing Matters

Sonia Hammam




Housing matters to the livability of cities and to the productivity of
their economies. The failure of cities to accommodate the housing
needs of growing urban populations can be seen in the proliferation
of poorly serviced, high-density informal settlements. While such
settlements are not new in the history of rapidly growing cities,
their persistence results as much from policies as from economics
and demographic transition. Slums have attracted most of the atten-
tion on urban housing in developing countries, and the Millennium
Development Goals have given prominence to their reduction.
However, urban housing issues transcend conditions in slums and
are linked closely to economic activity. City economies influence
housing demand, and in turn the flexibility of housing supply affects
economic activity and city growth.
   Housing strategies to deal with rapid urban growth have varied over
time and at different stages of urbanization. Renaud (2004) points
to the dissimilarity of East Asian strategies at the early stages of their
urbanization: underinvestment in housing in Japan and the Republic
of Korea,1 large-scale public investment in Singapore and Hong Kong
SAR, China, central planning in China, and a non-interventionist
                                                   Sonia Hammam     337


approach in Taiwan, China. The strategies in these countries have
evolved with urbanization and economic development.
    Starting in the early 1990s, housing policy advice was enshrined
in the concept of “enabling markets to work.” A 1993 World Bank
policy paper defined this concept, elaborating on the enabling
approach that had been adopted in 1988 as part of the UN Global
Strategy for Shelter to the Year 2000. At its most simplistic, the
policy paper emphasized limiting the role of governments to a set of
policy instruments and reforms that would allow housing markets
to operate effectively. This was as much a reflection of the prevailing
consensus on public and private sector roles as it was a reaction to the
inefficiencies of public housing production in developing countries.
    The concept of an enabling role for government has its roots in
the dominant policy advice of the 1970s, which argued against gov-
ernment programs of direct housing production and slum removal.
Instead, governments were urged to take on interventions to facilitate
the informal process of self-help housing by reducing development
standards and providing infrastructure and tenure for low-income
groups.
    Unlike the earlier enabling approach to self-help housing, the
market-oriented view framed the housing policy discussion in the
context of the economic effects of good and bad housing outcomes,
including for the poor. It drew attention to how policy and institu-
tional arrangements affect housing outcomes by shifting the debate
away from targeted low-income housing interventions and toward
policy instruments that affect how housing markets function. On the
demand side, it emphasized policy action in property rights, housing
finance, and subsidies. On the supply side, it emphasized serviced
land supply, land and housing regulations, and the organization of
the sector. These areas of emphasis represent the building blocks of a
housing system.
    By shifting the debate toward policy instruments and away from
targeted intervention, the market approach implied that interven-
tions were not needed beyond getting the policies right. It was also
largely silent on the direct problems of housing for the lowest income
groups. While the approach may appear abstract and prescriptive in
its reforms and views on the role of government, its focus on market
processes has highlighted the importance of understanding housing
338 Housing Matters


market performance when designing reforms or specific interven-
tions. The policy environment not only influences outcomes but also
constrains the scaling up and sustainability of targeted interventions.
The debate often appears to be over a singular focus on targeted inter-
ventions, on the one hand, and policy, regulatory, and institutional
reform, on the other. Yet a mix of both is required.
   The World Bank’s recent urban strategy suggests that the market
approach was “far too sanguine” about the difficulties of creating
well-functioning housing markets with private construction and
financial sectors that respond to low-income housing demand. It
instead argued for a more pragmatic view that includes interventions
through measures such as land readjustment, a return to sites and
services, upgrading, and subsidies to the poorest (World Bank 2010).
There is, however, no consensus on the sequencing and content of
policies and targeted interventions. One view, recently put forward
by the 2009 World Development Report on economic geography,
suggests that land-use regulatory reforms and targeted interventions
should take place at advanced stages of urbanization (World Bank
2009). Addressing the causes and outcomes of poor housing sector
performance at such a late stage is likely to be costly, given the dura-
bility of housing. As Martine and McGranahan (2010) warn about
Brazil’s poor performance during its urban transition, “the unwilling-
ness to prepare for massive growth has not only made Brazil’s urban
transition unnecessarily traumatic but also left a legacy of social and
environmental problems that prevent the country from benefiting
from all the inherent advantages offered by urbanization” (Martine
and McGranahan 2010, 55).
   The housing sector’s performance continues to present chal-
lenges, even in middle-income countries that are well past their
urban transformation. The debate on housing market performance
has been limited by inconsistent data on and definitions of slums
that indicate a billion slum households. While one may argue about
definitions and quantities, the existing data clearly signal that urban
housing markets are under pressure—not only in the least urban-
ized (but rapidly urbanizing) regions but also in the most urbanized
developing country regions. This, however, does not imply that the
main response should be to focus solely on “solving” the problem of
                                                     Sonia Hammam      339


slums without addressing the policies that influence housing system
performance and give rise to slums.
   This chapter provides an overview of the policy and institutional
building blocks that determine housing sector performance, drawing
on studies from both developed and developing countries. It focuses
on property rights, including tenure choice, housing finance, and
subsidies. It also reviews the factors that affect supply: the availability
of serviced land, as well as land and housing regulations. While these
elements have been standard tools of housing policy, they are still the
subject of considerable debate over their sequencing, policy content,
and priority. There has been a great deal of emphasis over the last
two decades on demand-side measures to improve property rights
systems, develop housing finance, and even to introduce new subsidy
systems. All these developments are important, but as this chapter
argues, less progress has been made in understanding and addressing
the factors that constrain supply, which often thwart improvements
on the demand side.

Property rights

Clear, enforceable, and tradable property rights, along with systems
for settling disputes and determining compensation for public acqui-
sition, are necessary for effective housing market performance. Secure
property rights improve market efficiency by reducing transaction
uncertainty and making it easier to transfer rights, thereby increasing
the volume and value of real estate transactions. In addition, clear
titles are as important as collateral for access to finance and the devel-
opment of housing finance. In developing countries, these benefits
are often compromised by a regulatory environment that reduces the
value of legally owned property and its use as collateral. Moreover,
even where property rights are well established, they have little value
without institutional structures for enforcement and adjudication.
    Many cities have a continuum of tenure statuses with various
bundles of rights, ranging from squatting to leasehold and freehold.
Property rights systems tend to be fragmented and poorly developed,
causing delays in public and private land acquisition and infrastructure
provision, and inefficiencies in land and housing markets. Without
340 Housing Matters


effective dispute settlement institutions, the lack of clarity in real
property rights leaves land in legal limbo, distorting land prices and
hindering private real estate transactions, finance, and development.
    The ambiguities and conflicts over property rights that are com-
monly found in informal settlements, and that lead to various degrees
of tenure insecurity for their residents, reflect the shortcomings and
inefficiencies of the system for enforcing and adjudicating exist-
ing property rights or for establishing clear rights in the first place.
Registries tend to be incomplete and poorly maintained, property
disputes account for large caseloads in the courts, and registration
processes are often lengthy and costly. While the institutional aspects
of property rights (definition, enforcement, and adjudication) are the
critical elements for ensuring secure rights and reducing risks for real
estate investment, most of the debate has been narrowly focused on
titling and tenure security for slum dwellers.

Do titles matter?

De Soto (2000) framed tenure security as a matter of property rights
embodied in legal title, which converts the informally held hous-
ing and land assets of the poor to usable wealth. Titling essentially
allows the poor to benefit from a flow of investment and credit and
to become more integrated in the urban economy. The 2009 World
Development Report on economic geography echoes the primacy
of titling (World Bank 2009). It identifies titling as the critical first
step in building fluid land markets and defers regulatory reform to
later stages of urbanization. Buckley and Kalarickal (2006), on the
other hand, draw attention to the role of regulatory and other con-
straints in preventing the emergence of effective land and housing
markets, even where titles are well established. While not denying
the importance of titles, they give precedence to reforming regulatory
frameworks.
    The differences in the two perspectives are more about appropriate
sequencing, but Buckley and Kalarickal’s views imply that titles are
a necessary but insufficient condition for the development of more
fluid housing markets. The experience in transition countries is
instructive in this respect. The massive transfer of ownership rights to
sitting tenants in the 1990s was not sufficient to unlock the value of
                                                    Sonia Hammam     341


housing assets. Ten years after the initial reforms, housing markets had
begun to show some signs of recovery, and market transactions were
growing; however, housing investment remained historically low, the
stock had deteriorated, and homelessness had grown (Tsenkova and
Turner 2004). The transition countries had achieved a high degree of
private ownership without any of the complementary institutional
structures associated with real estate markets and transactions.
    Regulatory factors can reduce the benefits of titles. The planning
process and regulations that define what can be built, where, and
to what standard mitigate property rights even in the most market-
oriented housing systems. However, in developing countries where
land use and building regulations are frequently thwarted, even legally
acquired property might not qualify for title registration or credit.
Changes in regulatory measures defining minimum lot sizes may
informalize development of legally purchased property that does not
meet standards, as in Brazil, where the law specifying minimal plot
sizes prohibits the registration of property within non-conforming
subdivisions. Property rights are compromised as a result, because
title registration is the critical guarantee in most Latin American legal
systems (Biderman 2008).
    While titling is necessary for overall housing finance develop-
ment, there is little evidence that titling programs in informal areas
have substantially increased access to credit for their low-income
beneficiaries. Despite the implementation of a large titling program
in Peru, access to credit reportedly increased 9–10 percent for house-
holds with newly titled properties and tended to be limited to public
banks. This underscores that collateral security through titles is a
necessary but insufficient condition for accessing finance. Lower
income or informally employed borrowers must also demonstrate
repayment capacity. Moreover, newly titled properties might not
qualify for finance where plots are below formal minimum sizes or
where the construction does not comply with building standards.

The debate over tenure security and title
regularization programs
Tenure security has long been a central tenet of upgrading pro-
grams to protect slum dwellers from eviction and to encourage
342 Housing Matters


greater investment. It was emphasized as a means of dealing with the
non-income aspects of urban poverty and integrating informal settle-
ments by improving living and housing conditions, rather than as
an instrument for reducing poverty overall. The way to achieve such
security has, however, been a matter of fierce debate, even before
De Soto’s insistence on titles as the key instrument.
    Informality does not always signify insecurity. Nor does it prevent
property transactions and investment. De facto tenure security is
often sufficient to induce investment in housing improvements in
informal settlements. As Doebele (1978) remarked, “while tenure
is generally considered a legal category, it is, just as fundamentally,
a matter of the state of mind of the persons concerned” (Doebele
1978, 111). Housing investment and improvements are common in
consolidated settlements where the fear and practice of eviction are
low, where customary rights are well established and recognized, or
where services have been provided. In India, notified slums, which
are slated for regularization and services, tend to have a lower pro-
portion of poor-quality housing than non-notified slums. At times,
even promises of non-eviction for a sufficiently long period provide
enough incentive. Where there are strong traditions of customary
rights, some governments have shown flexibility by recognizing these
rights and transactions. At the same time, customary practices tend
to evolve in an urban setting and mimic some of the processes in the
formal system (Razzaz 1992).
    Clearly, in many instances informally acquired rights benefit indi-
vidual households, allowing them to build and sell fairly easily. There
is, however, some evidence that titled households are more likely to
invest than non-titled households and that titled property commands
a premium (Lanjouw and Levy 2004; Payne et al. 2008). Moreover,
as Bertaud (1989) suggests in his study of Indonesia, informal rights
generally prevent small-scale developers from acquiring and develop-
ing land, thus slowing the process of secondary and tertiary infra-
structure provision and the activities of small-scale developers in the
housing market.
    On an operational level, Gulyani and Bassett (2007) suggest
that what matters for tenure security is providing services, as
formalization can unnecessarily delay investment. They find that
“simplified” processes for providing intermediate rights tend to be as
                                                   Sonia Hammam     343


time-consuming and difficult as titling. In a later review of informal
settlements in Kenya, Gulyani and Talukdar (2008) are less categorical
about infrastructure as the key to tenure security. They take note of
slums’ heterogeneity and suggest that the choice of interventions,
such as titling and infrastructure, depends on the living conditions
in slums. In practice, tenure regularization and upgrading programs
have often provided less than full title. These varied intermediate
tenure systems provide some of the rights embodied in titles in a
permanent or time-bound manner but are usually not accepted
as collateral by private financial institutions. The effectiveness and
impact of intermediate tenure systems on land markets have not been
evaluated, and the assumption is that such measures would or could
eventually lead to more formal legalized tenure.2
    Critics of formalization programs point to their potential for dis-
placing low-income groups as a result of the higher values associated
with titled property (Payne et al. 2008). There has, however, been
little empirical analysis of the distributional impacts of formalization
programs. It is unclear how prevalent such displacement is or whether
it is an outcome of titling or the accompanying provision of services,
which also increases property values and is more likely to encourage
landlords to raise rents. Razzaz and Galal (2001) suggest that the
level of displacement as a result of titling may be more significant in
local formalization programs. When programs are carried out on a
broader scale, there is a greater incentive for landlords to consolidate
and expand, ensuring a more elastic supply of rental housing.
    An additional concern is titling’s potential to displace poor
households in high-value locations, leading some to suggest that
such areas should not be formalized (Payne et al. 2008). Legalization
of tenure, when limited to a few informal areas in cities where the
overall quantity of titled land is at a premium, would certainly
encourage raiding, indicating a need for much broader city-wide
efforts. However, poor households in high-value locations are not less
vulnerable to displacement by government or market raiding based
on their informal tenure. The issue in these instances is not so much
titling as it is the accompanying legal processes for the protection
of rights and the provision of adequate compensation. To prevent
displacement, some countries have enacted prohibitions on sales in
newly formalized areas. However, this has just led to new forms of
344 Housing Matters


informal transactions and distortions. Brazil, on the other hand, has
used such planning tools as Zones of Special Social Interest, which
provide for reduced zoning standards and property rights. To ensure
that the benefits of formalization remain available to lower income
households, sale of property within these zones requires municipal
approval. The effectiveness, feasibility, and impacts of such measures
have not been evaluated and are worth reviewing.
    A very different set of criticisms of formalization programs ques-
tions their effectiveness in addressing informality. Biderman and
Smolka (2011) draw attention to the fact that tenure formalization
and upgrading programs can increase informal settlements in Latin
America—or at least not reduce them. They argue that formaliza-
tion can encourage further informal development, in anticipation of
future regularization of tenure and service provision. The programs
mitigate some of the difficulties confronted by existing residents of
informal settlements but are largely an ineffective cure for the dual
land and housing development process. This can be seen in the lack
of progress in tenure security despite long-standing formalization
programs in many Latin American countries. Regional data indicate
that the overall level of tenure informality affected 10 percent of
households in 1995 and had not declined a decade later. Even Peru,
which embarked on a large titling program that provided 1.5 million
titles, experienced an increase in tenure informality, from 18 percent
of households in 1995 to 21 percent in 2006 (Rojas and Medellin
2011).
    To sum up, the concerns expressed by critics of tenure formaliza-
tion programs point to the limitations of fragmented interventions
in integrating informal areas—and to their potential for introducing
further distortions. Durand-Lasserve and Selod’s (2007) review of
formalization programs provides some insight into the critical fac-
tors that determine their effectiveness. They suggest that in successful
interventions, tenure is not limited to its legal aspect; it is linked
with reforms in land administration, allocation of rights, and conflict
resolution. These institutional aspects take time to develop but are
often overlooked in titling programs.
    While many of De Soto’s claims about titling’s potential for
reducing poverty appear exaggerated, critics’ claims of the potentially
harmful social effects of formalization programs raise important
                                                   Sonia Hammam     345


concerns that need to be better understood and empirically verified.
Formalization is clearly not sufficient on its own, and it needs to
be undertaken on a less fragmented basis within a broader context
of reform of the regulatory environment for land and services.
Ultimately, its success depends not on the number of titles issued
but on strengthened institutions and systems for defining, enforcing,
and adjudicating property rights (registry, contract enforcement,
protection of rights, conflict resolution, and compensation policies).

The rental market

The rental market is suited to meeting housing demand particularly
in rapidly growing cities and in countries undergoing substantial
changes in employment structure and location. Development of the
rental sector provides the following advantages:

• Enhancement of labor mobility, because tenants have less transac-
  tion and fixed costs in moving.
• An option for households that do not have the means to buy a
  home or do not wish to, such as young families, young adults,
  recent migrants, and lower income households.
• A choice for asset investment and a source of complementary
  income.

Despite the rental sector’s importance, it has received little policy
attention. Instead, many countries have focused on homeownership,
partly in the belief that this form of tenure is socially and politi-
cally more desirable. Government policy has, therefore, often favored
homeownership over rental through the tax system, access to credit,
and subsidies. Most low-income programs, such as upgrading, sites
and services, public housing, and subsidies, have also emphasized
homeownership in developing countries.
   Private rental markets provide the bulk of rental housing in
most developing countries. But little is known about the operations
and size of this market. Part of the problem is that rental is largely
informal in developing countries, without contracts in the formal or
informal housing stock. While it is difficult to generalize about tenure
patterns, rental housing dominates in African cities in both formal
346 Housing Matters


and informal sectors. By contrast, it represents barely one-fifth the
urban housing overall in Latin America. At the same time, contrary
to conventional wisdom, most of Latin America’s poor people are not
tenants, perhaps because informal housing “ownership” is so preva-
lent. Rental is not the dominant form of tenure for lower income
groups. Even in Colombia, which has a fairly large rental sector, less
than half the lowest income groups are tenants (Figure 13.1).
    Rental housing has been neglected not only in policy discus-
sion but also in recent analytical work on housing in developing
countries, beyond reviews of rent-control regimes. An important
exception is Gulyani and Talukdar’s (2008) study of Nairobi’s slum
rental sector, which makes up 30 percent of the city’s housing. The
study describes the sector as “a low quality–high price trap” for ten-
ants, with absentee landlords, poor services and housing quality,
little tenure security, and few incentives for either consolidation or




Figure 13.1 Incidence of renters by income quintile in selected Latin American
countries, 2006
Source: Rojas and Medellin 2011.
                                                  Sonia Hammam    347


improvement. This may not be the norm for rental housing in infor-
mal areas, but it is not unique to Nairobi.3 The results, nonetheless,
highlight the importance of understanding the dynamics of this
market, which challenges not only the conventional wisdom about
informal housing and its inevitable progressive improvement but also
the presumed distributional effects of traditional remedies, such as
upgrading and tenure security. Fay’s (2004) study of urban poverty
in Latin America, on the other hand, reports that absentee slumlords
are no longer the norm in informal settlements. Owners tend to be
individuals living in the same informal areas as their tenants, have
similar or slightly higher socioeconomic status, and own few rental
properties.
   Rental housing in 19th- and early-20th-century European, U.S.,
and many colonial cities was built by investors for the middle and
upper classes. With the expansion of alternative investment oppor-
tunities, the increased access to finance for homeownership, and the
enactment of rent controls in many countries, the role of investors
has declined substantially. Today, small-scale individual landlords
are the main suppliers of private rental housing, even in developed
countries where institutional and corporate investors are more active.
They account for about two-thirds of the rental supply in the United
Kingdom and more than three-quarters in France (Oxley et al.
2010). Small-scale individual landlords also appear to provide much
of the formal and informal rental housing in developing countries
and deserve policy attention in any effort to expand this market.
   Rental sector reform tends to focus on direct public interventions,
such as rent and eviction controls. As important as these may be, they
are not always the only binding constraints. In the United States,
for example, studies have shown that restrictive zoning regulations
favoring single-family housing have had a greater influence on the
supply of low- and middle-income rental housing than have rent
controls (Schuetz 2007). Among other factors that influence the
supply of rental housing are differential tax and subsidy policies. In
Morocco, for example, removal of rent control is unlikely to lead to
a large expansion of the rental stock given prevailing fiscal policies
and incentives. Not only are there tax exemptions on mortgage inter-
est, but owner-occupied units benefit from preferential treatment on
capital gains and property taxes. The fiscal exemptions afforded to
348 Housing Matters


homeowners represent the largest subsidies in the housing sector and
discourage investment in rental housing, which is essentially taxed at
a rate four times that of owner-occupied housing.

Rent control

Rent control has been widely practiced in both developed and devel-
oping countries. It has also been widely decried for the distortions it
introduces in the overall housing market and for its inefficiency as
a redistributive mechanism. In cities with rigid and extensive rent-
control regimes, residential mobility is constrained, a large propor-
tion of the stock is essentially frozen out of the market, and the
quality of the stock is reduced through lack of maintenance.
    The benefits of rent control accrue to sitting tenants when con-
trols are introduced and tend to be regressive. In the Arab Republic
of Egypt, for example, a recent survey suggests that upper income
groups tend to benefit disproportionately (Technical Assistance for
Policy Reform II) (USAID 2008). However, even tenants of rent-
controlled units generally experience a reduction in benefits through
greater responsibility for various side payments and key money. A
study by Mayo et al. (1995) found that key money in Cairo was
roughly equivalent to the net present value of the difference between
market rent and the frozen rent level over the duration of a long-term
tenancy contract. Once additional payments were factored in, total
housing costs for tenants were about twice the nominal controlled
rents, though still below market rates. Benefits are also reduced by
the decline in the quality of rent-controlled units. A striking example
is the rent-controlled stock in Mumbai, which has yielded very low
rents for such a long time that almost half the units are either con-
demned or beyond repair due to lack of maintenance.
    Rent control can shift supply to the owner-occupied sector. The
shift is often also from the formal into the informal rental sector in
the form of a secondary market in controlled units, which can be
found in cities from New York to Cairo. In Cairo, successive restric-
tive regulations contributed to the development of an active second-
ary market and a parallel informal rental market. More important,
the combination of low rents and strong eviction controls, which
give tenants quasi-ownership rights, have contributed to a high
                                                  Sonia Hammam     349


vacancy rate. Reforms introduced in 1996 decontrolled vacant and
newly constructed units and increased the availability of rental units.
However, almost 40 percent of the housing stock in Greater Cairo is
estimated to still be subject to controls.
    Rent-control regimes vary in whether they set rent levels, rent
increases, or both; allow rents to be freely negotiated for new ten-
ants; and permit changes to reflect costs or adjust for inflation.
They also vary in breadth of coverage, strength of tenants’ rights,
and effectiveness of enforcement. Their impacts, therefore, vary by
these features and market conditions. In recognition of the evolu-
tion and differences in rent-control regimes, Richard Arnott has put
forward a more nuanced view on their effects, though it is hardly
a consensus. Arnott (1995) distinguishes controls that freeze rents
and provide strong tenant security from those that simply regulate
increases in rent levels and contract terms while not controlling rents
between tenancies. Some form of the second type of tenancy controls
is common in Western Europe. While the first-generation restrictive
controls are roundly criticized, Arnott suggests that the impacts of
the second generation controls need to be empirically verified and
evaluated case by case, given the variations in rent-control regimes.
In a later paper on the Swedish rental market, Arnott (2003) suggests
that the newer types of controls provide a basic level of tenure secu-
rity and do not necessarily restrict supply. Malpezzi and Ball’s (1991)
review of rent control in developing countries also recognizes the
variations in rent-control regimes and their impacts. The authors also
emphasize the need for policy makers to carefully study the nature of
rent-control regimes and evaluate their impacts before undertaking
reforms.
    The relationship between rental regimes and market size is not
always straightforward. Analysis of rental markets by Oxley et al.
(2010) indicates that a range of contrasting regulatory environ-
ments can be compatible with a large private rental sector. Germany
and Switzerland have some controls on rental increases and strong
tenure security for their tenants, but they have large private rental
sectors, which account for 45 percent (Germany) and 67 percent
(Switzerland) of the stock. Conversely, the United Kingdom and
Spain, after decades of stringent controls that discouraged investment,
have liberalized their rental regimes, but they now have fairly small
350 Housing Matters


private rental sectors, representing 13 percent (the United Kingdom)
and 15 percent (Spain) of housing.
   Discrepancies between rental regimes and rental rates also exist in
developing countries, indicating that rent control is not the only vari-
able in determining rental housing supply. Morocco, which has only
recently introduced reforms to its rent control laws, has a rental rate
of 28 percent, compared with 16 percent in Tunisia, which removed
controls in the 1970s. The lower rate in Tunisia could reflect the easier
access to land and finance for homeownership and the persistence of
strong tenancy rights, which make eviction difficult and lengthy even
in cases of non-payment. Similarly, Colombia has maintained the
highest rental rates in Latin America, at 32 percent, comparable to
the United States. Gilbert (2003) attributes Colombia’s high rental
rates to more stringent land controls that limited opportunities for
invasion.

The decontrol process

Reform of housing systems affected by rent control requires analyz-
ing its impacts and the underlying market distortions from taxes,
subsidies, and regulatory policies. The positive influence of decontrol
in stimulating rental markets is not always immediate or inevitable.
Decontrol in a supply-constrained market (as a result of other distor-
tions) is likely to raise rents without a significant increase in rental
supply. Where the process involves protracted revisions and changes,
the uncertainty about the permanence and nature of changes dis-
courages investment. Successive decontrol measures in Spain and
some Canadian provinces failed to significantly increase the rental
stock. In the United Kingdom, the initial decontrol measures in the
1960s led to a surge in the ownership market, as landlords preferred
to sell their units rather than continue to rent them. Similarly, despite
the subsequent full liberalization of rental housing, the reduction in
social housing production, and the privatization of a large portion
of public housing, the United Kingdom private rental market has
seen some increase but has become a marginal niche market with
short-term leases.
   Decontrol measures provide a number of benefits by removing
distortions and inequities in housing markets. They offer opportunities
                                                    Sonia Hammam     351


to better maintain, use, and redevelop the existing private rental
stock, which is often on valuable, centrally located land. As complex
as the effects of rent control are, the decontrol of rental markets is a
challenging undertaking. Decontrol raises strong political economy
concerns and is administratively complex. It involves striking a
balance between landlord and tenant interests in lease termination
and rent-setting rules and defining minimum default contract terms.
Just as important, decontrol requires adjustments in tenants’ rights,
with clear rules for contract termination and remedies for contract
violation. Adjustments need to be introduced gradually to ultimately
converge toward market rents. While the gradual adjustments
imply an often lengthy process, a blanket decontrol of rents is
often both politically difficult and too much of a financial hardship
for the lowest income groups, resulting in pressures to reverse the
process.
   Decontrol is often followed by an overshooting of rent levels,
which should eventually stabilize provided more units come on the
market. Providing allowances to ease the rental burden on the poor
is often necessary, but it might not be fiscally feasible in countries
with large controlled sectors where rents have fallen far below market
levels. In Spain, for example, administrative delays in designing
allowances led to the maintenance of control for low-income tenants,
with tax support to compensate landlords.
   Finally, decontrol is unlikely to influence rental in informal settle-
ments, where most low-income rental occurs. Upgrading services
and tenure security for the subsistence landlord will more effectively
encourage a greater supply of rental housing in this sector. But decon-
trol, along with appropriate tenure-neutral regulation and taxation,
is needed to stimulate supply in the formal private rental sector,
especially by small-scale individual investors. The extent to which
more organized formal investors might enter this sector depends on
a number of factors, including tax policies and the availability of
financing.

Subsidies

The chief rationales for government intervention through subsidies
include negative externalities affecting public safety and social
352 Housing Matters


stability; equity concerns, whereby low-income groups are deemed
to need housing assistance; and market failures. In practice, the three
rationales are not always mutually exclusive or explicitly stated. In
fact, Hong Kong SAR, China’s, massive public housing programs
grew initially out of concerns for public safety and the needs of low-
income groups after a disastrous fire in a large squatter settlement. The
initial programs aimed to resettle slum dwellers, but out of a desire to
maintain social stability by improving housing conditions, they grew
to cover a much broader segment of the population (Renaud 2004).
Similarly, Chile’s housing reforms and policies intended to correct
perceived market failures were also motivated by a desire to improve
social stability. However, rather than rely on public production,
Chile chose to address both these concerns through a combination
of regulatory reform and demand-side subsidies to stimulate private
sector production and finance.
    Subsidies, regulations, and taxation are among the most impor-
tant interventions by which governments influence housing market
outcomes. In principle, the three forms of intervention can be seen
as substitutes, but the relative efficacy of the measures depends on
their interactions with one another and on specific market condi-
tions. Of the three forms of intervention, subsidies have caused the
most intense debate and controversy, reflecting the difficulties and
inefficiencies in their design and implementation. The early housing
literature on developing countries generally critiqued existing sub-
sidy programs, emphasizing the need to reduce most of them. With
growing interest in affordability and social housing policy in middle-
income countries, there has been a broader discussion of subsidies’
role in housing policy in developing countries and a greater focus
on policies to improve their efficiency, transparency, and targeting
(Buckley and Mathema 2007).

The case for demand-side subsidies

Most of the economic literature on housing subsidies favors
market-friendly, demand-side subsidies. These are considered more
cost-effective and equitable than project-based, supply-side subsidies.
They enable low-income beneficiaries to rely on competitive markets
to access a range of affordable choices. Unlike public housing
                                                   Sonia Hammam     353


programs, they generate fewer distortions and are simpler to phase out
when beneficiary incomes rise. The empirical case for the superiority
of demand-side subsidies in cost-effectiveness and equity has relied
primarily on extensive studies comparing public housing production
programs with rental allowance programs in the United States. These
studies found substantial differences between the costs of public
housing rental programs and direct subsidies to households through
rental allowances. They also indicated that the direct subsidies were
better at targeting low-income households.
    The shift to demand-side subsidies has usually occurred in coun-
tries well into or past their urban transition, where the housing
problem concerns affordability rather than overall supply shortages
due to market or regulatory constraints. Therefore, it is not surpris-
ing to find an increased use of demand-side subsidies through rental
allowances in the United States and many European countries. In
the United Kingdom, for example, more than 80 percent of housing
subsidies in 1975 supported the direct production of social rental
housing. By 2004, 67 percent of subsidies were on the demand side,
with housing allowances as the main subsidy instrument (Whitehead
et  al. 2005). Supply-side subsidies have been reduced but not
eliminated as a means of supporting affordable housing in developed
countries—even in the United States, where the Low-Income Housing
Tax Credit supports developers producing low-income housing. The
debate on whether supply- or demand-side housing subsidy programs
represent better policy is not fully settled in Europe, despite a marked
shift away from public production. Public assistance depends increas-
ingly on a combination of rental allowances to households and direct
fiscal and financial support to the municipal or non-profit sector to
provide, manage, and maintain the stock of social housing.
    In principle, demand-side subsidies through allowances or upfront
capital grants allow greater consumer choice at the lowest cost to
government. But in practice, they perform best in markets where
they can trigger a supply response. If markets are tight, as they often
are in developing countries, demand-side subsidies might, in fact,
exacerbate the affordability problem for non-subsidized low-income
households as rents or prices increase. Their benefits will then accrue
to landlords or developers, with little impact on the overall housing
supply.
354 Housing Matters


    Demand-side subsidies through capital grants have been intro-
duced in a number of Latin American countries and in South
Africa, based on a model pioneered in Chile. The Chilean experience
illustrates the challenges of shifting to a market-friendly housing
assistance system. The transition was not a simple textbook process
of relaxing supply and demand constraints. Starting in 1977, Chile
undertook a comprehensive reform of the sector to promote private
sector production and financing of housing—with the government
as enabler. The market’s failure to serve the needs of lower income
groups was attributed to weak demand. To address this constraint,
the government provided demand-side subsidies through vouchers
to enhance access to private bank financing. In addition, traditional
supply constraints were reduced through changes in the regulatory
framework governing urban land use and conversion.
    These broad, sweeping reforms did not elicit the anticipated
response from either private developers or banks. Both failed to show
any interest in moving down-market, confining their activities to
the middle-income beneficiaries of the capital grants and mortgage
programs. As a result, the government had to become more active in
contracting with private developers for building low-income housing
and allocating units to beneficiaries, effectively adopting a supply-
driven approach in the programs targeted to the lowest income
households. Moreover, the government had to assume the role of
lender, incurring large arrears in the process.
    The overall program stimulated both private supply and financ-
ing for middle-income beneficiaries. However, it failed to do so for
beneficiaries in the bottom two income quintiles. Chile continued
to refine the programs over several decades, expanding their size
and purpose to include the purchase or renovation of existing units.
It wound down the supply-driven program for the lowest income
groups in 2002, replacing it with a program that eliminated the loan
component and instead provided a capital grant for the purchase of
new or existing units, to which beneficiaries were required to con-
tribute a small amount of savings. It also substantially reduced public
loans and assistance to middle-income groups.
    While the Chilean model is often considered a successful market-
based model, it has been marked by heavy public sector interven-
tion. The mix of programs resulted in a massive surge in housing
                                                      Sonia Hammam      355


production, significantly reducing housing shortages. While certain
aspects of the Chilean program are debatable, its main lessons are that
one size does not fit all and that there are no quick fixes. The program
owes its success to its flexibility, offering a range of options for various
segments of the population rather than focusing exclusively on the
lowest income groups. The deeply subsidized programs were accom-
panied by a host of regulatory land-use reforms to ensure a more
flexible market response and to reduce and improve the targeting of
subsidies over time. Instead of being a one-off approach, the program
was allowed to evolve and adjust. It benefited from this continual
process of review and adjustments over several decades, phasing in
different approaches, such as coverage of existing units, and phasing
out programs that did not work or were no longer needed.

Targeting efficiency of demand-side subsidies

The rationale for demand-side subsidies is based partially on the
idea that they are easier to target to the poor and are therefore more
equitable. The evidence from programs modeled after the Chilean
system is, however, not compelling on that score. The results of a
comprehensive evaluation by the Inter-American Development Bank
of nine Latin American programs that provide upfront capital grants
linked to mortgages indicate that they violate both horizontal and
vertical equity. The evaluation found both high leakage and low
coverage rates of the target populations (both poor and non-poor)
(Ruprah 2010).
    On average, only 2 percent of eligible households actually ben-
efited from these programs, partly because the target groups covered
a broad segment of the population. In Chile, for example, the target
group extended to households in the 60th percentile of the income
distribution, so it is not surprising that coverage was limited. The
lowest quintile initially received about 25 percent of the subsidies;
however, with the program’s recent evolution, there was a shift to
substantially increase their share of resources and improve their hous-
ing conditions. The high rate of leakage, averaging about 44 percent
for all nine programs, highlights the challenges of enforcing strict
eligibility criteria, even in countries with fairly sophisticated means
of testing for income.
356 Housing Matters


   The targeting challenge in these programs lies in balancing cover-
age of the poor through subsidies with the risk of default on the
complementary mortgage loans. Full coverage of the poor would
require generous capital grants to mitigate the risks of mortgage
delinquency. The evaluation estimates that the programs would have
had to triple in size to fully cover the poor.4

Supply-side subsidies

The choice of subsidy instrument depends largely on the perception
of the housing problem, the policy goals, and the market and institu-
tional context. Apgar (1990) cautioned against the consensus among
housing economists on the superiority of demand-side subsidies and
argued for flexibility in the choice of instruments, taking into account
specific market conditions and the potential adverse effects of subsidy
choices on non-subsidized low-income households. He suggested
that in markets where supply is inelastic, demand-side subsidies are
likely to increase rents for non-recipient low-income households. In
these markets, supply-side programs are more likely to result in a net
addition to the stock and a price decrease in response to demand.
Apgar’s views underscore that there is no best policy in what are often
second-best situations.
   Glaeser and Gyourko (2008) refine Apgar’s conclusions about the
appropriate use of supply-side subsidies in their discussion of federal
housing policy reform in the United States. They criticize such sup-
ply programs as the Low-Income Housing Tax Credit, noting that
a large part of the benefits is absorbed by developers. For Glaeser
and Gyourko, demand-side subsidies have performed better, but
they take into account concerns about the impact on non-subsidized
households in supply-restricted markets. In this context, they sug-
gest that “the best case for subsidizing new construction occurs in
constrained markets where demand is high and local economies
are strong” (Glaeser and Gyourko 2008, 126). This may describe
the situation in many developing country cities experiencing rapid
growth; however, the scale of housing requirements for low-income
groups and the scarcity of resources have usually resulted in limited,
costly, poorly targeted programs operating on a national scale across
different market conditions. Even where supply-side subsidies for
                                                  Sonia Hammam     357


new construction may be justified, improvements in housing sector
performance still require the more difficult task of addressing supply
constraints.
   Public construction of rental housing in developing countries
has not been extensive, with a few notable exceptions (for example,
China, Singapore, and Hong Kong SAR, China). Even less com-
mon is the provision of rental allowances, which are administratively
more complex and require a supply-responsive private rental system.5
Instead, assistance has tended to be supply-driven, with a focus on
new construction and financing of units for sale at discounted prices
and with subsidized financing. Public housing models have generally
been limited in scale in most countries due to resource constraints.
While smaller in scale, they have generally suffered from being costly,
inappropriately located, and poorly targeted.
   Singapore’s and Hong Kong SAR, China’s, experiences eliminat-
ing slums through massive public housing interventions are not easy
to replicate in developing countries. These programs benefited from
a robust financing system, total control of land supply, and healthy
growth of their economies and incomes. However, no country has
resolved the slum issue without some form of public intervention on
the supply side. While upgrading is generally accepted as an appro-
priate and less costly supply-side intervention than direct provision
of housing, it remains a largely remedial solution to the immediate
problems confronting informal development. For this reason, policy
makers often see upgrading as an endless process of catching up
with informal housing development. It is more costly than servicing
land prior to development and an insufficient response on its own.
Interventions need to be upgraded within the context of an overall
effort to address property rights, land regulation, and infrastructure
deficiencies.
   With growing emphasis on privatization and deregulation, there
has been a general reduction in the scope and funding of public hous-
ing programs. At the same time, fiscal constraints have encouraged
both developed and developing countries to use the planning process
to require that private developers incorporate affordable housing
under certain conditions. In Europe, these requirements are justified
as a means of recapturing the increment in land value created by the
planning approval process. The programs are often complemented by
358 Housing Matters


a number of incentives, such as density bonuses and faster approval
processes, or they can allow buyouts in cash or in kind to be used for
low-income housing. Variants of such programs include “inclusion-
ary zoning” in the United States, Section 106 housing in the United
Kingdom, and the imposition of quotas for low-income housing
in privately developed sites in China and India. The programs are
attractive to policy makers as a means of providing housing with
minimal public investment. An additional advantage is that, unlike
traditional public housing programs, they allow a greater mix of
incomes in different neighborhoods. They are seen as an alternative
model to traditional public housing, which generally traps the poor
in their own neighborhoods.
   Evidence of the success of these programs in meeting afford-
able housing demand is limited. Even though inclusionary zoning
programs have operated in the United States since the 1970s, their
performance is difficult to evaluate given their variability across juris-
dictions. A study by Schuetz et al. (2007) indicates that affordable
housing through inclusionary zoning accounted for about 2.3 per-
cent of total production in the San Francisco Bay Area over a 28-year
period. It represented a small fraction of total housing produced by
other supply-driven programs, such as the Low-Income Housing Tax
Credit. In short, it is not, nor does it intend to be, a substitute for
other public subsidies to achieve affordable housing objectives.
   In the United Kingdom, Section 106 of the Town and Planning
Act of 1990 allows localities to negotiate the incorporation of afford-
able housing as a condition of the planning approval process. These
are site-by-site agreements based on general guidelines, not blanket
requirements across all private residential development projects. The
planning obligations under Section 106 have produced less than
half of annual affordable housing requirements (Whitehead 2011).
However, a government report indicates that the vast majority of
Section 106 housing entails additional subsidies and has not resolved
the shortfall in public resources (Whitehead et al. 2005). Moreover,
some analysts have suggested that the protracted negotiations and
requirements of planning obligations might have contributed to the
slowdown in overall housing supply (ODPM 2005).
   In India, mandatory requirements to set aside 25 percent of all
new development projects for affordable housing production are
                                                  Sonia Hammam     359


considered not only a less costly alternative to direct public provi-
sion but also a means of accommodating existing slum dwellers and
stemming the flow of informal housing. The incentives to developers
include access to land and greater density allowances. However, their
potential to alleviate or prevent slum conditions is hampered by lim-
ited formal production and the inherent weaknesses of mandatory
cross-subsidy schemes that tax higher income housing or landowners
in already restricted markets.
   These public-private arrangements are not a panacea and are less
effective when market conditions are poor. They present oppor-
tunities to capture surpluses that arise from government action in
planning for the benefit of the community, but their potential for
delivering affordable housing should not be overstated.

Housing finance

With financial liberalization, the availability of mortgage finance
has grown in developing countries. China and India have seen their
housing finance systems expand at impressive rates, starting from a
low base. A few middle-income countries have seen mortgage debt
rise to 20–35 percent of gross domestic product (GDP). As notable
as the growth has been in a few countries, housing finance is still
limited in size and reach, accounting for barely 10 percent of GDP
on average. In most developing countries, a significant majority of
households still do not qualify for market rate mortgages to purchase
formal sector housing.
   Expansion of finance has improved housing affordability in a num-
ber of countries, particularly for middle-income groups. The Chilean
case and similar programs in Costa Rica highlight the importance of
finance in stimulating private housing supply for middle- and lower
middle-income groups. Bertaud (2010) credits Thailand’s housing
finance system with facilitating a rapid increase in affordable housing
production by the private sector in the 1980s. He emphasizes that
Bangkok’s more flexible land and housing development standards
would not have been sufficient to increase the supply of affordable
housing without the availability of finance through the National
Housing Bank.
360 Housing Matters


   Governments have attempted to make housing loans more
affordable through a variety of on- and off-budget instruments,
such as subsidized loans; lump-sum grants to buy down the inter-
est rate or toward down payments on the price of the house; and
preferential tax treatment for mortgages.6 Governments also tend
to focus their support to mortgage lending for new housing, ignor-
ing the existing stock, which normally accounts for the majority of
transactions. Despite many of the government measures to expand
access to finance, the informality of housing and employment in
many developing countries necessarily limits the reach of mortgage
finance systems. Guarantee programs to encourage banks to lend to
low-income groups have been introduced in some countries and are
being considered in India. Morocco has established such a program,
FOGARIM, as part of its sector reform to encourage access to market
finance for lower income households, including beneficiaries of its
national slum-upgrading program. FOGARIM awarded guaran-
tees for 34,600 market rate mortgages over 2003–08. However, by
2010 participating banks began to reduce their lending as arrears
were mounting, reaching 27 percent in some of the country’s poorer
regions. While the arrears may be attributed to lax underwriting
practices, the significant 50 percent increase in the prices of eligible
units due to real sector constraints also contributed to the decline
in lending.
   While reforms to expand housing finance are critical as urbaniza-
tion progresses, they must be placed in the appropriate sequence and
housing market context. In the absence of measures to address the
real sector issues that shape the responsiveness of the housing sup-
ply system, the expansion of finance and subsidies may exacerbate
existing imbalances. As Buckley and Mathema note in their study
of Accra’s highly distorted housing market, “just improving access to
formal housing finance without making housing supply more elastic
will fuel further price increases in the already expensive and inelastic
housing market” (Buckley and Mathema 2007, ii). Moreover, reforms
to expand access are usually not sufficient for the mortgage market
to function at scale, simply because real sector supply-side con-
straints result in fewer eligible houses to finance. Thus, despite East
Asia’s more developed housing finance systems and favorable credit
conditions, the expansion of finance is constrained by land supply
                                                  Sonia Hammam     361


rigidities and urban development regulations, which cause housing
prices to rise faster than household incomes (Chiquier 2006).
   As mortgage finance systems in most developing countries still
fund a small share of overall housing transactions and have limited
coverage of middle-income groups, it is unrealistic and unwise to
expect them to begin lending on a broad scale to the lowest income
groups. The more critical priorities in this context are to address
the land and infrastructure issues that limit housing supply while
ensuring that private resources can be leveraged to expand access to
mortgage finance for middle-income groups.

Factors affecting supply

Ensuring adequate supply is the main housing challenge in devel-
oping countries undergoing rapid urbanization. At the same time,
most distortions in the housing systems of developing countries are
found on the supply side. Even where there are few market distor-
tions, housing supply is not like the production of cars or washing
machines. At a minimum, it requires a longer lead time and tends
to respond more slowly to increased demand in the short term. It
also depends on the availability of serviced land, which in itself is
not elastically supplied, and requires planning, organization, and
funding. Land market distortions, inappropriate standards, a lack of
infrastructure, and cumbersome and costly permitting processes can
further slow the availability of developable land and the pace of hous-
ing construction. Filtering the existing stock of units from higher
to lower income households is a long-term process that cannot be
counted on to provide an adequate supply during periods of high
demand and increased prices.7 At the same time, the filtering process
in the existing stock is often slowed by such regulations as rent and
eviction control, which limit the mobility of households.
   Many countries have focused their support for improving housing
affordability through demand-side policy interventions in the form
of improvements in property rights, direct subsidies, tax exemptions,
and support to increase housing finance affordability. There has been
less emphasis on supply-side processes to encourage a more flex-
ible response that adjusts to changing economic demands in cities.
Interestingly, the UK Treasury commissioned a study to explore the
362 Housing Matters


causes of sluggish housing supply, which had fallen below the rate
of new household formation in the 1990s. The report identified the
need for better informed and more flexible land-use planning and
regulations to ensure a more responsive supply system. It also high-
lighted how the lack or inadequacy of infrastructure was preventing
or delaying construction even in the country’s most affluent regions,
adding to the affordability and supply problem (Barker 2004). While
the context and policy environment are different, the supply con-
straints are very similar to those faced by rapidly growing cities in
developing countries.

The supply of serviced developable land

The shortage of serviced developable land is perhaps the most impor-
tant obstacle to increased formal housing supply. The limited supply
of serviced land tends to drive up urban land prices and encour-
age developers to serve the high-end market, where profits can be
maximized. At the same time, remedial action to deliver services to
informally built-up areas is estimated to be three to seven times more
costly than providing infrastructure for new development, drain-
ing public resources that could otherwise be spent more efficiently
on increasing the overall supply of services (Biderman and Smolka
2011).
   Many cities, when confronted with the costs or pressures of
additional development, have imposed restrictions. Faced with
inadequate infrastructure, Indian cities have maintained uniformly
low floor-area ratios (FARs) to limit building heights in central
locations—rather than increase investment in services—and to
mobilize resources either through property taxes or impact fees to
pay for them. Bertaud and Brueckner’s (2003) study of the impact
of uniform FARs in central Bangalore indicates that the city is about
32 square kilometers larger in area because of the FAR restriction, an
amount equal to 17 percent of the built-up areas. So it is not clear
how much real savings in infrastructure investment this policy has
achieved. As they emphasize, “in major Indian cities like Mumbai,
Delhi, or Bangalore, consuming more land to save on infrastructure
investment is a bad bargain” (Bertaud and Brueckner 2003, 3).
                                                  Sonia Hammam     363


   Infrastructure shortcomings translate into higher rates of infor-
mal housing in developing countries. Few cities take on the task of
preparing for growth by securing public rights of way and making
the necessary infrastructure investments. This can be seen not only
in the rapidly growing cities of Africa and South Asia but also in
middle-income, highly urbanized countries with growing economies,
like Brazil, where housing production has continued to outpace the
infrastructure supply. Dowall (2006) suggests that Brazil’s infor-
mal housing (defined as housing lacking in infrastructure) can be
expected to rise from 23 percent in 2000 to 35 percent by 2030, if
infrastructure and housing production trends continue.
   International experience indicates that cities’ productivity and
livability is enhanced by infrastructure investments that can accom-
modate population growth. Bertaud’s (2010) review of Korean urban
development policy describes the massive government investment
in infrastructure and intervention in urban land development. The
initial objective was to ensure an adequate supply of serviced land
to support industrial productivity, not to deal with the shantytowns
that made up more than a third of Seoul’s housing stock in the
1960s. Korea’s interventions to provide high-quality servicing of large
quantities of land early in its urban transition allowed it to rapidly
absorb a large influx of households with increasingly better living
conditions.
   In their study of Indian housing markets, Annez et al. (2010)
point to the experiences of Bangkok, Seoul, and Hong Kong SAR,
China, noting that they significantly improved housing conditions
and reduced the percentage of slum households by focusing on devel-
oping infrastructure to increase effective land supply and allow more
intensive use of urban land. Tunisia is another interesting example
in this regard. Its national upgrading program has been justifiably
praised for its contribution to the dramatic decline in slum hous-
ing from 23 percent in 1975 to 2 percent in 1995. The program’s
success, however, would not have been possible without the simul-
taneous massive investment in water and sewer trunk infrastructure
by the national utilities. As a result, coverage of existing informal
settlements through upgrading was made possible, and additional
land was opened up for further development. This contrasts with
364 Housing Matters


the situation in most Indian cities, where the inadequacy of exist-
ing infrastructure systems limits reform of land-use regulations to
allow more appropriate and less costly development and reduces their
capacity to scale up service delivery in slum areas.
   Government intervention to increase the supply of serviced land
has varied, and there does not appear to be a single model for suc-
cess. Bertaud’s (2010) case studies of Asian cities provide examples
of contrasting strategies, none of which is perfect but all of which
contributed to ensuring an adequate supply of serviced land for hous-
ing development for a range of income groups. Korea exemplifies
strong state intervention, carrying out land readjustment schemes
that initially allowed it to service land on a self-financing basis
and that affected about 35 percent of the land in Seoul. Bangkok’s
more laissez-faire approach of extremely flexible development stan-
dards attracted private investment in affordable housing in centrally
located areas.
   Among the many reasons for the inadequacy of serviced land
supply are weak fiscal and financial performance, inappropriate regu-
latory norms, and poor planning practices that distort requirements
for the planning and provision of infrastructure. Compounding the
problem are the weak incentives and diffuse accountabilities for ser-
vice provision and financing across levels of government, land, and
infrastructure institutions. In many instances, city governments bear
the costs of development without the capacity to capture the benefits
or much authority to guide development or service provision. While
these constraints require longer term institutional changes, there
is a renewed interest in tapping various land-based instruments to
finance infrastructure.
   Infrastructure provision significantly influences land values,
indicating that cities could capitalize on the increased value through
effective property taxation, development impact charges, develop-
ment exactions, and other land-based instruments to finance service
delivery. If, in the past, responsibility for infrastructure provision
by developers was limited to on-site services, fiscal pressures have
encouraged cities in the United States and Europe to look for ways to
require developers to pay for all or part of the costs of infrastructure
for new development through impact fees. A number of countries
have successfully used variants of land-based financing instruments
                                                  Sonia Hammam     365


to expand service delivery: land readjustment in Korea, valorization
charges in Colombia, land leasing in Hong Kong SAR, China, and
tradable development rights in São Paulo. With the exception of
property taxes, these instruments do not provide a steady stream
of income, but they nonetheless have allowed many cities to fund
large investments in infrastructure in the absence of other sources
of finance.

Land and housing regulations

Regulations, in principle, deal with externalities and correct for
market failures. Henderson (2007) provides a useful description of
the types and purposes of regulations, which can be summarized
as follows:

• Land-use planning, which segments land uses to ensure that
  incompatible activities are kept separate.
• Density and open-space regulations, (including minimum lot
  size, set-back and frontage standards, height restrictions, and land
  set-aside standards), which deal with neighborhood crowding or
  congestion, ensure sufficient open space, and regulate how build-
  ings impede each other’s view and access to sunlight.
• Developer requirements to ensure adequate services so developers
  do not “free-ride” off public services, such as in strip development.
• Construction regulations to set minimum quality and safety stan-
  dards to help with asymmetric information problems.
• Environmental and health standards.

Given these broad objectives and powers of enforcement, government
interventions through the regulatory process exert a significant influ-
ence on housing costs and housing market performance. Regulations
tend to be easier to impose, without much attention paid to their
consequences, and difficult to reverse. In most developing countries,
these interventions are likely to have a greater impact on housing out-
comes for a significantly larger share of the population than is direct
public investment in housing or upgrading of slums. Also, almost
any system of land-use planning is likely to restrict supply and affect
low-income groups more than other segments of the population. By
366 Housing Matters


the same token, a totally unregulated system also disadvantages lower
income groups, as they have to compete for land in the same loca-
tions as more affluent groups. The issue in practice is not to do away
with regulation and planning, as unplanned development implies
large costs borne by both the city and its inhabitants. Instead, there is
a need to review the extent to which supply is restricted and whether
these restrictions cause significant price distortions or welfare effects.
   The overall net welfare effects of regulations can be either positive
or negative. Angel’s (2011) study of urban expansion emphasizes the
cost of minimal regulation and not planning for growth in develop-
ing country cities. He describes how Bangkok was once considered
a model of efficient land and housing markets, with its flexible and
minimal regulations that allowed the private sector to build afford-
able housing for a large segment of the low-income population. The
city’s failure to keep up with private building activity by ensuring
space for an adequate system of secondary roads and securing public
rights of way resulted in high welfare costs from severe congestion
and pollution.
   Most studies of regulations have focused on their negative impacts.
Cheshire and Sheppard’s (2002) study of the welfare impacts of plan-
ning regulations indicates that the supply restrictions imposed by both
the greenbelt boundary and the amount of land zoned for residential
development in Reading, UK, are equivalent to a 4 percent income
tax. While they do not argue for a removal of regulations, they suggest
that relaxing the restrictions, particularly pushing out the greenbelt
boundary, would have a positive welfare effect. Similarly, analysis by
Bertaud and Brueckner (2003) indicates that restrictions imposed
by a low uniform Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) in central
areas of Bangalore result in a welfare loss of 3–6 percent of income in
additional commuting costs from suburban areas. At the same time,
the draconian FAR limit the financial viability of redeveloping acces-
sible central city locations where older structures were built to much
higher FAR values. FAR limits, while not inherently problematic,
should fit the market context and the locations where they are applied
and serve as a guide rather than as a binding constraint. Moreover,
once values are set, they must be periodically reviewed and adjusted
to reflect changing demand in different locations, and infrastructure
adjustments can then be made accordingly.
                                                  Sonia Hammam     367


   Regulations can affect the pace and affordability of housing supply
through a variety of means. They can exclude low-income groups
if consumption standards (minimum lot sizes, height restrictions,
and so on) are set at levels significantly beyond what this population
can afford. Often not recognized in setting minimum standards at
such levels is that, in the absence of subsidies, low-income groups
will be forced to double up or find informal housing. At the same
time, restrictive standards that limit supply and increase prices drive
up the number and size of households requiring subsidies, which
makes it difficult for governments to develop sustainable or equitable
subsidy policies.
   Regulations also affect construction costs by creating lengthy
approval processes, driving formal developers to focus on the high-
end market, where profits are more certain, or to the informal sector,
where approvals and authorizations are ignored. The time required
to obtain permits and the associated uncertainty of the process
result in higher transaction costs and fewer transactions. Mayer and
Somerville’s (2000) study of U.S. regulations estimates that a met-
ropolitan area with a 4.5-month delay in approval and two different
types of growth-control restrictions would have about 45 percent
less construction than a metropolitan area with a 1.5-month delay
and no growth management policy. Similar studies on the impact of
approval delays have not been undertaken for developing countries,
but the average time for approval of construction permits, according
to Doing Business surveys, is about seven months, ranging from five
months in the Middle East and North Africa to eight months in
South Asia. These averages measure the time required to go through
the processes, so they probably understate the actual time it takes to
obtain approvals.

The impact of regulations on supply

The impact of regulatory standards on affordable housing supply
is a widely recognized, if rarely acted on, constraint in developing
countries. Analysis of housing programs in Malaysia in the 1990s
demonstrated that regulations discourage private developers from
serving the low-income market. Even where developers received sub-
stantial subsidies through low-cost land and reduced infrastructure
368 Housing Matters


standards, the subsidies were outweighed by the costs of subdivi-
sion regulations and pricing restrictions imposed by the program.
Under these circumstances, developers were willing to participate
in programs for low-income housing only in exchange for easing of
planning approvals on other sites (Hannah 1989). Yet, Bertaud and
Malpezzi’s (2001) analysis of site development standards (FAR and
percentage of developable land) in Malaysia suggests that if restric-
tions on construction and roads were eased to increase salable land
to 55 percent of the developable land, this would double develop-
ers’ profitability ratio and provide sufficient incentives to shift their
activities to the lower income market. Similar analysis of the impacts
of restrictive density standards in Brazil also indicates that relaxing
standards would reduce costs for informal land developers. However,
attracting these developers to the formal housing market in Brazilian
cities requires further reductions in titling and infrastructure devel-
opment costs.
    The impact of land-use regulations on housing supply and prices
in developed countries has been studied extensively in the economic
literature. Glaeser and Gyourko’s (2003) review of the relationship
between zoning regulations and housing supply in many U.S. cit-
ies suggests that heavily regulated cities have both lower levels of
construction and higher prices. Similarly, their study of New York
City attributes the high cost of housing to regulatory restrictions on
building heights, which resulted in lower construction levels. Glaeser
et al. (2005a) take the arguments on regulation further in their study
of housing and urban growth. They suggest that cities with restric-
tive regulatory regimes are less able to absorb demand arising from
increased productivity. In such cities, growing demand as a result of
productivity increases translates into higher prices and less output.
This implies that severe restrictions on housing production in cities
experiencing high demand may ultimately push growth out to other
areas, which may not be as productive.
    Although the literature may overstate the impacts of regulations on
prices in cities experiencing high demand, or productivity increases,
it nonetheless persuasively argues that restrictive regulations contrib-
ute to high housing prices and less supply. The main weakness is
that it does not identify the impact of specific regulations in specific
                                                    Sonia Hammam     369


contexts. Bertaud notes that “the problem is not so much whether
cities are overregulated or under-regulated but rather what the regu-
lated value of specific parameters is and how distorting these values
are in the economic context of a specific city” (Bertaud 2010, 45). The
differential impacts of restrictive uniform FAR regulations, for
example, are evident in studies of Mumbai and Chennai. In Mumbai,
FAR restrictions have contributed to very high real estate prices.
However, Dowall and Monkkonen’s (2007) analysis of Chennai’s
land markets indicates that despite having similar restrictions on
the books, construction and land prices reflect patterns found in less
regulated cities.

Regulations and informality

Studies on the impact of regulations on informality highlight the
dynamics between formal and informal sectors. The fact that the
informal sector largely ignores regulations does not mean that it is
not affected by them. To a large extent, it owes its creation to the
restrictions imposed but not universally enforced by the formal
sector. As Bertaud notes, “the boundary between the formal and
informal systems is set entirely by regulations and the level of transac-
tions costs required to pass from the informal to the formal system”
(Bertaud 2010, 45). The link between the two sectors argues against
designing policies and interventions that focus exclusively on the
informal sector.
   Several studies have been undertaken in Latin America analyzing
the relationship between regulations and the growth of the informal
sector. Most of the studies confirm the regulatory link between
formal and informal sectors described by Bertaud. The assumption is
that regulatory restrictions that limit formal supply result in higher
rates of informality. Rather than paying the higher price in the formal
sector, lower income groups resort to the informal sector where supply
is more elastic but where services and secure tenure might be lacking.
However, informality is not synonymous with poverty, particularly
in middle- and lower middle-income countries, where informally
developed settlements are often undertaken on the outskirts of cities
by private land and housing developers. While these settlements may
370 Housing Matters


be unauthorized and lacking in services, they differ from squatter
areas where land is illegally occupied.
   Goytia et al. (2010) analyze the impacts of regulation (using
different indexes for regulation) on the informality of tenure in
Argentina’s major cities. Their study analyzes ways that regulations
affect formal supply, but their most robust results are for regulations
that specify minimum consumption levels (that is, the amount of
housing that can be built and other quantitative regulations, such as
minimum lot sizes, building heights, and open-space requirements).
Not surprisingly, they find that the more regulated cities have higher
rates of informality. And more specifically, their analysis suggests that
cities that have incorporated land-use plans into their regulatory or
legal frameworks are more likely to have larger informal sectors. This
finding seems to argue against planning regulations in general, but
the authors suggest that it may simply reflect the effect of “minimum
consumption” standards, enforced through legally binding land-use
plans. The enforcement of these plans presumably results in higher
levels of informality for households that cannot afford to comply
with formal standards. The authors also find that long, expensive
approval processes reduce tenure formality, underscoring the need
for their simplification.
   Souza (2009) looks at regulation’s impact on prices in the formal
sector and the development of the informal sector in Curitiba. Her
study is one of the few that takes into account spatial factors in ana-
lyzing informal development. The results of her analysis suggest that
more restrictive land-use regulations, which increase formal housing
prices in one area, push households into the informal sector but in
more distant peripheral locations.
   Henderson (2007) takes a somewhat different view of regulatory
impacts. He argues that because direct regulations are largely ignored
by the informal sector, Brazilian cities attempted to control infor-
mality in the 1980s by denying services to informal settlements—a
practice not unique to Brazilian cities. The Brazilian law establish-
ing minimum plot sizes made it illegal for cities to provide services
to areas that did not comply with these requirements. His analysis
suggests that wealthier cities experiencing high migration rates had
a greater tendency to deny services in an effort to control migra-
tion and informal development. Interestingly, this analysis does not
                                                  Sonia Hammam     371


isolate the increase in informality from the larger context of urban
growth and the political economy of managing growth.

                                 ***
This chapter has examined the building blocks of housing systems
and the debates around these instruments. It has noted the efforts
to improve demand-side policies and the challenges on the supply
side, which have received less emphasis in practice. The search for
the right enabling policies, the correct sequencing and emphasis on a
universal set of dos and don’ts to enabling markets, overlooks the fact
that housing markets are fundamentally local. There is no one-size-
fits-all workable solution or set of optimal policy prescriptions and
interventions. Rather than models for how markets should perform,
cities need to better understand and monitor local market dynamics,
processes of supply and demand, the formal and informal markets,
and the stock and flow of housing if they are to formulate adequate
policies and design appropriate interventions.
    The recognition of the impacts of land regulations and policy on
housing supply is not new. However, the debate on how to move for-
ward has not advanced much in practical terms. In some cities, we are
a long way from understanding the impacts of different regulations
and the tradeoffs involved. Evidence that regulations tend to affect
the choices of the poor more adversely, or that they result in greater
informality, should not detract from their wider impacts on hous-
ing supply across broad segments of the market. In some ways, we
have come full circle to the early concerns of urban projects, which
focused on servicing land, planning processes to improve housing
affordability and supply, and revision (not removal) of land regula-
tions. These concerns were fragmented and limited to specific sites.
They tended to ignore city-level outcomes and policies. However,
they are now echoed more widely at the city level as issues deserving
greater policy attention and intervention to improve overall housing
and land market performance.
    Finally, there is a need to develop a much longer term and wider
perspective when assessing housing policies and interventions. There
has been a frequent tendency to write off different interventions
and expect high paybacks in a short period of time. Yet develop-
ing countries that have dealt with housing successfully have done
372 Housing Matters


so through a sustained commitment over a long time. Two vastly
different approaches in Chile and Singapore underscore the need
for a comprehensive framework focused on improving housing
affordability across a broad spectrum of the population. The Chilean
experience had a fairly lengthy process of public intervention, adjust-
ments, and revisions to achieve a policy aimed at ensuring better
housing outcomes for a large segment of the population. Similarly,
Singapore’s very different housing strategy, which relied on signifi-
cant public investment and control, also underwent adjustments and
revisions in programs and policy over many years.

Notes
 1. While the Republic of Korea viewed housing as a non-productive
    sector and did not intervene directly in building housing in the early
    period of urbanization in the 1960s, it intervened quite heavily in land
    development. In the late 1970s, it began to intervene in the housing
    sector and had one of the more regulated housing development and
    finance systems.
 2. Evidence from Brazil suggests that municipalities have a difficult
    time reconciling and keeping track of the multiple layers of rights
    through regularization programs and of historical systems of allocation,
    making for an opaque and even more cumbersome system of land
    administration.
 3. The authors suggest that such arrangements may also be common in
    South Asian cities. There is evidence that similar arrangements existed
    in the bustees of Calcutta.
 4. The program in Costa Rica that allowed much broader uses of the
    subsidy to purchase or improve existing units or build new housing
    had better results in both coverage and leakage. It initially managed to
    attract private developers, but it functions primarily through the non-
    profit sector. However, budget constraints resulted in a reduction in
    resources available to support the program.
 5. Rent subsidies (Bolsa Aluguel) through rental allowances were created
    to allow a limited number of low-income families to access the private
    rental market in São Paulo. However, rental ceilings were set below
    available market rental rates, and the subsidy levels required were sig-
    nificant.
 6. For a comprehensive review of housing finance, including subsidies
    related to housing finance, see Chiquier and Lea (2009).
                                                    Sonia Hammam      373


 7. Filtering has not been studied in developing countries. An early study
    by Ferchiou (1988) of Mexico and Tunisia indicated that filtering was
    limited, with very short-moving chains.


Bibliography
Angel, Shlomo. 2011. “Making Room for a Planet of Cities.” Policy Focus
   Report PF027, Lincoln Institute of Land Policy, Cambridge, MA.
Annez, Patricia, Alain Bertaud, Bimal Patel, and V.K. Phatak. 2010.
   “Working with the Market: Approach to Reducing Urban Slums in
   India.” Policy Research Working Paper 5475, World Bank, Washington,
   DC.
Apgar, William C., Jr. 1990. “Which Housing Policy Is Best?” Housing
   Policy Debate 1 (1): 1–32.
Arnott, Richard. 1995. “Time for Revisionism on Rent Control?” Journal of
   Economic Perspectives 9 (1): 99–120.
Arnott, Richard. 2003. “Tenancy rent control.” Swedish Economic Policy
   Review 10: 89–121.
Barker, Kate. 2004. Review of Housing Supply. Final Report, HMSO,
   London.
Bertaud, Alain. 1989. The Regulatory Environment of Urban Land in
   Indonesia: Constraints Imposed on The Poor and Impact of World Bank’s
   Urban Projects. Washington, DC: World Bank.
——–—. 2010. “Land Markets, Government Intervention and Housing
   Affordability.” Working Paper 18, Brookings Institute, Washington, DC.
Bertaud, Alain, and Jan Brueckner. 2003. “Analyzing Building Height
   Restrictions: Predicted Impacts, Welfare Costs, and a Case Study of
   Bangalore, India.” Policy Research Working Paper 3290, World Bank,
   Washington, DC.
Bertaud, Alain, and Stephen Malpezzi. 2001. “Measuring the Costs and
   Benefits of Urban Land Use Regulation: A Simple Model with an
   Application to Malaysia.” Journal of Housing Economics 10 (3): 393–418.
Biderman, Ciro. 2008. “Informality in Brazil: Does Urban Land Use and
   Building Regulation Matter?” Working Paper WP08CB1, Lincoln
   Institute of Land Policy, Cambridge, MA.
Biderman, Ciro, and Martim Smolka. 2011. “Housing Informality: An
   Economist’s Perspective on Urban Planning.” Working Paper WP11MS2,
   Lincoln Institute of Land Policy, Cambridge, MA.
Buckley, Robert, and Jerry Kalarickal. 2005. “Housing Policy in Developing
   Countries: Conjectures and Refutations.” The World Bank Research
   Observer 20 (2): 233–57.
374 Housing Matters


Buckley, Robert, and Jerry Kalarikcal, eds. 2006. Thirty Years of World Bank
   Shelter Lending: What Have We Learned? Washington, DC: World Bank.
Buckley, Robert, and Ashna S. Mathema. 2007. “Real Estate and Remittances
   in Accra, Ghana:” World Bank, Washington DC.
Cheshire, Paul, and Stephen Sheppard. 2002. “Welfare Economics of Land
   Use Regulation.” Journal of Urban Economics 52: 242–69.
Chiquier, Loic. 2006. Housing Finance in East Asia. Washington, DC:
   World Bank.
Chiquier, Loic, and Michael Lea, eds. 2009. Housing Finance in Emerging
   Markets. Washington, DC: World Bank.
De Soto, Hernando. 2000. The Mystery of Capital: Why Capitalism Triumphs
   in the West and Fails Everywhere Else. New York: Basic Books.
Doebele, William. 1978. “Selected Issues in Urban Land Tenure.” In Urban
   Land Policies: Issues and Opportunities, vol. I. Washington, DC: World
   Bank.
Dowall, David. 2006. “Brazil’s Urban Land and Housing Markets: How
   Well Are They Working?” In Brazil Inputs for an Urban Strategy, vol. II.
   Washington, DC: World Bank.
Dowall, David, and Paavo Monkkonen. 2007. “Chennai Urban Land
   Market Assessment.” Working Paper 2007–02, South Asia Urban
   Development, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Duebel, Hans-Joachim. 2007. “Impact of Rent Control and Rental Housing
   Reforms.” In A Roadmap for Housing Policy Reform in Egypt, prepared by
   Sameh Wahba, Marja Hoek-Smit, Catherine Lynch, Sally Merrill, Hans-
   Joachim Duebel, and David Sims. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Durand-Lasserve, Alain, and Harris Selod. 2007. “The Formalisation
   of Urban Land Tenure in Developing Countries.” Paper presented at
   the World Bank Urban Research Symposium, Washington, DC, May
   14–16.
Fay, Marianne. 2004. The Urban Poor in Latin America. Washington, DC:
   World Bank.
Ferchiou, Ridha. 1982. “The Indirect Effects of New Housing Construction
   in Developing Countries.” Urban Studies 19 (2): 167–76.
Gilbert, Alan. 2003. Rental Housing: An Essential Option for the Urban Poor
   in Developing Countries. Nairobi: United Nations Human Settlements
   Programme.
Glaeser, Edward L., and Joseph Gyourko. 2003. “The Impact of Building
   Restrictions on Housing Affordability, Policies to Promote Affordable
   Housing.” Economic Policy Review 9 (2): 21–39.
——–—. 2008. Rethinking Federal Housing Policy How to Make Housing
   Plentiful and Affordable. Washington, DC: American Enterprise Institute
   for Public Policy.
                                                       Sonia Hammam      375


Glaeser, Edward L., Joseph Gyourko, and Raven Saks. 2005a. “Urban
   Growth and Housing Supply.” Discussion Paper 2062, Harvard Institute
   of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
——–—. 2005b. “Why Is Manhattan So Expensive? Regulation and the
   Rise in Housing Prices.” Journal of Law and Economics 48 (2): 331–69.
Goytia, Cynthia, Cecilia de Mendoza, and Ricardo Pasquini. 2010. “Land
   Regulation in the Urban Agglomerates of Argentina and Its Relationship
   with Households’ Residential Tenure Condition.” Working Paper
   WP10CC1, Lincoln Institute of Land Policy, Cambridge, MA.
Gulyani, Sumila, and Ellen M. Bassett. 2007. “Retrieving the Baby from the
   Bathwater: Slum Upgrading in Sub-Saharan Africa.” Environment and
   Planning C: Government and Policy 25 (4): 486–515.
Gulyani, Sumila, and Debabrata Talukdar. 2008. “Slum Real Estate: The
   Low-Quality High-Price Puzzle in Nairobi’s Slum Rental Market and
   its Implications for Theory and Practice.” World Development 36 (10):
   1916–37.
Hannah, Lawrence. 1989. “Getting the Incentives Right.” Urban Notes 1
   (1). Washington, DC: World Bank.
Henderson, J. Vernon. 2007. “The Effect of Residential Land Market
   Regulations on Urban Welfare.” Paper presented at the World Bank
   Urban Research Symposium, Washington, DC, May 14–16.
Lanjouw, Jean, and Philip Levy. 2004. “A Difficult Question in Deed: A
   Cost-Benefit Framework for Titling Programs.” William and Mary Law
   Review 45 (3): 889–951.
Malpezzi, Stephen, and Gwendolyn Ball. 1991. “Rent Control in Developing
   Countries.” Discussion Paper 129, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Martine, George, and Gordon McGranahan. 2010. “Brazil’s Early Urban
   Transition: What Can It Teach Urbanizing Countries?” International
   Institute for Environment and Development, London.
Mayer, Christopher J., and Craig Tsuriel Somerville. 2000. “Land Use
   Regulation and New Construction.” Regional Science and Urban
   Economics 30 (6): 639–62.
Mayo, Stephen, Anna Hardman, and Stephen Malpezzi. 1995. “Egypt Rent
   Regulation Reform Study for the Arab Republic of Egypt.” World Bank,
   Washington, DC.
Office of the Deputy Prime Minister (ODPM). 2005. Sustainable
   Communities: Homes for All: A Five Year Plan from the Office of the Deputy
   Prime Minister. London: Crown.
Oxley, Michael, Ross Lishman, and Tim Brown. 2010. “Promoting
   Investment in Private Rented Housing Supply: International Policy
   Comparisons.” Department for Communities and Local Government,
   London.
376 Housing Matters


Payne, Geoffrey, Alain Durand-Lasserve, and Carole Rakodi. 2008.
   “Social and Economic Impacts of Land Titling Programmes in Urban and
   Peri-Urban Areas: International Experience and Case Studies of Senegal
   and South Africa.” Final report submitted to Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
   Government of Norway; Swedish International Development Agency
   (SIDA); Global Land Tools Network in UN-Habitat.
Razzaz, Omar. 1992. Contestation and Mutual Adjustment: The Process of
   Controlling Land in Yajouz/Jordan. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Razzaz, Omar, and Ahmed Galal. 2001. “Reforming Land and Real
   Estate Markets.” Policy Research Working Paper 2616, World Bank,
   Washington, DC.
Renaud, Bertrand. 2004. “Permanence and Change: East Asian Housing
   Policies after Fifty Years.” Conference paper for the International Housing
   Conference in Hong Kong, “Housing in the 21st Century: Challenges
   and Commitments,” Hong Kong, February 2–4.
Rojas, Eduardo, and Nadine Medellin. 2011. “Housing Policy Matters for
   the Poor: Housing Conditions in Latin America and the Caribbean,
   1995–2006.” Working Paper Series IDB-WP-289, Inter-American
   Development Bank, Washington, DC.
Ruprah, Inder. 2010. “The Transparency, Incidence, and Targeting
   Efficiency of Housing Programs in Latin America.” Working Paper OVE/
   WP-04/10, Inter-American Development Bank, Washington, DC.
Schuetz, Jenny. 2007. “Land Use Regulation and the Rental Housing
   Market: A Case Study of Massachusetts Communities.” Joint Center of
   Housing Studies of Harvard University, Cambridge, MA.
Schuetz, Jenny, Rachel Meltzer, and Vicki Been. 2007. The Effects of
   Inclusionary Zoning on Local Housing Markets: Lessons from the San
   Francisco, Washington, DC, and Suburban Boston Areas. New York: New
   York University Press.
Souza, Maria Teresa. 2009. “The Effect of Land Use Regulation on Housing
   Price and Informality: A Model Applied to Curitiba, Brazil.” Working
   Paper WP09MS1, Lincoln Institute of Land Policy, Cambridge, MA.
Tsenkova, Sasha, and Bengt Turner. 2004. “The Future of Social Housing in
   Eastern Europe: Reforms in Latvia and the Ukraine.” European Journal
   of Housing Policy 4 (2): 133–49.
United States Agency for International Development (USAID). 2008.
   “Housing Study for Urban Egypt: Final.” Technical Assistance for Policy
   Reform (TAPR II), Washington, DC: USAID.
Whitehead, Christine. 2011. Housing & Planning Policy: Making Housing
   Affordable. CASE Themed Series. London: London School of Economics.
                                                        Sonia Hammam       377


Whitehead, Christine, Mark Stephens, and Moira Munro. 2005. Lessons
  from the Past, Challenges for the Future for Housing Policy: An Evaluation of
  English Housing Policy 1975–2000. Office of the Deputy Prime Minister,
  London.
World Bank. 2009. World Development Report 2009: Reshaping Economic
  Geography. Washington, DC.
——–—. 2010. Systems of Cities: Harnessing the Potential of Urbanization for
  Growth and Poverty Alleviation. Washington, DC.
14


Converting Land into Affordable
Housing Floor Space

Alain Bertaud




Cities emerge from the spatial concentration of people and economic
activities. But spatial concentration is not enough; the economic via-
bility of cities depends on people, ideas, and goods to move rapidly
across the urban area. This constant movement within dense cities
creates wealth but also various degrees of unpleasantness and mis-
ery that economists call negative externalities—such as congestion,
pollution, and environmental degradation. In addition, the poorest
inhabitants of many cities are often unable to afford a minimum-size
dwelling with safe water and sanitation, as if the wealth created by
cities was part of a zero-sum game where the poor would be at the
losing end.
   The main challenge for urban planners and economists is reduc-
ing cities’ negative externalities without destroying the wealth
created by spatial concentration. To do that, they must plan and
design infrastructure and regulations while leaving intact the self-
organizing created by land and labor markets. The balance between
letting markets work and correcting market externalities through
                                                        Alain Bertaud   379


infrastructure investment and regulation is difficult to achieve. Too
often, planners play sorcerer’s apprentice when dealing with markets
whose functioning they poorly understand.
    It is possible to ignore markets for a while, as in the cities of former
command economies like China and the Soviet Union before the
1990s. Planners in those cities were free to design cities by allocat-
ing land among uses and deciding how these uses would be spatially
related. They proceeded with full design control over cities in the
same way that an architect designs a house. The result was less than
optimal, with extreme pollution, severe housing shortages, and vast
obsolete underused industrial land areas.
    Planners, no matter how technically competent, cannot design and
plan every aspect of a city, because they do not have the information
that each individual land user alone possesses. The information about
individual location and land consumption preferences, together with
land supply responses, is bundled into real estate prices. These prices
need constant monitoring and interpretation to guide planners’
responses to the ever-changing equilibrium between supply and
demand for land and infrastructure.
    But empirical evidence also shows that, without any government
intervention, markets cannot create large well-functioning cities.
Large informal settlements, for instance, surrounding Cairo, Kabul,
and Lagos, demonstrate that indispensable primary infrastructure
and public parks cannot be created by private initiative alone. In
these spontaneous settlements—pure products of market forces
unadulterated by regulations—the absence of sewers, storm drainage,
and arterial roads impose extreme health and economic hardships
on their inhabitants. And these settlements impose a cost on the
entire city because their impenetrability interrupts the continuity of
citywide transport and other networks.
    The role of the urban planner is then, first, to better understand the
complex interaction between market forces and government inter-
ventions—infrastructure investment and regulation—and second, to
design these interventions based on precise quantitative objectives.
Each city’s priorities would depend on its history, circumstances, and
political environment. But maintaining mobility and keeping land
affordable remains the main urban planning objective common to
all cities.
380 Converting Land into Affordable Housing Floor Space


Land-use policies and plans: between utopia
and reality

With few exceptions, planners are asked not to design new cities but
to modify existing ones. Development options are thus quite limited,
and theoretically optimal land-use spatial arrangements—even if
they could be identified—become irrelevant when confronting the
reality on the ground. Planners often have a hard time facing this
reality. They lose precious time and resources in preparing utopian
plans hoping to transform the structure of an existing city into a new
clever optimal form.
   Periodic fads focusing on a single aspect of urban development
can also push planners toward “bold visions” that border utopia.
Legitimate concerns for air pollution and the global warming caused
by urban transport’s greenhouse gas emissions have triggered an
assault on mobility. Any extension of the urban land supply often
qualifies as “sprawl,” whether in a North American city with an
average built-up density of eight people per hectare or in an Asian
city with a density 20 times larger! Many measures to restrict sprawl
restrict the land supply and usually make housing less affordable.
   Desperate to reduce congestion and pollution, planners too often
opt for reducing mobility rather than improving it through new
transport systems. Reducing traffic by preventing cars from running
on some days of the week depending on the ending digits on their
license plate reduces mobility and often does not achieve lasting
environmental results. By contrast, congestion pricing can reduce
congestion and pollution without reducing mobility. This partial
solution should expand now that technology’s high transaction costs
have declined. Overall, planners should be aware that reducing envi-
ronmental externalities constrains urban development and so cannot
be the main objective of urban planning.
   The land use of large cities is extremely resilient. Land use changes
in areas already built, whether widening streets or recycling obso-
lete land use on a large scale, are slow and involve high transaction
costs. And spatial structural changes are usually path-dependent. In
large cities, population densities could change in the long run—but
extremely slowly. Average urban population densities tend to go
down, not up (Angel 2011). Dominantly monocentric cities tend to
                                                      Alain Bertaud   381


become polycentric in the long run, but once a city is polycentric it
cannot return to being monocentric.
   The slow evolution of existing land use does not mean that a
city does not change. Incomes, technology, and relative prices may
change very rapidly, as in many cities of Asia and some cities of Africa.
These changes affect the supply and demand for land and transport.
In Vietnamese cities, household incomes rising over 10 years have
allowed commuters to shift from bicycle to motorcycle as the main
mode of transport. This change affected not only traffic management
but also housing. The quasi-universal use of the motorcycle in Hanoi
(81 percent of all vehicle trips in 2008) allowed firms to relocate
in suburban areas—where land was cheaper than in the traditional
central business district—while maintaining accessibility for its labor
force and suppliers. Densified urban villages at the fringe of urban-
ization became a major source of cheap housing for commuters with
increased mobility provided by the motorcycle.
   But not all changes have positive impacts. Further increases in
household incomes are already creating a demand for cars that
Hanoi’s existing road network cannot accommodate. The decentral-
ization of jobs has created dispersed commuting destinations into
suburbs that traditional transit solutions—bus rapid transit, buses,
or subways—will struggle to reach with adequate service.
   The problem facing planners is thus to maintain mobility and
affordability and reduce environmental externalities—because cities’
land use evolves slowly but technology and incomes change rapidly.
By monitoring changes, analyzing current land use, and finding
solutions for maintaining mobility and affordability, planners have
plenty to do without having to redesign existing cities. The following
sections concentrate on only a few aspects of land-use management
in an existing city, mainly monitoring land supply and looking at
how land development practices, regulations, and markets allocate
land among users.

The supply mechanism for urban land—often opaque and
poorly understood by planners and city managers

The economic efficiency and social equity of cities depend on an
adequate mechanism for the supply and distribution of urban
382 Converting Land into Affordable Housing Floor Space


land. Governments have a crucial role in the land supply by pro-
viding transport infrastructure. The spatial pattern of the primary
infrastructure network and the mix and speed of transport modes
determine the potential supply of developable urban land that would
be compatible with an integrated labor market.
    Despite the government’s well-known and accepted role in pro-
viding primary infrastructure, it is assumed that in most countries
markets largely determine the allocation of developed land and the
price of the floor space built on it—with the obvious exceptions of
Cuba and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. A preliminary
evaluation of new greenfield development in Ahmedabad, India,
shows that only about a third of the land developed in the last 10
years has been distributed through market mechanisms. While this
proportion will vary greatly by city, I do not think that Ahmedabad
is an outlier.
    The market for urban land is unique and complex. The supply and
consumption of urban land depends heavily on government invest-
ment and regulation. And as a consequence, land market mechanisms
are often opaque to both land consumers and suppliers.
    Land development is crucial for city development. But urban land
is only an intermediary product in the construction of cities; the real
end-product is the floor space built on it. We all have a tendency to
focus on land use and land prices because cities are managed and
monitored mostly through maps, two-dimensional simplifications
of a three-dimensional reality. What differentiates urban land from
rural land is the floor space built on it.
    The amount of floor space that can be built on a unit of land is
thus a crucial variable whose value should be monitored to manage
urban land effectively. Low consumption of land per person is not
necessarily an indicator of household deprivation; low consumption
of floor space per person always is. The amount of floor space built
on a unit of land should be determined by consumer demand limited
only by the obvious externality costs imposed on its neighbors. But
as shown below, the ratio between land and floor space is too often
constrained by inadequate infrastructure and arbitrary regulations.
    In many cities, the high price of floor space prevents poor house-
holds from being able to afford housing in the formal sector—that
is, to build on land that conforms to the regulated development
                                                        Alain Bertaud   383


process. So poor households can afford only land developed infor-
mally in a much simpler parallel process. Instead of having this
dichotomy, there must be a way to develop land and build floor space
with different characteristics that make doing so legal, affordable,
and safe.
    City managers and urban planners often quote the “high price of
urban land” as responsible for the poor’s inability to afford formal
housing.1 The responsibility for the high prices is generally attributed
to either the actions of speculators or the greed of land owners. Very
little can be done to stop vaguely defined land speculation—and
even less to prevent greed. Even so, land supply bottlenecks—the real
cause of high land prices—are seldom analyzed.
    What determines the supply of urban land for future develop-
ment, and how is this land distributed? Urban land development is
a linear process, similar to an industrial production chain. How long
does it take for the primary input—rural land—to be transformed
into the finished product—floor space? How much land is frozen,
and for how long, during the various stages of transformation on the
production chain? How much land is permanently wasted or mis-
allocated? Because floor space is what urban firms and households
consume, how many units of land have to be developed to produce
one unit of floor space?
    The answers obviously will vary with each city, depending on its
topography and resources and the technology available to it. I will
spell out the various steps of the complex process that transforms
land into buildable, salable lots and eventually into floor space. This
chapter aims to identify when the original land fed into the supply
chain is all gone. I identify what constitutes the potential supply of
land—and then how this land is transformed into developed land
and eventually into floor space.

The supply of developable urban land—constrained by the
speed of daily trips
The efficiency of large labor markets is the raison d’être of large cities.
The daily trips by the active population from home to work and
urban amenities allow labor markets to work. Spatial mobility makes
cities economically viable.
384 Converting Land into Affordable Housing Floor Space


    As cities grow very large, travel distance increases, and traffic con-
gestion slows commuting and increases the time spent on transport.
The time spent daily moving from residences to jobs and amenities
is like a tax on urban productivity, and when this time becomes too
long it is also a tax on family and social life.
    Some urban planners argue that it should be possible to put jobs
and housing in the same location. This would reduce travel time and
perhaps allow walking or cycling to work, even in very large cities.
The attempts in new satellite towns in cities as diverse as Stockholm
and Seoul show that this does not reduce commuting distance. In
so-called self-sufficient satellite towns, the distance traveled increased,
compared with the rest of the city, as people living in satellite towns
usually work in the core city and people working in the satellite
towns often commute from a suburb of the core city.2
    Why is it not possible to match the locations of housing and jobs
in large cities? Most of the world’s cities are already built with hous-
ing next to where jobs are concentrated. But people moving to a
large city are unlikely to look for a job only within a short distance
of their new home, and employers are not going to limit their search
for workers to their firm’s neighborhood. The wide choice of jobs
and potential employees that large cities offer is the main motive for
moving to a large city, for both individuals and firms. Firms are better
off when they can select from a large number of workers; individuals
are better off when they can choose from a wide range of jobs. The
job market is thus city-wide and cannot be fragmented into discrete
neighborhoods. Labor market integration is found not in a clever
land-use arrangement but in better and faster transport.
    In a large city, an efficient urban transport system should take a
commuter from any part of the city to any other in an acceptable
length of time. This acceptable commuting time multiplied by the
speed of travel defines the radius of the circle reachable under the
commuting time limit and thus defines the potential land supply for
city extension under the current transport system.

Acceptable travel times

What then is the acceptable limit to daily travel time? In U.S. and
Western European cities, the mean travel time stayed about constant
                                                            Alain Bertaud   385


over the last 10 years, despite increases in population and in distance
traveled (25 minutes mean travel time for U.S. cities in both 2000
and 2009) (McKenzie and Rapino 2011). The mean one-way travel
time for large cities varies from around 25–35 minutes. Many large
cities in emerging economies are growing much faster in both popu-
lation and income than are American and Western European cities,
pushing mean commuting times well beyond 35 minutes because
their transport systems are unlikely to be able to adjust to the more
rapid physical expansion. The median travel time in Gauteng, South
Africa, is 29 minutes—seemingly similar to a European or North
American city—but almost 15 percent of commuters travel more
than one hour one way each day, while in the New York metropoli-
tan area (with a population 150 percent larger than Gauteng’s) only
7 percent of commuters commute more than one hour (Figure 14.1).
    The supply of urban land will thus be constrained by the distance
that can be traveled in less than one hour to jobs and amenities from
the various residential locations in and around the city (Figure 14.2).
As a city expands in population and area, the distance between jobs
and amenities will likely increase, requiring higher speeds to connect
in less than one hour.




Figure 14.1   Commuting trip travel time in Gauteng, 2009
Source: Stats SA 2009.
Figure 14.2   Land supply corresponding to one hour commuting time for three spatial arrangements for jobs and amenities
Source: Author’s analysis.
Note: Monocentric jobs are concentrated in the central business district; polycentric-clustered jobs are concentrated in a few clusters; polycentric-
uniformly dispersed jobs are completely dispersed within the built-up area.
                                                       Alain Bertaud   387


   The potential land supply is the yet-unbuilt area where a city can
expand while avoiding the fragmentation of its labor market. Studies
in Asia and Western Europe show that a 10 percent increase in travel
speed corresponds to a 15 percent expansion in the size of the labor
market and a 3 percent gain in productivity (Prud’homme and Lee
2009). To approximate the effect of the existing transporation system
on the potential land supply, assume that one hour for a one-way
commute is the maximum travel time to define a city’s potential
land supply.
   In a labor market perfectly integrated (and thus with maximum
productivity), any job should be reached in less than one hour from
any part of the built-up area. This first hypothesis is shown on the
top part of the figure for the three spatial arrangements for job
distribution. Keeping the urban area constant, the travel length to
the more distant job from any point at the urban periphery increases
as the jobs move away from the center. To limit commutes to an
hour, the speed of travel has to increase when jobs are more dispersed.
This is what often happens in real life, because trips from suburbs
to suburbs are usually faster than those from suburbs to the central
business district.
   A second hypothesis shows a less perfect world, where only a frac-
tion of the jobs would be accessible in less than one hour from the city’s
periphery. The labor markets would then be fragmented—depending
on their location, workers will have access to only a fraction of the
jobs available in the city. Productivity would fall in proportion to the
percentage of jobs that can be reached in less than one hour over the
total number of jobs. Increasing travel speed would expand the size
of the labor market, and productivity would, as a consequence, also
increase.
   In the real world, the means of transport—and thus the speed
of travel—depend on income groups and patterns of travel. Higher
income groups, which can afford faster transport, would have access
to the entire labor market, while poorer households would have
access to only a fraction of it, significantly lessening their earning
opportunities.
   The schematic representation of Figure 14.2 shows the relation-
ship among land supply, job spatial distribution, and speed of
travel. For a given urban area with less than one hour travel time, the
388 Converting Land into Affordable Housing Floor Space


monocentric distribution of jobs allows the slowest travel speed,
because the central location of jobs reduces distance to all house-
holds. The polycentric arrangement would require travel speeds to
double, holding the land area constant, to allow one hour travel time
from all parts of the city to all jobs.
   So far the time spent traveling is the major constraint on urban
land supply. Economists traditionally use the cost of transport from
the city center as a determinant of the limit of urbanization (or by
extension, to the land supply). The cost of transport includes both
the cash paid for transport (gasoline, tolls, transit fare) and the
opportunity cost of time spent traveling. The cost per unit of time
traveled, an opportunity cost, is different for travelers belonging to
different income groups—higher for higher income and lower for
lower income.
   The direct costs of commuting trips in large modern cities—by
individual vehicles or by public transit—are often heavily subsidized,
directly or indirectly. The failure to include the economic price of
carbon emissions in the cost of the fuel consumed, for example,
further removes the incentive to use direct transport costs to influ-
ence travel behavior. In assessing the supply of land, I am using
current behavior influenced by the actual price paid for transport
and not the economic price, which reflects the real economic cost
of commuting.
   However, for the lowest income households, who can afford only
to walk, the cost of travel is even more important than travel time
in limiting their choice of residential location. In some cities, the
poorest inhabitants spend more than two hours a day commuting
from home to work (Box 14.1). The extreme commuting hardship
in Gauteng might be exceptional (about 4 percent of commuters in
Gauteng are estimated to commute more than 90 minutes one way),
but it may become more common with increasing income disparities
in even larger cities. There would certainly seem to be a correlation
between the high cost in time and money commuting in Gauteng
and the 26 percent unemployment rate (OECD 2011).
   The area where this person is living—two and a half hours from
her job—would be considered outside the urban supply area with
a maximum of one hour commute time. But a different mode of
transport would put her residence inside the land supply zone.
                                                            Alain Bertaud   389



     Box 14.1      The five-hour commuting burden in Gauteng,
                              South Africa

  A single mother of four children ages 3–12 lives in Tembisa with her
  mother. She spends nearly five hours each day commuting to and
  from work in the Pretoria suburb of Brummeria, where she is an office
  cleaner. The journeys cost nearly 40 percent of her monthly salary
  of 1,900 rand. She leaves home at 05:00 to be at the office at 07:30,
  starting with a 2-kilometer walk to the taxi stand, which takes her to
  the train station. In Pretoria, she takes another taxi to Brummeria.
  After leaving work at 16:00, she may not get home until 19:00, as the
  trains are often late. She spends over 700 rand a month on transport
  and nearly 100 hours on the road.
         —National Development Plan Vision 2030, Presidency’s National
                    Planning Commission, South Africa, November 2011.
      The length of the trip for the woman commuting to her work:
  47 kilometers. Her average commuting speed is only about 19 kilo-
  meters an hour, very low due to the many changes in the mode of
  transport she must use. She must first walk to a taxi stand, then wait for
  a collective taxi that takes her to a railway station, then wait for a train
  that takes her to a station, and then wait for a collective taxi that takes
  her to her job. If she could afford a motorcycle, she could do the trip in
  less than one hour and would gain three hours every day.



Clearly, in defining the land supply area the real issues are speed and
mode of transport, not distance.
   The negative impact of more than two hours total daily travel time
on the life and welfare of poor people causes their real income to be
far lower than the already low level measured in monetary terms.
Trips longer than one hour disrupt family life, with serious long-term
social consequences on employment and on children’s education.
Too often, the proponents of transport systems fail to evaluate the
door-to-door users’ time of transport, considering the viability of the
proposed transport system from only the view of the operator, not
the user. As a consequence, travel time by different transport mode is
seldom monitored. Robert Cervero, in his otherwise comprehensive
and authoritative book in advocacy of urban transit, devotes only a
390 Converting Land into Affordable Housing Floor Space


few lines to travel time by different mode (Cervero 1998). He admits
that the usual faster travel time by car, even in transit-based European
and Japanese cities, is the main challenge in shifting the transport
mode from car to transit. Indeed, this is a major challenge!

The mode and length of the transport network determines the
supply of land
Assuming that one hour each way is the maximum commuting time
acceptable in a city, we can calculate the area that can be accessed
in less than one hour from a central point. The part of this area yet
to be built corresponds to the supply of land that can be developed
for city expansion without imposing significant and unmeasured
welfare costs on long-distance commuters. The size of this area will
depend on the speed of different transport modes and the pattern
of the road network. Figure 14.3 illustrates the steps that can help
derive the supply of land from the speed of different transport
modes. The distance covered during one hour’s travel time depends
on the speed of transport. The speed of transport depends on the
mode of transport. Transport modes are divided into two categories:
individual and collective.
   Individual means of transport—walking, bicycling, motorcycling,
and driving a private vehicle—provides access to any area along a
road network at any time and without the need to walk to a station
or bus stop. By contrast, collective transport—minibuses, buses, bus
rapid transit, and rail—provides access only along a transit network
that is usually a fraction of the length of the road network. It depends
on the frequency of transport and the network’s operating hours (for
instance, buses operate at, say, 10 minute intervals, between 6 in the
morning and midnight).
   Figure 14.3 shows the distance that can be covered in one hour
using different transport modes and their corresponding door-to-door
speed. The various supply areas are based on the distance covered in
one hour by different transport modes at the door-to-door speed and
on an assumption that the urban area is covered by a continuous road
network and that the transit network covers the existing network at
1-kilometer intervals. These areas would measure the potential land
supply corresponding to various transport modes in a monocentric
Figure 14.3   The potential supply of land depends on the speed of different transport modes
Source: Author’s estimates.
392 Converting Land into Affordable Housing Floor Space


city, where most jobs and amenities are concentrated in a central
location. In a polycentric city, the supply area would have to be
divided by about two.3 However, the speed of motorized individual
transport would be faster for suburb-to-suburb trips than for suburb
to urban core trips. See Box 14.2 for an example of the door-to-door
speed of public transport.



         Box 14.2      Door-to-door speed of public transport

  Commuting time is the total time it takes to go from trip origin to final
  destination, called the door-to-door commuting time. Commuting
  speed is the distance from origin to destination divided by the door-to-
  door commuting time. It is usually significantly lower than the speed
  of the means of transport itself. When collective means of transport are
  used, the difference in speed is significant, because it requires walking
  to and from transit stations, and the differences become even larger
  when there is a need to transfer between transit lines and larger still
  when the transfer is between different transport modes (bus to subway,
  or train to collective taxis).
      Suppose that to catch a bus a passenger has to walk on average about
  500 meters at 4.5 kilometers an hour, taking about 7 minutes. If a bus
  arrives every 10 minutes the average waiting time will be 5 minutes
  before boarding. The bus runs at 25 kilometers an hour between stops.
  Assume that stops are spaced every 500 meters and that the bus stops
  for 30 seconds at each stop to let passengers board and alight. Over
  10 kilometers, the real speed of the bus will be 17.6 kilometers an hour
  because of the time waiting at stops. Finally, after arriving at his or her
  stop, the passenger will still have to walk an average of 500 meters to
  final destination.
      Using the above parameters, the door-to-door commuting speed of
  the bus is only 12.6 kilometers an hour. If a transfer is necessary to
  another bus line and the headway or time between buses is 10 minutes,
  an average of 5 minutes will be added and the door-to-door speed will
  drop to 11.5 kilometers an hour.
      For individual means of transport, the average speed of the vehicle
  is usually very close to the door-to door-speed, except for car trips to
  downtown areas where the distance from car parking to workplace
  destination might be significant and must be walked.
                                                               Alain Bertaud     393


   In a city where the road network is idiosyncratic, as is typical,
the area accessible through the road network in a given time can be
measured directly on a map (Figure 14.4). In Ahmedabad, a scooter
runs at about 30 kilometers an hour. The total area accessible in less
than one hour from a central location (1,675 square kilometers)
using the existing road network represents the land supply under
current infrastructure for somebody using a scooter as transport and
working in central Ahmedabad. Part of the area accessible in less
than one hour is already built—in this case 384 square kilometers of
area available for development. So, the new potential land supply is
1,291 square kilometers, but it is available only to users of scooters or
faster vehicles.




Figure 14.4   Ahmedabad’s land supply within 30 kilometers of the city center
Source: For area within 30 kilometers of central business district, author’s calcula-
tions; for built-up area, Annez et al. (2012).
394 Converting Land into Affordable Housing Floor Space


    Ahmedabad has also a network of city buses and a newly built bus
rapid transit network. The supply of land for people using the public
transport system—bus, bus rapid transit, or a combination of the
two—would be different and certainly much smaller than the area
accessible by scooter. In addition, the use of auto-rickshaws, com-
mon in India, would expand the reach of the bus or bus rapid transit
network and, as a consequence, the land supply for users of public
transport who can afford the supplemental cost of an auto-rickshaw.
    The potential supply of land where a city can expand is dependent
on the city’s transport system, and each income group is limited to
its own potential land supply dependent on the affordable transport
mode. For people who can afford only to walk, the land supply area
is very small (about 40 square kilometers). In cities where jobs are
dispersed, as in Gauteng, low-income walkers have access to only a
fraction of the job market and are likely to face either high unem-
ployment or much lower real income due to the implicit taxes they
pay through transport costs.

Increasing the supply of land through faster transport would
have more positive impact on the housing of the poor
One frequent reason for the high cost of land is an inadequate trans-
port system. Transport networks should be planned to expand the
land supply area for the lowest income urban groups. Expanding the
land supply would hold down housing costs by putting more land
on the market. Increasing transport’s door-to-door speed by allow-
ing fast and efficient transfers between transport modes could have
more impacts on the quality of housing of the poor and on their
employment rate than many more traditional low-income housing
programs.
   In the large cities of Vietnam, where household incomes are
sufficient to afford a motorcycle for every worker, the land supply has
become very large, and the quality of housing is thus generally high.
Motorcycles allow access to undeveloped areas with narrow roads
or even unpaved rural trails. In these areas, low-income households
do not have to compete for land with higher income groups, who
generally require car accessibility for their housing location. The land
area accessible only by motorcycle becomes a parallel land market
                                                     Alain Bertaud   395


“reserved” for lower income households. In most of the world’s cities,
the rich, because of their superior mobility, have access to a much
larger land supply area than the poor. In Vietnamese cities, because
of the quasi-universal social acceptability and affordability of the
motorcycle, this advantage is reversed, and the poor, by accepting
to live in areas accessible only by motorcycle, have a larger and more
affordable land supply than the rich.

A costly obstacle course: the transformation of potential supply
of land into residential floor space
Basing the land supply area on the speed of transport modes is only
the first step in getting land to its final urban user. It measures only
accessibility—it does not mean that the land is available for use. The
transformation of the potential land supply into buildable land and
eventually into floor space is nearly always long and costly.
    Transforming rural land into urban developed land differs by
country, and it is not possible to provide a general description of
the process. In some market economies, land development is a
state monopoly, even though the developed land is eventually sold
on the free market, as in Singapore and the Republic of Korea. In
China, the local government has also a monopoly on land develop-
ment, though most of the land, once developed, is auctioned on the
free market.
    As an example, consider Ahmedabad. India is a market economy
with a well-established legal system that supports property rights.
But the country’s often overreaching government often slows land
development to a halt, reducing the potential land supply.
    The state of Gujarat, where Ahmedabad is located, has the pecu-
liarity of having perfected over the last 30 years a land readjustment
system that in principle would greatly simplify and rationalize the
transformation of rural land into urban developed land. In reality,
the administrative hurdles created by several levels of government
make this transformation lengthy and expensive. In India, as in most
countries, land development is an obstacle course with many players,
many rules, and many referees who often do not even realize that
their actions or principled obstructions are the major causes of the
shortage of developed land.
396 Converting Land into Affordable Housing Floor Space


   The undeveloped area within less than one hour travel time from
Ahmedabad’s city center is potentially part of the land supply only for
people with access to a car or a motorcycle (see Figure 14.4). Before this
land area can be developed, it will be subjected to time- and money-
consuming controls, permits, and regulations. And it will require the
coordinated construction of tertiary infrastructure to enable access to
individual lots. In Ahmedabad, which is not exceptional, being able
to build legally on a lot in a greenfield development requires 14 steps
involving the federal revenue department and multiple offices of the
state and local government. The process would normally take several
years, with no guarantee of success.
   In emerging economies, household incomes are rising quickly,
and financial services are becoming more available. This creates a
large increase in demand for housing and office buildings and thus
for land. Because of the time lag in getting the necessary permission,
the land supply response to increasing demand is always very slow,
resulting in rapid land appreciation. In Ahmedabad, the theoretical
supply of land accessible to the population will be adequate for many
years to come, but the time required for getting from greenfield to
developed plot is so long that it has already created an artificial short-
age of developed land.
   Only a very small part of the land within the theoretical acces-
sibility supply area will end up “on the market” for development.
The ability to develop enough land in time to accommodate the
demand coming from an increasing population and increasing
incomes is the major challenge of modern urbanization. As shown
below, more land could be put on the market faster by simplifying
the administrative system and reducing the amount of land allocated
administratively.

Only a fraction of the land developed each year is
submitted to market forces

The economic efficiency of cities rests on the assumption that land is
valued at market prices and that it is periodically recycled to its best
and highest use as determined by market forces. Land owners, under
this assumption, periodically review the value of their land assets and
change to a different use if the return net of the sometimes significant
                                                     Alain Bertaud   397


transaction costs is not optimum under the current use. That is why
tall office buildings in some locations replace old townhouses, and
why detached houses on large lots are replaced by townhouses. The
high transaction costs of land use readjustment explain why this pro-
cess does not happen quickly. When land becomes more expensive,
developers substitute capital for land by building taller buildings,
using less land per unit of floor space. This constant creative destruc-
tion is what allows cities to adapt to changing consumer demand and
to new technology.
    Because adjusting to a new use is expensive, only a small fraction
of the developed urban land is ever submitted to the market forces
just described. A large part of the urban land supply is allocated each
year by regulation or by government acquisition through eminent
domain. The majority of this administratively allocated land is used
for roads, parks, railways tracks, utilities, government buildings, and
more. As a consequence, the possibility of rapid changes in land use
and density, which could improve the productivity of cities, would
happen very slowly.
    I am not arguing that the value of the land on which roads and
parks are built should be constantly updated and that alternative,
more financially rewarding uses should be constantly explored.
Obviously, large areas of a city have to be devoted either to public
goods, which should escape the rigors of the market, or to potentially
private goods, such as roads, which are almost everywhere treated as
pure public goods. But calculating what proportion of the land area
developed each year is submitted to market forces could be a good
indicator of how the scarce land is used, underused, or wasted.
    I have tentatively tried to measure how the 2,682 hectares of land
developed in Ahmedabad over 2000–10 had been allocated (Figure
14.5). Not perfect, the measure is probably accurate enough to help
guide future land policy. It is based on existing statistics, interpre-
tations of Google Earth imagery, and the preliminary results of an
ongoing study on public land use.
    Ahmedabad is probably typical of land use in large Indian
cities and reflects Indian land development practices and regulations.
The analysis of the flow of land developed in cities outside India
would certainly show different results. The purpose of measuring
Ahmedabad’s greenfield land allocation is to show a method for
Figure 14.5    The land allocation process in new areas in Ahmedabad over 2000–10
Source: Author’s calculations.
                                                    Alain Bertaud   399


comparing across cities the transformation of land from agricul-
tural to urban use and the transformation of developed land into
floor space.
   How many hectares of rural land have to be developed to produce
1 hectare for building housing, industries, and commerce? Every
mayor and urban planner should know this ratio for their city. From
the preliminary land study in Ahmedabad, the ratio between devel-
oped land and salable land is 3.3. That is, under current development
practice in Ahmedabad, 3.3 hectares of rural land have to be devel-
oped to allow 1 hectare to be used at its highest and best use (this
includes land developed by the informal sector). On this 1 hectare
of land, 1.7 hectares of floor space would be allowed to be built by
current regulations. That is, roughly 2 hectares of developed land are
required to produce 1 hectare of floor space.
   I am not implying that the land allocated for roads, utilities,
and government buildings is being wasted—far from it. I am just
distinguishing the land set aside for permanent public use from the
land that will be on the market—and determining which type of
use can be changed depending on its market value and consumer
demand. Roads, railway tracks, and sewer plants almost never change
their use over the years. The land used by government buildings
could theoretically change its function over the years, and the floor
space built on it could be expanded. Such changes seldom happen,
however, because governments are not in the habit of carrying in
their books the capital value of the land they occupy.4 There is thus
no incentive to use the capital value of government land more effi-
ciently. Just ask any ministry or municipality the total area of their
land holding. Nobody knows, unless a study is specially designed
and financed to find out (such a study is currently being conducted
in Ahmedabad).

The land allocation for the extension of Ahmedabad over
2000–10
The 2,682 hectares of land developed over 2000–10 are of two types:
land developed formally (95 percent) and land developed informally
(5 percent), including slums and additions to villages absorbed into
the new urbanization.
400 Converting Land into Affordable Housing Floor Space


   Before private development can take place, some land areas are
typically allocated by the master plan to various uses. These include
major road and railway right of ways (11 percent) and utilities
(5 percent). The land allocated to major roads depends on norms and
regulations for right of ways. The land allocated to utilities depends
on engineering standards and technology.
   The next allocation, 14 percent of the land developed, concerns
government administrative buildings and major public facilities,
including schools, government hospitals, police stations, and large
parks. The allocation is sometimes through the master plan but often
through ad hoc eminent domain acquisitions. This land is usually
acquired at below-market prices.5 Once allocated, its use tends to
become permanent. The low intensity of use shown by the small
footprint of buildings and the low floor-area ratio—compared with
adjacent privately used land—shows a frequent disconnect between
the value of land and the intensity of its use in administrative build-
ings. This should be no surprise because land’s value, once acquired
by government, rarely if ever figures as an asset in government finan-
cial accounts.
   The land used under “local roads and small open spaces”
(17 percent) is not acquired but is set aside by Gujarat Development
Control Regulations, which define minimum street width, open
space, setbacks, and parking (Figure 14.6). The allocation is similar
for all areas of the city, whether near the center where the land is
expensive or in a faraway suburb where the land is cheap. The cost of
land for internal streets and common open space is paid for directly
by the developers and eventually by individual end-users.
   “Land retained by government in town planning schemes”
(22 percent) is specific to the State of Gujarat and includes the land
retained when the government creates “town planning schemes,”
land readjustment projects that now extend to all of urban Gujarat.
The government retains land for special purposes when implement-
ing land adjustments. This land could be used for any public purpose
the government sees fit, including parks and public buildings, large
infrastructure, or a utility. It can also be allocated to public housing
or even sold to finance the construction of infrastructure.
   Over 2000–10, 69 percent of the total land developed was
administratively allocated by acquisition or regulations. Not enough
Figure 14.6   Typical low-cost housing layout according to Gujarat Development Control Regulations
Source: Author’s redrawing based on Annez et al. (2012).
402 Converting Land into Affordable Housing Floor Space


information is known about its use to know if some areas have been
overallocated or are underused. There may be an underallocation in
some categories (major roads, storm drainage) and an overallocation
in others (government buildings). This arbitrary land allocation
sharply limits the land available for private development, particularly
for housing. And it increases the likelihood that most of this land will
be frozen under uses largely not dictated by the market.
   The residual land not included in the categories described—
26 percent of the total—is developed as private plots and bought
and sold at market prices. This 26 percent is the only part of the
land developed likely to change use or intensity of use according to
consumer demand.
   The floor space that can be built on this land is, however, severely
limited by floor-area ratio regulations. In Ahmedabad, the floor-area
ratio is uniformly limited to 1.8 square meters of floor space per
square meter of land (with some areas as low as 1) in most of the
city. This limit is imposed on residential and commercial areas alike,
whether in the city center or in faraway suburbs.
   Slums and villages account for only 5 percent of the developed
land. But they serve a much larger populace. For example, the ratio
of slum area over total area built before 2000 was 7 percent—but
people living in slums in 2000 represented 35 percent of Ahmedabad’s
population.
   Villages are not bound by the development regulations constrain-
ing formal residential areas. The land within informally developed
areas—slums and village extensions—is allocated purely through
markets. Whether the original settlers in slums were squatters or
paid for the land, a market was immediately created, and properties
are now constantly traded. Change of land use, from residential to
commercial, for instance, is also dictated by market forces. So is the
allocation of land for street and open space.

The allocation of land submitted to market forces

For urban land submitted to market forces, commercial and busi-
ness users will usually outbid residential users in the most accessible
location. The higher income groups will in turn outbid lower income
groups in the more environmentally desirable locations. The lowest
                                                      Alain Bertaud   403


income group that can still afford formal housing will be able to
afford only the residual areas. And the households that are too poor
to afford the minimal regulatory norms defining formal construction
will have to settle in informal areas.
   Low-income residents may be able to outbid higher income
groups by consuming less land per household, as in many U.S. cities,
but this possibility declines when low-income residents cannot afford
the higher construction costs of multistory building—that is, they
cannot substitute capital for land. Poorly designed regulations often
prevent low-income households from reducing their land consump-
tion and therefore cause them to be systematically outbid by higher
income groups. Their only alternative is to move into the slums in the
informally developed areas. While the density in slums is produced
by market forces, the total area developed informally and its location
depend more on historical accidents than on consumer choices and
market forces.

The transformation of land into floor space

A city is defined by its buildings and by the economic activities or
consumption in them. The end-product of urbanization is therefore
not land but floor space. This truism is often ignored because of the
difficulty of representing the third dimension on a map. Perhaps the
three-dimensional images of cities constantly updated on Google
Earth will change that.
    Land-use regulations usually restrict the floor space that can be
built on each parcel of commercial and residential land. Typically,
regulatory limits on floor-area ratios prevent higher income groups
and commercial users from building as tall a structure as they would
like (reducing their ability to substitute capital for land), forcing
them to consume more land than they would in the absence of regu-
lations. This regulatory constraint, by increasing the land area used
by commercial users and high-income groups, indirectly reduces the
area of land available for lower income groups.
    In the informal areas, the lack of regulation leads to intensive land
use, but the lowest income households either cannot afford the cost
of sturdy concrete construction required to build several floors or
their property rights are so ambiguous that they are reluctant to make
404 Converting Land into Affordable Housing Floor Space


the investment. They compensate for the inability to build multistory
buildings by minimizing plot size, open space, and road areas, even
reducing further their consumption of land.
   In Hanoi, where even poor households can afford to buy or rent
multistory buildings, informal areas have buildings with up to five
floors, multiplying the floor space affordable to low-income house-
holds. The examples of Hanoi and Bangkok suggest that a key factor
in creating affordable housing is removing the regulatory constraint
on floor-area ratios.
   Removing constraints on land supply—be they imposed by defi-
cient transport systems, poor land allocation practices, or arbitrary
normative regulations—has two main objectives: improving urban
productivity and improving the housing quality of the poor. Housing
affordability is thus linked directly to land supply.

The demand side: rethinking affordability

The traditional method for evaluating housing affordability is to
measure the ratio between the median housing price and the median
household income. It does not work well in cities with wide income
disparities and a large informal housing stock.
   Rapid changes in income distribution, as seen in India and in
many East Asian cities, further reduce the usefulness of the tradi-
tional normative approach. Government institutions usually define
“affordable housing” by minimum lot size, minimum floor size, and
minimum water and sewer infrastructure. The price of land becomes
the only dependent variable in the traditional “affordable housing”
equation, the values of all other variables having been fixed by norms
as rigid as they are arbitrary.
   Under the traditional approach, the government promotes the
building of so-called “affordable housing” on the cheapest land
possible—housing in the distant periphery of cities or in very
undesirable locations. In Gauteng, a massive state-subsidized hous-
ing program had spacious individual houses with well-designed
infrastructure and social services but—to save money on land—they
were built in distant locations that would have been considered
outside the land-supply area defined by the transport mode that the
beneficiaries could afford. The result has been costly and lengthy
                                                     Alain Bertaud   405


commutes, chronic unemployment, or both. The study of land
supply thus needs to be complemented by an understanding of the
land consumption for each income group.
    Every urban dweller consumes some urban land. In the same
city, some consume very little land, others a lot. Consuming very
little urban land is not in itself a bad thing and is not necessarily
caused by poverty. For instance, people living in luxury apartments
along Old Peak Road in Hong Kong SAR, China, consume about
4.5 square meters of land per person while slum dwellers in Sankar
Bhuvan Slum in Ahmedabad consume just a little more, or about
6.5 square meters per person (Figure 14.7). What is the real difference?
The luxury apartment dweller in Hong Kong SAR, China, can build
35 square meters of floor area per person on this 4.5 square meters
of land by living in a high-rise building. But the slum dweller in
Ahmedabad can build only 4.1 square meters of floor area on her
6.5 square meters of land—because the light construction she can
afford can support only a roof.
    Because apartment dwellers in Hong Kong SAR, China, can
spend enough to leverage the little land they consume into a large
area of floor space, they enjoy high environmental quality while con-
suming very little land. By contrast, Ahmedabad slum dwellers lack
the capital to build multistory dwellings on the little land they can
afford. As a result, the environmental quality of the dwelling of the
slum dweller is extremely low while consuming the same amount of
land as a high-income city dweller.
    The possibility of leveraging a small area of land into a large area
of floor is restricted in three ways: by income, by regulation, and by
access to finance. Only households that can afford to pay or borrow
for the minimum capital investment—represented, say, by the mini-
mum cost of about 25 square meters of concrete construction—can
leverage a small area of land into a spacious floor. This minimum
varies by country: it is around $5,000 in Ahmedabad and about
$30,000 in Hong Kong SAR, China. Poorer households that cannot
afford this cost have to live in dwellings whose areas are often even
smaller than the plot of land they can afford.
    Various government regulations fix minimum land consumption
per households, either directly by fixing a minimum plot size or
406 Converting Land into Affordable Housing Floor Space




Figure 14.7   Ahmedabad—typical slum layout: Sankar Bhuvan Shapur
Source: Author’s drawing and calculations based on 2010 survey conducted by the
Self Employed Women’s Association of India.


indirectly by fixing a maximum floor-area ratio (the proportion
between the land area and the floor area that can be built on it).
   Arbitrary regulations fixing minimum land consumption affect
the poor differently than the rich. Poor households that cannot afford
the minimum land consumption fixed by regulations are forced to
live in informal housing. More affluent households are often forced
by regulations to consume more land than they would in the absence
of regulations.
   Evaluating current household land and floor space consumption
standards and the prices corresponding to these standards in different
                                                     Alain Bertaud   407


locations is the only way to evaluate housing demand and current
affordability. The search for affordable housing should include
measures to improve the existing low-income housing stock and to
increase the supply of new low-cost housing. The flow of new low-
cost housing might come from developing new greenfields, recycling
older housing stock, or densifying existing residential areas.
   Housing is a continuum: different income groups with different
mobility compete for the same land. So it is necessary to have a com-
plete view of the current consumption characteristics of all income
groups. Detailed housing consumption surveys by income group
should be conducted yearly to provide an updated overall view of the
market. On the supply side, the regulatory constraints on the richer
households, obliging them to consume more land than they demand,
have a negative effect on the poorest.
   Over the years, the income distribution of households will be
constantly changing. Some who were poor will become middle class,
but they might be partially replaced at the bottom of the income
scale by poor people moving into the city.
   The stock of housing units will also change each year because of
new additions (often at the top of the income scale), while some
of the older stock will be demolished. The inability to increase the
supply of new units, usually because of land supply bottlenecks, will
raise housing prices and reduce housing consumption for all, with
more dramatic consequences for the lowest income groups. Due to
new land and housing flows, it is essential as part of the land supply
quantification to project the change in housing stock and to compare
it with the changes in the number of households in each income
group. Cities usually monitor the number of new formal units being
built each year, but they often fail to monitor the drop in the existing
housing stock due to demolitions or land-use changes and the growth
or contraction of the informal sector.

Housing policy should be based on a complete
understanding of the land supply process and the current
pattern of land consumption among income groups

We have seen the complexity of the land supply process in Ahmedabad.
Over the years, different cities have developed different ways of
408 Converting Land into Affordable Housing Floor Space


transforming rural land into urban floor space. No “best practice”
in supplying urban land can be relevant to all the traditions, culture,
and topography that make the world’s cities so different and attrac-
tive. It is possible, however, to recommend a method for analyzing
the land supply process quantitatively and defining the limits of the
potential land supply based on existing transport modes and their
speed. This quantitative analysis could help establish priorities and
eliminate the practices and regulations that have fewer benefits and
higher costs.

Get the numbers right on supply and demand

On the supply side, most cities are now using geographic information
system (GIS) technology to map existing land use, making it possible
to extract fairly accurately the area of land consumed by different
users. GIS and satellite imagery allow establishing a complete “land
accounting” system that can detect the inefficient and costly leaks in
the land development process. The unresponsiveness of land supply
to demand caused by identifiable bottlenecks is the major obstacle
to land development, reducing housing consumption for all and
especially the poor.
   Establishing the potential supply of land based on the commuting
speed of income groups is also essential. Many housing policy failures
have been caused by the notion that the cheapest land, whatever its
accessibility, is the best location for the poor.
   The patterns of land consumption for business, industries, and
housing also have to be analyzed. Both technology and rising house-
hold incomes can dramatically change these patterns of consumption.

Audit regulations and discard ones that impose high constraints
but few benefits

Land-use regulations are the result of years of government action
reacting to the perceived problems of the moment. As the city econ-
omy changes and the understanding of what makes a city productive
evolves, many regulations lose their rationale. But nothing is more
resilient and long-lived than an obsolete regulation.
                                                     Alain Bertaud   409


   Many land regulations contradict each other. Some increase land
consumption: minimum plot size, maximum floor-area ratio, mini-
mum number of parking spaces per dwelling. Others reduce land
supply: green belt, restriction of land conversion from agricultural
to urban.
   The combination of regulations that boost land consumption with
those that reduce land supply greatly increases the price of land to the
detriment of all households, more dramatically for the lowest income
households.
   Weeding out obsolete land regulations would itself go a long
way toward improving the housing consumption of lower income
groups. Other actions will be needed, of course, such as investing in
infrastructure and transport to increase the supply of land accessible
from any point in a city in less than one hour.


Define a supply-side policy program

Housing standards could be dramatically improved for the poor if
many supply-side barriers were removed—or at least reduced—and if
the spatial aspect of housing, particularly the transport cost for each
location, is taken into account when designing a land and housing
policy. Several actions are available in different sectors:

• Transport. Increase the land supply by expanding the reach of infra-
  structure and the speed and convenience of transport. Calculate
  current land supply based on the dominant mode of transport
  used by income groups.
• Management of public land holdings. Audit and map govern-
  ment land holdings, and eventually reconvert some underused
  government land into salable land or use it as a public good (parks,
  for instance).
• Regulatory reform. Remove some of the regulatory constraints on
  commercial and high-income groups that artificially increase their
  land consumption. Remove some regulatory constraints mostly
  affecting low-income groups to increase the number of households
  that can afford formal housing (reviewing minimum plot sizes,
  apartment sizes, parking requirements, and so on).
410 Converting Land into Affordable Housing Floor Space


• Informal areas and slums. Monitor the areas, densities, growth
  rates, and land-use standards of informal areas. Consider formal-
  izing these areas as parallel markets where land-use rules are purely
  demand-driven instead of normative.

Urban planners need to take full responsibility for the
timely delivery of buildable land to markets

Urban planners have the merit of playing an operational role in city
management; they are key actors in the design of infrastructure and
urban regulations. They often consider their role as “designer” of
more efficient and more “livable” cities. But they also often ignore
the role of markets—and in particular the demand from households
and firms for land and floor space. As a result, the plans they prepare
lose relevance and fail to be implemented, particularly when they fail
to monitor the growth of informal land markets that are the only
source of land for the poor.
    To play a more efficient role, planners should monitor the supply
and demand for land and floor space. They should monitor the
supply of developable land, defined by the area accessible through
the transport network in less than one hour. They should ensure the
elasticity of the supply of land by expanding the reach and the speed
of the transport network when prices and household incomes are
rising. Failure to do this inevitably results in high land prices that
become unaffordable to the poor and even the middle class.
    Mapping, monitoring, and eventually expanding the developable
land supply is of course not sufficient to make it readily buildable.
Developable land is a raw input that needs to be processed before it
can be used and built on. In the great majority of cities, the respon-
sibility for processing undeveloped land into developed buildable
land is fragmented among multiple departments, acting in successive
sequence and with few time constraints and no sense of urgency.
Municipal services having to give their approval for land develop-
ment often prefer to prevent or slow down land development to avoid
potential problems rather than to try to solve problems as rapidly as
possible. They tend to see developers as mostly greedy creators of
negative externalities, rather than as necessary intermediaries in the
delivery of land and floor space to households and firms.
                                                          Alain Bertaud    411


   So, to increase the yearly flow of land put on the market, it is
necessary to infuse municipal services with a sense of urgency. In
rapidly developing cities, mayors should publicly fix a yearly target
area for developed land delivered to users. To implement the land
supply target, a municipal land manager should be in charge of
following up the stream of land being transformed from developable
to fully developed. This would include the preparatory infrastructure
work completed by the municipality as well as the various regulatory
approvals. The land manager should become the equivalent of a
factory manager—fully responsible for the output of a factory. To
my knowledge, no official fulfills this role in any city. In most cities,
the numerous planning officials involved in the transformation of
land have the power to slow down the process; none has the power to
accelerate it.
   The absence of municipal accountability in the supply of urban
land made available to the market contributes to the inelastic supply
of land when prices increase, making land and eventually housing
unaffordable for a large portion of the urban population. Only when
the monitoring and delivery of developable land would become a
normal municipal tasks will cities see a decrease in the share of the
total population that have to rely on the informal sector to have
access to land and housing.

Notes
 1. An economist would argue that the land price can qualify as high only
    when compared with something else, such as the price of construction
    or the median household income. But for most urban planners land
    price is always too high.
 2. For Stockholm, see Cervero (1998); for Seoul, new towns see Lee and
    Ahn (2005).
 3. In a polycentric city, all else equal, the maximum travel distance of a
    worker located in the periphery would have to equal the diameter of
    the built-up area (assumed to be a circle), rather than the radius, if jobs
    are concentrated in the center. Alternatively, speeds would have to
    double to cover the same area.
 4. To my knowledge, only the government of South Africa taxes itself for
    the land it occupies (see Figure 14.2).
412 Converting Land into Affordable Housing Floor Space


 5. The acquisition price for eminent domain is fixed at “jantri rates,”
    which are administrative land values fixed by the Gujarat state govern-
    ment for tax purposes. It is usually much below the market value, even
    with the 30 percent bonus usually added to it.


Bibliography
Angel, Shlomo. 2011. Making Room for a Planet of Cities. Washington, DC:
   Lincoln Institute.
Annez, Patricia Clarke, Alain Bertaud, Marie-Agnes Bertaud, Bijal Bhatt,
   Chirayu Bhatt, Bimal Patel, and Vidyadhar Phatak. 2012. “Ahmedabad:
   More But Difficult Government for ‘Slum Free’ and Livable Cities.”
   Policy Research Working Paper 6267, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Cervero, Robert. 1998. The Transit Metropolis: A Global Inquiry. Washington,
   DC: Island Press.
Lee, Chang-Moo, and Kun-Hyuck Ahn. 2005. “Five New Towns in the
   Seoul Metropolitan Area and Their Attractions in Non-Working Trips:
   Implications on Self-Containment of New Towns.” Habitat International
   29: 647–66.
McKenzie, Brian, and Melanie Rapino. 2011. Commuting in the United
   States: 2009. American Community Survey Reports, U.S. Census
   Bureau, Suitland, MD.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD).
   2011. OECD Territorial Reviews: The Gauteng City-Region, South Africa.
   Paris: OECD Publishing.
Prud’homme, Rémy, and Chang-Woon Lee. 2009. Size, Sprawl, Speed and
   the Efficiency of Cities. Observatoire de l’Économie et des Institutions
   Locales, Grenoble, France.
15


Housing and Urbanization in Africa
Unleashing a Formal Market Process


Paul Collier and Anthony J. Venables*




The accumulation of decent housing matters both because of the
difference it makes to living standards and because of its centrality to
economic development.
   The consequences for living standards are far-reaching. In addi-
tion to directly conferring utility, decent housing improves health
and enables children to do homework. It frees up women’s time and
enables them to participate in the labor market (Franklin 2011).
More subtly, a home and its environs affect identity and self-respect.
Commentary on the emergence of an African middle class has become
common, but it is being defined in terms of discretionary spending
and potential for consumer markets. A politically more salient defini-
tion of a middle class would be in terms of home ownership and the
consequent stake in economic stability.
   The role of housing in economic development is perhaps not
sufficiently recognized. Investment in housing is often regarded with

    * Thanks to Bob Buckley, Richard Manning, Steve Malpezzi, and participants
in the World Bank conference on “Rethinking Cities” for helpful comments.
414 Housing and Urbanization in Africa


disquiet due to its association with speculative property bubbles and
financial instability. Yet in developed economies, housing is by far
the most important tangible asset. For example, the total private
wealth of households in Britain is $15 trillion, of which $5.5 trillion
is property, overwhelmingly housing (ONS 2009). The aggregate
process of national asset accumulation is thus fundamentally bound
up with investment in housing.
    Not only is housing the single most important asset, it completely
dominates an economically strategic asset class. Investment is con-
ventionally disaggregated by agency and type. Agency distinguishes
between private and public, the two generally being complements.
Private investment is usually seen as particularly important for devel-
opment because private agents are more likely to discipline their
decisions. A further disaggregation of private agency is between firms
and households, the two having different objectives and different
access to finance. Housing is overwhelmingly a private, household
investment.
    Investment by type disaggregates into equipment and structures,
these also being complements. In low-income countries, this dis-
tinction is particularly important because equipment is imported,
whereas structures are internationally non-tradable and so must be
produced domestically. Investment in structures thus has a counter-
part in the output of the construction sector. And unlike equipment,
it can be frustrated by failures in either domestic demand or domestic
supply.
    Combining the two key analytic distinctions, housing dominates
the category of private, household, non-tradable capital. Yet with
regard to African investment, this massive and distinctive category
has received far less analytic and empirical attention than either pub-
lic investment or investment by firms.
    A further respect in which housing matters for economic devel-
opment is through the labor market. Construction creates employ-
ment, particularly because housing is typically more labor-intensive
than other structures (such as public infrastructure and commercial
property) and considerably more so than equipment, which in
Africa is imported. As the major asset class and labor intensive to
produce, investment in housing has the potential to make a sub-
stantial contribution to aggregate labor demand. Even in high-
                                Paul Collier and Anthony J. Venables   415


income countries, this is apparent during periodic housing booms.
However, in low-income countries that are only partly through their
urbanization process, housing has the potential for prolonged and
substantial employment demand, as in the 19th-century miracle cities
of Manchester, Chicago, and Melbourne. During the peak decades,
their main activity was their own construction (Belich 2009). In
addition to this direct effect, housing (together with transport
services) determines the ease with which workers can access employ-
ment and firms servicing local markets can reach consumers.
    In Africa, the process of formal investment in housing for ordinary
urban households has yet to get under way. The typical household
lives in a low-cost shack, likely to have been self-built. It will not
comply with official building standards. Rights of occupancy, though
probably robust, will be informal, and the building will have been
self-financed. The shack will be located in a shantytown, which
itself is informal: the local government will not have provided roads,
electricity, street lighting, water, or sewerage.
    Housing provision in the 21st-century African city contrasts
with 19th-century London and many other such cities (see Dyos
1968; Porter 1995). The fundamental conditions of migration and
income were similar. Between 1800 and 1900, London grew from a
population of 1–6 million, as peasants migrated to the city. Further,
per capita income levels in 19th-century London were compa-
rable to those in 21st-century urban Africa. Yet housing growth in
19th-century London, and indeed throughout Europe, remained
largely formal. The new housing for the English peasants who
migrated to London was built by small firms. Typically, the free-
hold on the land would be owned by one of the great estates, which
therefore had the incentive to plan the development process. This
was inequitable, as the estates captured much of the value of land
appreciation but had the advantage of creating incentives to invest
in local public goods and services. The estates would install basic
infrastructure—such as a road network on a tract of land—and then
sell off leaseholds in smaller plots to building companies.1 A building
company might build a row of houses, constructed using standard-
ized architectural plans and labor-intensive techniques. Only around
20 percent of houses were owner-occupied, most occupants being
tenants. Their landlords were usually not large corporations; instead,
416 Housing and Urbanization in Africa


they were older people who invested their retirement savings in a few
properties, living in one of them and renting out the others. This
produced three desirable side effects. The housing was professionally
built to standard designs and therefore easy to value. Its construction
generated jobs, and there was mixed occupancy by tenants, owner-
occupiers, and landlords, tending to produce both better mainte-
nance of the housing stock and greater social cohesion.
   This chapter examines why such a process has not happened in
Africa. Our hypothesis is that the peculiarity of housing exposes
it to multiple points of vulnerability not found together either in
private consumer goods or in other capital goods. Each point of
vulnerability can be addressed by appropriate government policies,
but addressing only one or two of them has little payoff if the oth-
ers remain unresolved. Further, the vulnerabilities faced by housing
are the responsibility of distinct branches of government, with little
natural collaboration. Unblocking multiple impediments to housing
therefore requires coordination that can come only from the head of
government: ministries of housing have neither the political weight
nor the analytic capacity to play this role effectively. Yet in Africa,
housing has never received such high political priority. This in turn is
because the centrality of housing in well-being and of housing invest-
ment in development has not been sufficiently appreciated.
   In 19th-century London and the other cities in which adequate
housing was built by an efficient market-led process, success rested
on simultaneously resolving five potential vulnerabilities. First, for-
mal housing was affordable. Building regulations were set at a level
appropriate for the level of income rather than based on some elite
notion of “desirable” accommodation. As a result, the building costs
of adhering to formal standards were not pushed so high as to induce
informality: they could actually be enforced. Second, there was clarity
in legal rights. Leaseholders had enforceable title and could, in turn,
use title as collateral because there was a functioning legal process of
foreclosure. Landlords had clear rights to evict tenants for unpaid
rent: indeed, tenant security was week-to-week. Third, formality
and legality unleashed financial innovation. Banks have seldom been
able to provide finance for non-elite housing: their administrative
costs are too high. Instead, specialist housing finance organizations
(building societies) emerged, pulling in deposits from lower-income
                               Paul Collier and Anthony J. Venables   417


households and lending them to middle-income households with
low risk, thanks to the sound collateral—and consequently at
long maturities and low margins. Fourth, the benefits of housing
infrastructure—roads, water, and sewerage—were internalized by a
coordinating authority and were so provided in advance of housing
construction. While efficient, this was achieved by the highly regres-
sive mechanism of ownership of huge tracts of land by the great ducal
estates. Finally, housing combined decent conditions for living with
opportunities for income. Reconciling residence with opportunities
depends on lenient zoning rules and effective transport connectivity
to the rest of the city, which was provided by the underground and
surface rail networks.
   These five vulnerabilities form the organizing framework for
this chapter. We argue that, in conjunction, they have stifled the
development of the formal private sector, particularly for low- and
middle-income households. While it has become conventional to
regard upgrading the existing stock and the flow of informal housing
construction as the only practical solution to Africa’s housing needs,
we explore the complementary approach of reestablishing formality.
A well-functioning formal sector dominates informality by reaping
the benefits of scale, continuity, and legality.

Affordability of construction

Affordability of construction is a prior condition to mass household
investment in housing. Affordability can only be assessed relative to
income and the share of budgets that ordinary households are willing
to devote to housing. For example, in Dar es Salaam, the typical
rental rate per room is around $10 a month, and in Dakar around
$16. So, a modest four-room home (equivalent to the “two-up, two-
down” of 19th-century Britain) would be affordable, albeit perhaps
for multi-occupant use, in the repayment range of $500–800 a year.
What this implies for a viable purchase cost depends on the real
interest rate and terms of financing, but it is difficult to see such
a repayment rate supporting a home costing more than around
$15,000. This, of course, includes the price of land, which in Dar es
Salaam on the informal market is currently around $5,000 for a plot of
300 square meters. Clearly, such a plot could support more than
418 Housing and Urbanization in Africa


one small house, but given current land availability, land costs per
house could not be reduced much below $2,000. The unit costs
of house construction depend partly on building standards, partly
on input costs, and partly on the organization of the construction
industry.

Building standards

All cities need building standards: London has had them since the
early Middle Ages (1216), when thatched roofs were banned due to
the fire hazard.2 Because housing investment is to an extent putty clay,
it is appropriate for standards to anticipate rising incomes. However,
the most important characteristic to anticipate may well be the need
for rising density. Flats, while initially more expensive to build than
houses, become more cost-effective at higher densities. Thus, it may
be more valuable to force an increase in the ratio of flats to houses
than in the building standards of individual homes.
    When standards are set appropriately, they function as a form of
“mental shorthand,” which reduces decision costs. However, in 1947
Britain suddenly and substantially raised its housing standards (the
Parker-Morris standards) and implemented them through the Town
and Country Planning Act. This was part of a much larger agenda
of social reform introduced by the British government of 1945–50.
Fortuitously, Britain shared in Europe’s “golden decades” of growth,
with household incomes rising rapidly to levels at which the new
standards were broadly appropriate.
    Unfortunately for Anglophone Africa, the British government
promptly applied the 1947 Town and Country Planning Act in its
colonies. Hence, on independence, African governments inherited
building standards that were inappropriate for their level of income.
This was not immediately apparent because in the early 1960s African
cities were still small and occupied predominantly by well-paid gov-
ernment officials and expatriates. Further, it would have been an act
of extraordinary courage and insight for newly installed governments
to lower standards. The new African political elite wanted to join
modernity, not to dilute it. And so Africa was stuck with building
regulations that, had they applied to 19th-century London, would
probably have frustrated formal housing for ordinary households.
                                Paul Collier and Anthony J. Venables   419


    Regulations cover building standards, such as wall thickness, room
size, and depth of foundations, and also the minimum plot size. For
example, in Nairobi, the minimum legal plot size is one-sixteenth of
an acre, unaffordable for ordinary households. These regulations were
not only revised down but also inevitably conveyed the impression
to African regulatory authorities that modernization would require
that standards be raised from time to time. Were the standards of
1947 to be good enough indefinitely? Hence, for example, in Dar es
Salaam the minimum plot size is 500 square meters, but the authori-
ties are discussing whether to raise it to 700. In East Asia, authorities
took a more independent view. For example, in the 1980s, Thailand
reduced minimum housing standards.3
    How out of line were the standards of the 1947 British Town and
Country Planning Act with African incomes? They were ambitious
in relation to British incomes as of 1947, and during the 1980s some
aspects of them were seen as so excessive that they were revised down.
In purchasing power parity terms, African per capita income is less
than a twentieth of British incomes as of 1970 (a date by which the
standards were probably reasonable). How long it will take Africa
to raise per capita incomes 20-fold is not amenable to forecasting,
but it is far longer than any reasonable horizon for the durability of
basic housing.
    Perhaps a more reliable indication that regulations are excessive
is that housing construction has bifurcated, with regulations being
ignored in the informal market, which caters to ordinary households.
Elite homes are individually designed and adhere to building stan-
dards. Ordinary people live in informal housing, which does not
adhere to costly building standards, and the design of which is in
consequence idiosyncratic. An important consequence of informal-
ity is that such housing is hard to price. It is non-standard, and key
aspects of its quality, such as the depth of foundations, cannot be
observed. In turn, being hard to value impedes the resale market and
means that it would need to be heavily discounted before it could be
used as collateral.
    There have been several attempts around Africa to use formal firms
for low-cost housing. In Mozambique, the “low-cost” housing ended
up so expensive that it became upper-income housing. In South
Africa, housing costs were kept low, but this was achieved using land
420 Housing and Urbanization in Africa


that was remote from centers of employment and therefore cheap.
In Angola, the government resorted to Chinese firms to construct
a new city. However, even with Chinese workers and methods, the
homes ended up costing between $50,000 and $100,000 and so were
beyond the reach of ordinary households. Yet the costs of decent
housing need not be so high. In Mexico, where per capita incomes
are much higher than in Africa, mass housing—typically around
800,000 units a year—has been provided by the private sector at a
unit cost of around $35,000. A pilot project by Tanga Cement in Dar
es Salaam, using modern techniques of pre-casting and four-story
construction, suggests unit costs of around $15,000.

Unit costs of inputs

The key inputs into housing are land, material inputs, skilled and
unskilled labor, and finance.
    In the absence of market imperfections, the cost of land should be
determined predominantly by three fundamentals: its distance from
the city center, the population of the city, and per capita income.4
However, African cities abound in market imperfections for urban
land. We discuss land rights in a later section, but here we note that
because very little urban land is fully marketable, markets are thin
and prices are inflated. Further, in many countries there are few other
inflation-protected domestic assets, so asset demand is disproportion-
ately skewed towards urban land, some of it speculative. The wealthy
elite are often from the political class rather than entrepreneurs—and
so are not well placed to keep their wealth in self-owned enterprises.
Stock markets are underdeveloped, and in any case weak corporate
governance makes minority shareholdings in other enterprises risky.
Further, the political class has a comparative advantage in land specu-
lation because it is in a privileged position to anticipate economic
development and the granting of planning permissions.
    Material inputs, such as cement, have been surprisingly expensive
in Africa, typically around three times the world average price. This
is due largely to dysfunctional ports that provide considerable natural
protection, the uncompetitive organization of domestic production,
and the hostile climate for domestic business activity. For example,
Aliko Dangote, the richest individual in Africa, with a fortune
                                 Paul Collier and Anthony J. Venables   421


estimated at $11 billion, founded his business empire on cement
imports to West Africa before going into domestic production
(The Nigerian Voice 2011). In Mozambique, building sand is reported
to be imported despite a 2,000-kilometer coastline.
   Whereas unskilled labor in Africa is abundant and fairly cheap,
skilled construction labor is very scarce. This reflects decades of little
investment in structures and a construction industry small relative to
gross domestic product (GDP). A manifestation of this shortage is
the importing of foreign skilled construction workers—for example,
welders in Zambia and Chinese across the continent. The state has
withdrawn from training skilled manual workers, and firms may
limit training because of the historically volatile nature of demand.
   Finance for the sort of small firms that would build low-cost hous-
ing for ordinary households has been expensive, to the extent that
it has been available at all, because of wide spreads in the banking
system. In turn, this has reflected an uncompetitive financial market,
crowding out by government borrowing, and high risks of default.5

Industrial organization

The organization of the construction industry is also bifurcated. Elite
homes are constructed by foreign construction companies using
capital-intensive techniques and imported materials. The firms that
operate in Africa also operate in the Gulf States, and their unit costs
are far beyond the budgets of ordinary African households. As an
indication of the irrelevance of such firms to the housing needs of
ordinary people, the largest housing construction firm in Ghana
claims to have built around 3,500 houses over the past decade.
    By contrast, ordinary urban housing is largely self-built to ad
hoc personal designs. This compounds idiosyncrasy and hence the
difficulty of valuation. Largely missing are small but formal private
building firms employing a mix of unskilled and skilled labor, able to
raise formally the finance required to buy a plot and build houses on
it, constructed to standardized, architect-prepared designs, and com-
plying with building standards. It is unlikely that there are significant
direct impediments to the emergence of such firms, so the most likely
explanation for their scarcity is that the other problems discussed in
this chapter limit demand for their services.
422 Housing and Urbanization in Africa


   What policies would help bring unit costs down? The starting point
might be a realistic estimate of affordability generated from urban
budget survey data. While the results would differ by city, they would
reset norms, forcing difficult tradeoffs to the fore. A similar exercise
could price the minimum cost of complying with current building
standards. A discrepancy between these numbers would force policy
discussion. The cost chain could then be benchmarked, component
by component, on costs in low-income countries elsewhere in the
world, again making differences apparent. Other approaches are to
discuss with small, formal building firms the key impediments to
lower costs and to undertake quantitative surveys of firms’ cost and
productivity differences.

Legal rights

Legal rights affect the housing market in three respects: the owner-
ship, security and marketability of land rights; the extent to which
housing can function as collateral; and the rights of tenants relative
to landlords.

Land rights

Urbanization creates value, and rising density increases productiv-
ity. Because the effect is location-specific, much of the increase in
value accrues to the owners of urban land. The growth of cities is a
classic coordination phenomenon, and so the enhanced value is not
readily attributable to the actions of any single agent. But coordina-
tion, whether planned or spontaneous, is to a considerable extent the
result of public action. Hence, there are reasonable ethical grounds
for assigning the ownership of value addition to a city authority as
the representative of the residents who have collectively generated it.
This has been the strategy in Chinese urbanization that has enabled
the finance of urban infrastructure. By contrast, as noted above, in
Africa the ownership of prime urban land has often been appropri-
ated by politicians on a speculative basis. This appropriation is recent,
as rights of possession of rural land did not extend to marketability
and were often further circumscribed by being partially under the
authority of chiefs. In turn, the authority vested in chiefs reflected
                                Paul Collier and Anthony J. Venables   423


their functions as leaders of their communities. This history rein-
forces the ethical case for socializing much of the increase in urban
land values. However, the most straightforward way to capture these
land value gains would be not to reassign land ownership but to use
the tax system.
   While African urban land rights have often been privatized, they
have seldom been clarified. In some cities, such as Freetown in Sierra
Leone, a history of dysfunctional registration has left land ownership
radically unclear. The same piece of land may have several claimants,
each supported by some sort of documentation. Clearly, the number
of claimants to a plot is likely to increase in response to construction
because ownership becomes more valuable. The rights to property
constructed on the plot follow directly from the rights to the plot.
Resolution of these disputes through the court system is neither
reliable nor swift. Indeed, the legal basis for settlement is often still
in dispute. For example, in Ghana lawyers have been attempting
to resolve the rules of urban land rights for four decades. In other
cities, de facto ownership is accepted, but the owner does not have
legal title. These weaknesses in land rights make both land and the
property constructed on it less marketable and make both less able to
function as collateral.
   There is a tension here between the perspective of lawyers, whose
aim is to resolve complexity by deducing the strongest claim to
ownership, and that of economists, whose aim is to establish clear
marketable rights as swiftly as possible. A possible resolution is to
radically increase the taxation of value addition so that ownership
becomes less important. From this base, it might be possible to follow
an approach pioneered by the government of Uganda in 1992 to
resolve the property claims of Asian Ugandans who had been expelled
by Idi Amin. All claims to urban land and property were required to
be registered by a set date, after which no further claims would be
valid. Then, all cases of multiple claims were settled transparently at
a later date by an ad hoc court.

Property as collateral

Clarity in plot rights, though necessary for property to function as
collateral, is not sufficient. The function of collateral depends on the
424 Housing and Urbanization in Africa


ability of a creditor to foreclose on the property in defined circum-
stances of arrears. This, in turn, depends on the law and the reliability
and speed with which courts implement it. The common experience
has been for delays in court proceedings and judicial corruption to
make foreclosure unreliable. However, reform is feasible. Ethiopia
has recently introduced draconian legislation that is being enforced
in its courts whereby creditors can foreclose after only a few months
of mortgage arrears.

Tenancy

Tenancy is likely to be more affordable than ownership for most urban
households, though there appears to be considerable variation among
African cities. Purchase may well not be optimal for the median
urban household, yet owner-occupation has usually been the policy
goal. However, absentee landlordism is often dysfunctional. An ideal
model might be for households above mean wealth—for example,
those who have accumulated savings for retirement—to own a few
houses in a settlement, living in one and renting out the rest.
   In many countries, tenant and landlord rights have been subject to
long political cycles. When tenants are in a majority, governments are
inclined to legislate in favor of rent controls and tenancy protection.
As buy-to-rent investment becomes unviable, formal tenancy gradu-
ally diminishes so that at some point the scarcity of such accommo-
dation induces changes in the law. In much of urban Africa, there is
a well-functioning formal rental market for expatriates, but that for
ordinary households has largely informalized in response to gener-
ous tenant protection. For example, in Nairobi tenants with rent of
less than $60 a month have enhanced rights, and landlords cannot
raise rents. A realistic approach to reforming tenancy law may be
to grandfather in tenancy contracts but, for new tenancies, to allow
landlords to write fixed term contracts and to repossess property for
non-payment of rent.
   In sum, the confusing nature of urban land rights in Africa
reflects the continent’s recent urbanization and the very slow and
confusing evolution of rural land rights. In societies with few other
assets and a long and recent attachment to the soil, land rights are
inevitably politically sensitive. Governments have until recently
                                Paul Collier and Anthony J. Venables   425


lacked legitimate authority to resolve them. This is widely perceived
as an immovable impediment around which housing policy must
navigate, rather than as a fixable problem.

Financial innovation

Housing finance is needed both for the short-term support of the
construction phase and the long-term process of purchase.
   Banks normally provide the working capital for construction
firms. In Africa, banks would probably regard lending to small,
formal building firms for low-income housing as being too risky.
This perception may, however, stem from some other underlying
risk, such as the difficulty faced by ordinary households in financing
house purchases. Were these other impediments to be addressed, the
lack of working capital might resolve itself.
   To estimate the finance that would be needed for an ordinary
household to buy a decent home, we make some assumptions about
viable debt service and the cost of a house. Recall that based on
typical rental rates in African cities, payments of interest and prin-
ciple would be affordable to the occupants of informal housing
at around $500–800 a year. Suppose that the unit cost of decent
housing could be reduced to around $15,000. Then, a mortgage of
around two-thirds of the cost of the house would be viable at an
annual repayment rate of around 5–8 percent. What are the impedi-
ments to such terms?
   In 19th-century Britain, urbanization triggered innovation in the
mortgage market in the form of building societies. They were able
to outperform banks because they had much lower administrative
costs and much lower risks and so could work on narrower spreads.
Their lower costs reflected their specialization in long-term, low-risk
lending. The setup costs of a loan could be spread over many years,
and default was limited by good collateral. Inflation was very low, so
nominal interest rates could be low. As a result, the repayment of a
loan was not artificially brought forward by the erosion in real terms
of the principle. With low administrative costs and a substantial
branch network, building societies were able to lend at repayment
rates of within this range of 5–8 percent a year. They were also able
to build a large deposit base from ordinary savers. While lending
426 Housing and Urbanization in Africa


very long and borrowing short was potentially a recipe for a run
on deposits, the conservative business model protected them from
insolvency, and the central bank protected them from illiquidity. It
was the banks, rather than the building societies, that faced runs on
their deposits.
   Although some African cities have building societies, they cater to
either high-end housing or to civil servants. Except in the Franc Zone,
inflation is periodically fairly high, so that on conventional interest
rate practices the principle is at times rapidly eroded. Such high and
variable inflation makes 5–8 percent repayment rates completely
unviable on conventional lending models. Typical terms on African
“affordable” mortgages are an interest rate of 22 percent and a term
of only 10 years. Thus, in the first year of the loan the repayment rate
is around 25–30 percent of the amount borrowed. Unsurprisingly,
such “affordable” mortgages only cater to a tiny income elite. Also
unsurprisingly, defaults are typically concentrated in the first two
years of the loan.
   A common policy response has been to place ceilings on inter-
est rates or to offer subsidized public mortgages. For example, the
Nigerian government has been providing mortgages at 6 percent at
a time when the market interest rate is 18 percent. This kills the
possibility of a private market and would be fiscally ruinous at scale.
   A more viable way of overcoming this impediment might be to
index-link both the principle and the repayments. Such an innova-
tion is not currently feasible because it would require indexes in
which both borrowers and lenders could have confidence. To build
such confidence, one might subject government-produced indices to
regular and well-publicized independent verification by a respected
authority, such as the International Monetary Fund. For example, an
overall repayment rate of 8 percent would accommodate a real inter-
est rate of 3 percent, a repayment of principle starting at 3 percent,
and an administrative charge of 2 percent. This would be radically
more affordable than current practice and would reduce the risk of
early default. Of course, by shifting the structure of repayment into
the future, indexation at some point increases the risk of default in
later years. This can be guarded against both by setting a prudent
loan-to-value level and by macroeconomic management that con-
tains incipient housing bubbles.
                                Paul Collier and Anthony J. Venables   427


   Such mortgages would not impose high risks on lenders. Over the
20-year horizon appropriate for a mortgage, African wages should
rise relative to prices so that repayments become increasingly afford-
able. By both historical and current international standards, a real
interest rate of around 3 percent would be a reasonable return on a
loan that was both highly collateralized and affordable. While index-
ation of mortgages is rare in Africa, it has been common in Ghana for
20 years and appears to have worked well.
   Currently, there is much discussion of how mortgages might be
financed using innovations like securitization. However, the building
societies of 19th-century Britain did not depend on such innovations.
They were instead able to tap the small savings of ordinary house-
holds. There is some evidence that African households have similar
savings potential that has generally gone untapped. In the 1970s,
there were some highly successful initiatives through post offices
(Von Pischke 1975), but subsequent bouts of inflation wiped these
savings out. Recently, with the advent of e-banking, the scope for
mass savings has again been demonstrated: Kenya’s M-Pesa scheme is
serving as both a savings vehicle and a payments mechanism. There
is potential for building societies to use e-technology to harness this
depositor base. Indexation not only makes mortgages more afford-
able but also makes savings safer—and so is very popular with savers.
By matching the indexation of their mortgage assets with the index-
ation of their deposit liabilities, building societies could have a safer
business model.
   For housing to function as low-risk collateral, building societ-
ies need the conditions discussed in previous sections. Legal title
has to be clear, and court processes have to be reliable. Further,
systems whereby a lender can cheaply observe the credit history of
the borrower, whether there are other liens on the property, and the
actual occupancy of property (to establish whether it is tenanted) are
needed. Housing must be affordable, of standard design, and built to
enforced standards so that it can be accurately valued.

Supporting infrastructure

For housing to be decent, the property itself must be supported by
complementary physical infrastructure and social services: roads,
428 Housing and Urbanization in Africa


drainage, street lighting, electricity, water, and sewerage, together
with policing, schools, waste disposal, and health care.
    While the capital costs of some of these services may be provided
by property developers, ultimately supply is best undertaken pub-
licly. This is partly because many of the services are network goods
and so cannot be provided by each household individually and
partly because even where they can be supplied by each individual
household, as with sanitation, there are substantial externalities. At
African levels of income, the private benefits from installing good
sanitation in a house are generally insufficient to warrant the expense.
The public benefits imply that provision must be either subsidized or
enforced by compulsion.
    Cost-effective provision of physical infrastructure requires that it
be installed in advance of housing construction and then serviced.
If infrastructure is retrofitted, the costs may be prohibitive. For
example, the prolonged civil war in Sierra Leone induced massive
population growth in Freetown, while at the same time precluding
public investment in even the most basic urban infrastructure. As
a result, there is now a striking lack of roads. Since squatter-style
settlements have occupied the land on which roads might have been
built, even the legal processes required for clearance before road
construction are beyond current government administrative and
political capacities.
    These characteristics highlight the need to internalize local exter-
nalities, to finance long-lasting investment, and to plan ahead. The
three problems are interdependent. Without planning, population
growth will still occur, but settlements will be informal, so it will be
more difficult to build a tax base that internalizes externalities. Unless
externalities are internalized, neither services nor infrastructure
investment can be financed. Without credible prospects of finance,
there is little point in planning for services and infrastructure that
anticipate urbanization.
    Localized externalities of infrastructure can be captured and
thereby internalized, either through ownership of the land itself (as in
modern China and the estates of 19th-century London) or through a
local tax system. Where it is politically feasible, ownership is admin-
istratively less cumbersome and avoids distorting side-effects, but
                                Paul Collier and Anthony J. Venables   429


taxation is the more common approach. Urban planning is standard
around the world. The starting point is realistic forecasts of urban
population growth to provide estimates of demand for housing,
schooling, and health care. On this base, planners need to integrate
a view of likely local economic developments, including growth of
manufacturing locations and city center service activities. From this
demographic and economic information, the key decisions on new
residential locations and their supporting infrastructure follow.
   African governments have underinvested in both internalization
and urban planning. As noted above, Africa has not adopted the
Chinese model of government ownership of urban land, so that the
imperative is to achieve internalization by building local tax systems.
With few exceptions, notably recent developments in Lagos, African
city administrations have not generated significant tax revenue. As
a result, they have little political interest in local economic growth,
and infrastructure needs are unaffordable. This in turn rebounds on
urban planning: without finance, otherwise sensible plans become
idle dreams.
   Underlying the neglect of internalization and urban planning is
a deeper explanation: African governments have resisted urbaniza-
tion rather than embrace it. For example, the government of Liberia
has adopted a deliberate policy of refraining from infrastructure
investment in the recent settlement areas of Monrovia, as part of
a strategy of inducing urban residents to return to the countryside.
Underpinning this official resistance to urbanization is a political fear
of organized urban protest. Africa’s demographics imply that rapid
urbanization would create cities populated overwhelmingly by young
adults. The failure of African cities to generate sufficient opportuni-
ties for formal wage employment makes them potentially dangerous
concentrations of disaffected youth. Coincident with these political
fears of policy makers, donor agencies have emphasized rural devel-
opment as a priority for public spending. This bias stems from the
simplistic mantra that because the majority of poor people live in
rural areas, they should be the focus of public spending, and from
a deeper prejudice among non-governmental organizations (the key
political constituency for development agencies) against urban-based
economic growth.
430 Housing and Urbanization in Africa


Opportunities for income

It is not sufficient for housing to be of decent quality and to be prop-
erly serviced by public goods; housing must also enable households
to generate a viable income. At a minimum, new settlements must
be compatible with employment opportunities elsewhere in the
city. However, viable settlements should aspire to more than com-
patibility with exogenously generated employment opportunities.
Well-planned settlements can create employment in the provision of
local services and workshops, enabling most members of the resident
labor force to find employment within the locality. Hence, planning
for households to generate viable incomes involves both compatibil-
ity with exogenous employment opportunities and the generation of
endogenous local opportunities.
    Compatibility with exogenous opportunities involves physical
access to places of work, the accumulation of pertinent characteris-
tics for employability, and information about opportunities in other
parts of the city. Physical access is the most straightforward aspect
to plan. It requires that the location of settlements and transport
infrastructure permit commuting. This raises the initial cost of settle-
ments because it implies some combination of sites that are closer to
the city center and therefore have higher land prices and because it
implies more investment in transport infrastructure. The accumu-
lation of pertinent characteristics for employability is more subtle
but may also be important. The most obvious attributes are the hard
skills acquired through education and occupational training, both
of which can be directly planned and provided. The more nebulous
attributes come from the community attitudes and norms that form
in the settlement. For example, once unemployment becomes the
norm for young people, it will affect aspirations accordingly. Such
hysteresis effects are well-established—in both attitudes to work and
parental attitudes to education. These effects suggest that there may
be a premium on getting the early stages of new settlement right.
    In a new, large settlement, the generation of endogenous
opportunities for employment is likely to be more important than
compatibility with exogenous opportunities. Employment is most
often devoted to serving local markets. The fundamental aspects of
endogenous opportunities are density and regulation. The higher
                                 Paul Collier and Anthony J. Venables   431


the density of settlement, the greater the economic opportunities
per square mile. In typical low-income cities, this creates a tradeoff
between the economics of housing-as-accommodation and housing-
as-opportunity. The least expensive form of residence is single-story,
because greater height requires more substantial walls and more
sophisticated building. But the greatest opportunity per square mile
is through proximately spaced tower blocks. The market does not
handle this tradeoff well. The economic opportunity–generating
aspect of increased density is an externality, whereas the increased costs
of construction necessary for higher density are fully internalized by
the household. As a consequence, building heights and density will be
too low in an unregulated market. Density will increase as settlement
proceeds because land values will increase. But the putty-clay nature
of residential investment inhibits what would otherwise be a gradual
market-driven increase in height. Clearly, the informal settlements of
African cities have not yet induced investment in height. As a result,
the floor-area ratio of persons per hectare in the typical African city
is essentially flat over the spectrum of distance from the city center,
whereas the normal global pattern is for it to fall steeply as distance
increases. The floor-area ratio is substantially too low in areas close to
the center.6 This may be because of the other impediments discussed
above, such as finance or the lack of secure title, but it may also be due
to a coordination failure inherent in a market-driven process. At low
per capita incomes, low-rise residence may remain privately optimal,
because it never achieves a density that justifies writing off the fixed
costs of a low-rise and replacing it with a high-rise.
    Saunders (2010) suggests that from the social perspective, in
which the economic opportunity externalities of density are internal-
ized, the most appropriate choice along this tradeoff is blocks of five-
story buildings in which the ground floor is used for small businesses.
Five stories is the maximum height before the need for a lift, which
involves a quantum increase in costs. While this hypothesis is plau-
sible, it has not yet been researched. If it is correct, it would indicate
a substantial market failure in African cities, because structures in
informal settlements are generally only single-story.
    Inappropriate regulation can destroy the potential of high density,
as in many high-rise estates of the developed world that are zoned for
purely residential uses. While inappropriate regulation will constrain
432 Housing and Urbanization in Africa


employment generation, a city government can do much to promote
it. The market process is replete with local coordination failures and
externalities that astute official intervention can help offset. Local
marketplaces are themselves public goods. The weights, measures,
and hygiene practices adopted by local businesses benefit from public
standardization and verification. Local dispute settlement procedures
can reinforce contracts and reduce opportunism. And formalization
and certification of apprenticeships can enhance skill formation.
    The potential for damage and benefit inherent in public regulatory
policy at the city level mirrors the standard debate about national
industrial policies: a passive state is better than a predatory state but
worse than an astute developmental state. At the national level, the
conventional critique of the African regulatory policies adopted for
much of the post-independence era has been that they tended to
be predatory, in contrast with the developmental states of East Asia.
The same critique might apply to urban regulatory policies. Just as
Africa inherited inappropriately high building regulations, it might
have suffered a similar fate with zoning restrictions. However, the
informal settlements that have been the predominant process of
post-independence urban residential growth are usually beyond the
confines of the colonial city and seldom subject to effective zoning.
The key impact of urban regulatory policy toward settlement has
been to make it informal.

From failures of market coordination to failures of policy
coordination

African housing investment has been affected, directly and indirectly,
by public policies that have prevented the formal sector from provid-
ing housing that meets the needs of ordinary households. However,
these policies have not been enforced beyond the remit of the formal
sector. So, if informality were efficient, urban Africans would be well
housed. Informal builders would build decent homes cheaply, infor-
mal finance would finance them cheaply, informal dispute settlement
procedures would restrain opportunism, community processes would
coordinate to provide the public goods of settlement, and the mar-
ket would internalize the value of rising density. Yet ordinary urban
households are not well housed: the typical living quality provided
                                Paul Collier and Anthony J. Venables   433


by informal housing is pitiful and fails to provide the resident labor
force with sufficient proximate opportunities for decent incomes.
   Our message to Africa’s urban policy makers is not the need for
deregulation but the need for policy coordination. Housing invest-
ment on a large scale through formal channels requires a series of
supporting conditions. Unit construction costs in the formal sector
must be low enough to be affordable by ordinary urban households.
Legal title must be secure, be marketable, and support collateral and
rental. Finance must be available and affordable for both small con-
struction firms and mortgages. Infrastructure must be planned and
provided in advance of settlement. Residential services must come
swiftly after settlement. Both must be financed by capturing a share
of the value added to productivity by density. The location of settle-
ment, transport infrastructure, and public regulation must support
income opportunities, and each is not merely vulnerable to inept
policies but in need of appropriate policies.
   Not all impediments are important in all African cities. For exam-
ple, in Nairobi the constraints make the ownership of a property
unaffordable for ordinary households, even in an informal settlement,
In Dakar, most households own such property but find it difficult
to rent.
   We suggest that the persistence of multiple impediments is because
the payoff to policy reform in any one of these areas in isolation is
very limited, given that the others remain and will in aggregate be
binding. Since each is the responsibility of a different group of policy
makers, the rational strategy for each policy team is inaction. The
potential for urban housing can be unleashed only by a coordinated
push across a wide range of policy teams. This in turn requires that
housing policy be elevated to the highest political level. This has not
yet occurred, partly because of the bias against promoting urbaniza-
tion and partly because, as the informal nature of settlement became
established, formal policies became impotent and hence irrelevant.
Within African governments, ministries of housing largely restrict
their focus to the provision of housing to senior civil servants and
to the maintenance of inherited formal regulatory standards, which
conform to international practice. Meanwhile, among international
thinking on African housing policy, the prevailing view has become
that the priority is to help informal housing work better and to
434 Housing and Urbanization in Africa


upgrade infrastructure rather than to make formal housing invest-
ment work for ordinary households. While this is probably correct
given the confines of current policy discussion, such an approach
accepts the lack of formal market housing and the absence of coordi-
nation rather than confronting them.7
   Yet the political elevation of housing necessary for coordination
is no longer a forlorn goal. The post-apartheid government of South
Africa made decent housing a priority for its discretionary spending.
With revenues from the commodity booms, other African govern-
ments at last also have some discretionary income. Coincident with
these revenues, the Arab Spring in North Africa has focused concern
south of the Sahara on the well-being of their urban populations and
in particular on the need to provide jobs for young men. Affordable
housing built on a large scale using labor-intensive techniques by
small private construction firms is one of the few credible approaches
to a rapid expansion in jobs for this social group. Hence, housing
policy might now be able to achieve a political salience that has previ-
ously been infeasible.


Notes

 1. This secured a supply of local public goods, but citywide public goods,
    such as a complete sewerage system, were supplied only after the health
    scares of the mid-19th century and the development of effective city
    government—first with special purpose authorities and starting in
    1889 with the London City Council.
 2. Regulations were formalized in the London Building Act of 1667,
    which specified building materials and the width of streets. Surveyors
    were appointed to enforce the regulations (www.buildinghistory.org/
    regulations.shtml).
 3. Personal communication from Maya Hoek-Smit.
 4. Bertaud and Malpezzi (2003) present comparative work on urban
    density in 38 cities. Urban density gradients are prevalent in world
    cities but not in the two African cities in the sample, Cape Town
    and Johannesburg. We know of no systematic cross-country work on
    rent gradients.
 5. British building societies, which came to provide mortgage finance,
    started as societies of builders who pooled working capital.
 6. Personal communication from Steve Malpezzi.
                                 Paul Collier and Anthony J. Venables   435


 7. Further, the enhanced infrastructure benefits landlords who are largely
    absentees. For example, connection to electricity raises the rent per
    room in informal settlements 27 percent in Nairobi and 44 percent in
    Dakar (Gulyani et al. 2012).

Bibliography
Belich, James. 2009. Replenishing the Earth: The Settler Revolution and the
   Rise of the Anglo-World, 1783–1939. New York: Oxford University Press.
Bertaud, Alain, and Stephen Malpezzi. 2003. “The Spatial Distribution of
   Population in 48 World Cities: Implications for Transition Economies.”
   ECA Region Working Paper, World Bank, Washington, DC. http://rsrcs.
   elretoincae.com/webinars/1201/Bertaud%20and%20Malpezzi%20
   Density%2050%20World%20Cities.pdf.
Buckley, Robert M., and Jerry Kalarickal. 2005. “Housing Policy in
   Developing Countries: Conjectures and Refutations.” World Bank
   Research Observer 20 (2): 233–57.
Dyos, Harold James. 1968. “The Speculative Builders and Developers of
   Victorian London.” Victorian Studies 11: 641–90.
Franklin, Simon. 2011. Enabled to Work? The Impact of Housing Subsidies on
   Slum Dwellers in South Africa. Unpublished manuscript.
Gulyani, Sumila, Ellen Bassett, and Debabrata Talukdar. 2012. “Living
   Conditions, Rents and Their Determinants in the Slums of Nairobi and
   Dakar.” Land Economics 88 (2): 251–74.
Malpezzi, Stephen. 2006. “Cross-Country Patterns of Urban Development.”
   In A Companion to Urban Economics, edited by R.J. Arnott and D.P.
   McMillen. Hoboken, NJ: Blackwell.
Malpezzi, Stephen, and Jarjisu Sa-Aadu. 1996. “What Have African
   Housing Policies Wrought?” Real Estate Economics 24 (2): 133–60.
Olsen, Donald J. 1976. The Growth of Victorian London. London: B.T.
   Batsford.
Office of National Statistics (ONS). 2009. Wealth in Great Britain: Main
   Results from the Wealth and Assets Survey 2006/08. London: HMSO.
Porter, Roy. 1995. London: A Social History. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
   University Press.
Saunders, Doug. 2010. Arrival City: How the Largest Migration in History Is
   Reshaping Our World. London: Heinemann.
The Nigerian Voice. 2011. “Dangote is Africa’s Richest Man.” March 11.
Von Pischke, J.D. 1975. A Penny Saved: Kenya’s Cooperative Saving Scheme
   and Some Related Aspects of Rural Finance. Institute for Development
   Studies, University of Nairobi.
Index



Abramowitz, Moses, 151                 agglomeration economies, xix–xx,
accommodation of migrants, 237             xxii–xxiii, xli, 51, 53, 93, 117,
advanced economic sectors, 211–12          183, 185, 187, 199–200, 290
advanced economies of the west, 27     agricultural productivity, xlii
affordable housing, xxxv–xxxvi,        Ahmedabad, 394–6
   404–7, 417–22; see also housing         floor-area ratio in, 402
   construction of:                        greenfield development in, 382
       building standards for,             land allocation for extension
           418–20                              over 2000–10, 397–402
       industrial organization             land supply, 393, 396
           construction, bifurcation       sale of FAR bonuses, 322
           of, 421–2                       slum layout, 406
       unit costs of output, 420–1     air pollution, 311, 316, 320
   developable urban land, supply      Amazon, xxv, 136
       of, 383–96                      amenity(ies), xxxii, 80, 89–90, 96,
   traditional method of evaluation        98–9, 102–109, 384–6, 392
       of, 404–7                           provided by city, 93
   urban land, supply mechanism            public, 255
       for, 381–3                          urban policies in China and
   urban planners role to deliver              Mexico, 110–11
       buildable land to markets,          urban, 383
       410–11                          American Research and
African housing investment:                Development, 154–5
   failure of market and policy        Angel, Shlomo, 1–2, 13
   coordination, 432–3                 Annual Survey of Industries, 185
438 Index


anti-immigrant sentiment in          car cities, rise of, 315–21
   Europe, 227                          differentiated registration tax,
area-level entrepreneurship, xxv            317
Arnott, Richard, 349                    electric and hybrid vehicles,
Asian Development Bank, 32                  320–1
                                        fuel-inefficient vehicles, 317
backward locations, 96                  time-of-day pricing, 318
Bangalore Cluster, xxv                  traffic congestion and pollution,
Bethune House Migrant Women’s               318
   Refuge, 217                          vehicle ownership, 317
Bhalla, Surjit, 32                      vehicle-registration tax, 317
big city(ies), xli, 51, 60              Western European tax, 317
   bias, 52, 69–76                   casual jobs, 176
Biharis rural migrants, 236          Central Statistical Organization,
BioValley complex, Malaysia, 156        185
Boeke, Julius H., 175                Cervero, Robert, 389–90
bond financing, 298                  charter schools, United States, xxiv,
Brazil, 20, 31, 40, 42, 75              xxvii
   high-income households, 34        Chicago Skyway, 298–9
   subsidized agricultural lending   Childcare for factory workers,
       programs, 71                     Bangladesh, 219
British building societies, 434n5    China, 28
Brown, Gordon, 11                       city-size distribution, 91
business(es):                               comparison with United
   cycle policies, 96                           States, 100–6
   in large cities, 20                  demand for municipal water,
                                            36
Canadian labor fund program,            extension of social services to
   163                                      migrants, 41
CAPCO program, 166                      global investors in, 160
capital, 159                            high-income households in, 34
   need for growing cities in           internal migration restrictions,
      emerging markets, 35–7                xxviii, 94
   venture, see venture capital         intracity transport investment
capitalist:                                 in, 67
   agriculture, 176                     metropolitan areas contribution
   mode of production, 181                  to GDP in 2010, 26
carbon:                                 national controversy in 2012,
   emissions, 317, 327                      236
   footprint, 310, 320                  population share in towns and
   tax, 317                                 cities, 25–6
                                                                    Index    439


    railways role in production              mayors, 202, 205
        decentralization, 68                 national and regional cross-
    rate of return to capital in, 71             fertilization of ideas, 61
    urbanization in, 36, 80:                 in national system, xli–xlii
        pace of, 27                          need to reduce labor market
        policy on, 74, 92;                       rigidities, 201
    variables and sources for data           new, see new cities
        collection, 94–5                     and political subjectivity, 222–5
churning, 60–1                               and the power of networks,
citations, 130–1                                 41–3
city(ies), xv, 90, 203–4, 211, 215,          productivity advantage of,
    403                                          19–23
    areas for future research, xlii–xlv      shifting economic balance as a
    benefits from conditions, 210                challenge for, 37–8
    challenges confronting, 229              -size distributions, 52, 80–2, 90
    competition for people and               sizes, 52, 76–80
        investment, 16, 40–1              City 600, 29
    criteria for economically             City, The (Max Weber), 222
        successful, 117–23                climate change, xxxvi–xxxvii, 226,
    in developing countries, see             229, 310–11
        developing countries, cities in      urban adaptation to, 324–9
    economic efficiency of, 396                  environmental performance,
    as engines of growth, 53–7                       324
    essentials for timely formation              moral hazard, 328
        and expansion of, 78–9                   mortality risks and, 326
    existing, see existing cities                negative effects on economic
    framework for system of, 92–6                    growth, 324
    as frontier spaces, 225–8                    policy suggestions on, 325–7
    global GDP of developing and                 pro–economic growth,
        emerging, 29–31                              328–9
    governance:                                  rise of “fat tail” event, 327–8
        formality and informality,        climate; see also climate change
           247–6                             -proof cities, 328
        recognition and belonging,           proofing, 328
           246–7                          coal-fired power plants, 320
        rights and rational city,         college-educated:
           244–5;                            couples, 126
    in growing emerging markets,             residents, 121
        35–7                                 workers in United States, 118,
    as home to 1 billion new                     121, 128
        consumers, 31–5                   college graduates, 118–22, 128
440 Index


commercial and residential space:         123, 150, 270, 277, 347, 353,
   demand for, 265                        368
Common Basic Principles on                cities in, 62
   Integration, EU Council, 244           great-growing cities of, xxvi
communications capabilities, 287          link between urbanization and
commuting trip travel time,                   income growth, 83
   Gauteng, 385, 389                      market formation of new cities
congestion charging, xxxvii–xxxviii           issue in, 77
consumer city(ies), 57–8, 322             task of city leaders in, 38
consumer/consuming class(es):             transport investments role in, see
   definition of, 32                          transport investments role in
   demand for deposit services,               developing countries
       34–5                               urban and big-city bias in, 52,
   demand growth for products,                69
       34                              Dharavi slum, Mumbai, 214
   households income in, 33            diasporic network, 246
   size of, 32                         digitization, 223–5
   tastes of, 35                       direct housing production:
container port capacity, 269–70           programs of, 337
   demand for, 265                     division of labor, xxi, 220
container traffic, global, 270         door-to-door speed of public
contract renegotiations, 299–300          transport, 392
corporate services sector, 214         dual economy, 175
cost of living in cities, xxxi, 122,   dualism:
   142                                    between activities under colonial
country-wide shocks: spatial impact           law jurisdiction, 175
   of, 92, 113                            between capitalist and
                                              traditional mode of
debt crisis, 262                              production, 175
deindustrialization, xx, 60, 62, 83,      between modern/capitalist
   250                                        sector and traditional sector,
democratized states: urban                    175
   concentration in, 72–4                 traditional literature on, 181
deregulation, xliv, 199, 201, 205,     dualistic development model, 175
   357, 433
De Soto, Hernando, 340, 342, 344       economic globalization, 223
destitution, 211                       economic growth, xvii–xix, xxiii,
developed world, xvi, xxi, xxxiii,        xliv, 10, 18, 24, 53, 71, 126–9,
   xxxvi, xliii, 151, 218–19, 431         150–1; see also urbanization
developing countries/cities/world,     educated countries, 127
   xx, xvi–xvii, 2, 12, 24, 57, 60,    educated workers, xxiv, 132, 193
                                                                Index     441


education systems, xxii–xxiv,            activity(ies):
    xxvii–xxviii, 53, 127–8, 157,            hubs of, 149
    241, 245, 315, 329, 430                  less-consistent approaches
    differences in, 118                          for, 166–8
    economic disparities between             research and case study
        cities impact on, 121                    findings, 159–66
    emphasis on: dimensions,                 strategies and limitations of
        165–6                                    government to encourage,
efficiency of cities, 93–4                       156–9
electric and hybrid vehicles, 320–1   entrepreneurial innovation:
electricity:                             importance of, 150–4
    consumption of, 326               entrepreneurs, xxiv–xxvi, xxix, 1,
    demand management program            62, 76, 150, 154–6
        (California), 277                demand of local, 166
    generation of, 320, 327              dependence on partners, 159
    -intensive industries, 311           urban, see urban entrepreneurs
    for mitigating future climate     entrepreneurship, xxii, xxiv, 150,
        change, 326                      189–92, 202–3
    peak-time pricing, 326               action of group impact on, 155
    sources of, 320                      area-level, see area-level
electronic road pricing, Singapore,          entrepreneurship
    xxxvii                               definition of, 155
Emerging 440 cities/group, 29–34,        and innovation: relationship
    45n9, 265, 271                           between, 152
emerging cities, 33, 35                  promotion of public schemes by
emerging economies, 29–31,                   participants, 158
    112–13                            environmental issues: alternative
    demand/need for infrastructure       approaches to, xxvii–xxxviii
        in, 263–4                     European Union, 92, 117, 244
emerging markets, 20, 35–7            excessive frictions: concept of, 93
eminent domain, 13                    existing cities:
employment, xxi, xxv–xxvi, xxx,          locals long wait for political
    xliv, 25, 62                             consensus, 4
    in manufacturing sector, 184–5       switching costs in, 4
enabling markets to work: concept
    of, 337                           “fat tail” events: rise of, 327–8
energy efficiency, 36, 277            favored cities, 72–3
    in buildings, 272, 322–3          favoritism, 52, 71–2, 75
entrepreneurial:                      Federal Acquisition Regulation
    firms, 150, 153, 159, 168            (FAR), 366
    markets, 155                      Federalism, 72
442 Index


Female Youth Employment               formal sectors, xxix, xliv, 178, 185,
   Initiative, Afghanistan, 218          196, 199–201, 204–5, 314,
financing environmentally sound          369–70, 382, 417, 432–3
   infrastructure: challenges of,        deurbanization of, 187
   xxxvi–xxxvii                          housing, 75, 359
firms, xx, xxiii, xl, 59–60              probability of employment in
   advantage of cities for, 124               urban sector, 181
   churning among, 61                    wage, 182
   driven away from cities, 65        fossil fuel consumption, 316
   in economic sectors, 214           fragmented governance structure in
   informal, see informal firms          cities, 39
   within large cluster, 127          fuel economy, 316–17
   low success rate in China for      fuel-inefficient vehicles, 317
       start-up, 4
   private, see private firms         gasoline, 316–17, 320
   small service, xxx                 genderless urban planning in
floor-area ratios (FARs), xxxi, 65,      societies, 215
   322, 362, 369, 400, 402–4,         geographical distance, 131
   406, 409, 431                      geographic information system
floor space, demand for, 266–8           (GIS), 287, 408
FOGARIM program: for housing          geographic scale jumping,
   finance, 360                          251–2; see also urban
food security program in Belo            migration
   Horizonte, 42, 47n22               global financial crisis (2008–09),
forced migrations, 236, 250              149, 236, 298
foreign buyers spent on property,     global north cities, 236, 240–1,
   central London, 258n1                 245, 254–5
foreign domestic worker (FDW)         global pollution, 311
   rights, Hong Kong SAR and          global population, 2
   China, 217                         global south cities, 212–13, 245,
foreign firms, 3                         247, 251, 253, 256
formal firms, 204–5, 419              good city, 234, 247
formality, concept of, 174–8,         Google Earth, 325
   247–6                              “go on green” rule in small town, 15
   measurement and trends,            governance, xl, 11–12, 38–9, 90,
       178–80                            96, 104, 223, 258, 262, 264,
   urbanization and transition to,       281–3, 289, 307, 315
       180–93                            city, see city governance
formalization, 173, 180, 200,            corporate, 420
   203–5; see also urbanization          rural, 74
   policy implications on, 193–201       urban, 184, 200–1, 203
                                                               Index   443


greenhouse gas emissions, 310,           tall buildings, 322
   316–17                                urban pollution, 321
gross domestic product (GDP), 3,       housing, xvii–xviii, xxvii,
   10, 46n16, 261, 359                   xxx–xxxiii, 407; see also
   in MDRs vs LDRs, 11                   affordable housing
   U.S. population contribution in       assets, value of, 340–1
      2010 to, 23–5                      African housing investment:
                                             failure of market and policy
Harris-Todaro model, 176, 181–2,             coordination, see African
   193, 195                                  housing investment: failure
Hart, Keith, 177                             of market and policy
health care, 140, 168, 237, 240–1,           coordination
   310, 328–9, 428–9                     19th-century London,
higher education attainment in               vulnerabilities in 416–17
   India, 19                             finance, 359–61, 425–7
hinterland city/regions, 58, 62, 64,         development, 341
   68                                        FOGARIM program, see
home bias, 130                                   FOGARIM program: for
homeland network, 246                            housing finance
homelessness, 211, 249, 341                  in Thailand, 359
homeownership, land and finance          formal investment in Africa,
   for, 350                                  415
household sector, 321–4; see also        incomes, 33, 361, 381, 394,
   urban housing                             396, 404, 408, 410, 418
   air and water pollution, 321          investment in, 413–14
   consumption, 45n12                    legal right effect on market:
   in developed economies, 414               affordable tenancy, 424–5
   housing policies, 322                     land rights, 422–3
   low-quality informal housing,             property as collateral, 423–4
       323                               low-income, see low-income
   market-oriented, 341                      housing
   performance of, 338–9                 opportunities for income,
   price of water and electricity,           430–2
       326                               policy, determination of,
   property rights, 339–45                   407–10
   rural-to-urban migration,             provision in 21st-century
       impact of, 322                        African cities, 415
   sanitation and waste disposals,       reform of, 350
       321                               rental, see rental housing
   standard of living, 322               self-help, see self-help housing
   suburbanization of, 321               standards, 409
444 Index


   supported by physical                   disclosing information on,
      infrastructure and social                314–15
      services, 427–8                      policy tools for reducing, 312
   urban, see urban housing                right to pollute, 313
hukou household registration               Toxic Release Inventory dataset,
   system, China, 44n6, 74, 91,                314
   103, 113, 242–3                         trading pollution permits,
                                               313–14
identity politics of new migrations,       Union Carbide chemical disaster
   246                                         (1984), Bhopal, 314
immigrants, 74, 213–14, 224, 226,          vertical supply curve, 313
   229, 261                             industrialization, xlii, 27, 31, 51–2,
   European integration, 226               54, 62, 83, 174
   women, 216: in New York city,           drives development, 53
      221                               industrial mix, xxviii–xxix
   workers, 228                         Industrial Revolution, 271
immigration, 217, 226–8                 inequality in urban life, xxvi
income(s), xxvii, xxxv, 27, 45n11,      informal economy, xxix–xxx,
   56, 73, 94–5, 104, 195–6, 202,          177–8, 195, 198, 202, 212
   210–13, 253, 266–8, 291, 307,        informal enterprises, xliv, 177, 184,
   321, 325, 337, 345                      200, 203, 205, 214
   disparities in, 117                  informal firms, xxix, 196, 204–5,
   in emerging cities, 33                  xxix
   Emerging 440 population, 32–3        informality, concept of, 174–8,
   growth, 266–8                           205, 247–6
   hinterland, 70                          agenda for city mayors to
   informal, 177                               address challenges of, 201–3
   low-and middle-income                   concern in policy circles,
      countries, 144, 338                      194–8
   rural and urban, 181–2                  measurement and trends,
   and urbanization levels, 55                 178–80
India Factories Act of 1948, 184           policy perspective on, 198–201
individual firms, 74, 76, 311              trends in, 203–5
industrial city(ies) 213, 223, 235,     informal sector(s), xliv, 174, 176–7,
   240–1, 311                              180, 199–200, 204
industrial clusters, 124, 126–7,           association with high poverty
   133, 136                                    rates, 194
industrial decentralization in India,      contain smaller experimental
   65–7                                        firms, 67
industrial emissions:                      in Indian cities, xxix
   “command and control”                   less-advantaged workers benefit
      regulation, 312                          from employment in, xxx
                                                                 Index   445


   workers in developing countries,   internal cross-border labor
       178                                migration, 227
informal settlements, 13, 238,        International Institute for the
   336, 342, 363, 379, 432–3,             Environment and Development,
   435n7                                  251–2
   of African cities, 431             international investors, 157
   ambiguities and conflicts over     International Labour Organization
       property rights, 340               (ILO), 177
   Brazilian cities attempt to        intra-European migration, 228
       decontrol in 1980s, 370        investments, 139, 144, 154, 163,
   challenges of, 247, 323                165–8, 261, 281–2, 287–9,
   decontrol influence on rental          297, 341–2, 362–3
       in, 351                            in capitalist sector, 181
   difficulty in relocate, 325            competition for, 40–1
   in Kenya, 343                          in drainage systems, 328
   in Latin America, 344, 347             equity-linked, 153
informal urbanisms, cities of, 253        foreign, 117
information technology networks,          by government:
   269, 284, 287                              in sea walls, 328
infrastructure, xviii, xxii–xxiii,            in transportation
   xxix–xxxi, xxxiii, xl, 23, 25,                 infrastructure, 318
   27, 35, 38, 92, 100, 203, 205,         growing cities in emerging
   211–13, 215, 219, 221–2,                   markets need, 35–7
   228                                    need for growing cities in
   building of right, xxxviii–xxxix           emerging markets, 35–7
   payment for, xxxix                     physical capital, 262, 264
   sanitation, see sanitation             private, see private investment
   sewage, see sewage; wastewater         public, see public investment
       treatment systems                  savings in, 284
   transport, 57, 65–6, 68–9;             subway, 318
       see also transportation            in sustainable cities, 310
       infrastructure                     transport, see transport
   urban, 39, 78, 90, 103, 105,               investments
       242, 248                           urban infrastructure, 269
   water, see water supply                water supply, 270
innovative firms, 132                 invisible hand, 3
integration framework indicators,     Irish Industrial Development
   245                                    Agency, 41
Inter-American Development
   Bank, 355                          Jacobs, Jane, xxii, xxxv
intercity transport investment, 68    jantri rates, 412n5
446 Index


Japan:                                       supply, 109
   electronics firms, 59                     thick labor markets, see thick
   “lost decade”, 263                            labor markets
   post-war economic renaissance,            -to-land ratios, 53
       27–8                                  urban labor markets, see urban
jobs, xxxii, xxxiv, xxii–xxiii, xxviii–          labor markets
   xxix, 40, 89, 121, 124–7, 129,         land transformation into floor
   132, 134–6, 138–9                         space, 403–4
   casual, see casual jobs                land use, xxxiii–xxxv, 13, 322, 355,
   creation, xviii, 162:                     362, 363, 384, 397, 407
       formal manufacturing,                 change of, 402
          189–92                             controls, xxvii
       informal manufacturing,               densification, 257
          190                                GIS technology to map existing,
   in informal sector concentrated               408
       in developing countries,              legacies, 256
       179                                   planning, xxxv, 365
   innovative, 133                           policies and plans, 380–1
   local, 139–41                             regulations/rules, 142, 184, 364,
   manufacturing, 143                            370, 403, 408, 410:
   urban, xxviii, xxxiv                          impact of 368;
Juntos program, Peru, 220                    regulatory reforms in, 338
                                             standards, 249, 410
Kharas, Homi, 32                          large/larger cities, 20, 26, 41, 96,
Knowledge:                                   112
  economy, 212                               creating innovations, 152–3
  spillovers, xxiii–xxiv, 65, 117,           in emerging economies, growth
     123, 127–33, 138, 140                       of, 385
                                             evolving role of, 62–5
labor, 14, 25–6, 41, 53, 68                  firms in, 60
   -intensive industries, 311                functional specialization, 60
   Lewis perspective on, 175–6               land use of, 380
   markets, 79, 93, 118, 121,                role in economy, 23–4
       124–5, 387                         Late Middle Age cities, 223
       benefits of migration, 237         Latin America, 31
       integration, 384                      GDP in 2007, 29
   migrant, see migrant labor                incidence of renters by income,
   productivity, 121, 123:                       346
       in unorganized industry,              informal settlements in, see
          196–7;                                 informal settlements in Latin
   -receiving country, 227                       America
                                                                  Index   447


    maturity of urbanization in, 25      market:
    middleweight cities in, 40             failures, xvii, 71, 145, 352, 365,
lead emissions, 320                            431
lean manufacturing system, 279             formation of cities, 77–9
less-advantaged workers, xxix–xxx          rental, see rental market
less developed regions (LDRs),             size, 124–5, 193, 349
    6–12                                 marriage market, 125
less-skilled workers, xxviii             mass urbanization, 27–37
life expectancy in low and middle        mature economies, 37
    income countries, 7, 10              megacities, 20, 43n3, 44n9, 90, 96;
“livable” cities, xvii–xviii, xxx, 410     see also cities
location of formality in India,          metropolitan areas, xxv, xxvi, 21,
    184–93                                 23–4, 26, 39, 43n3, 59–60, 64,
London Building Act of 1667,               80, 94, 118
    434n2                                  average income of Indian, 121
“low-carbon” cities, 310, 322, 326         college graduates percentage in
low-income housing:                            U.S., 119–20
    Low-Income Housing Tax               Mexico, 31, 40, 42, 72, 91
       Credit, 353, 356                    city-size distribution:
    quotas for, 358                            comparison with United
Lucas, Robert, xxiii                               States, 100–6
                                           economic crisis (1994), 92
McKinsey & Company, 262, 273               high-income households, 34
McKinsey Global Institute (MGI),           total factor productivity of,
  262, 264                                     196
  report on global urbanization,           variables and sources for data
     265                                       collection, 94–5
McKinsey Global Institute                Microsoft, xxv, 140
  Cityscope database, 21–2, 25,          middle class(es), xxxi, 31–2, 45n11,
  44n8, 45n13                              210–11, 224, 318, 322, 407,
Maddison, Angus, 11                        410, 413
Maharashtra Navnirman Sena, 236          middle sectors, post–World War II
Mahila Milan (organization), India,        growth of, 210–11
  251                                    middleweight city(ies), 25–6, 29,
Manhattan, New York (city),                31, 39–40, 43n3
  United States, 3, 5, 13                migrant(s), xxiv, xxxi, 12, 41, 52–3,
manufacturing cities, 60, 83               74, 228, 235–6, 239–58, 345;
manufacturing density of India             see also migration
  (2000–05), 66                            access to health care for new,
manufacturing industries, xx–xxi,              237
  xxviii, xlii, 3, 53, 59                  labor, 74, 242
448 Index


  religious, see religious migrants   Mother Centers International
  rural, xxviii                         Network for Empowerment,
  subsidized housing access for         Germany, 221–2
      new, 238                        mother city, 20
migration(s), xxvi, 181–2, 370,       municipal water systems, 12, 15,
  415; see also city governance;        265–6
  informal settlements                  urban residential demand by
  internal migration in China,             2025 for, 36
      xxviii, 94
  into cities during 21st century,    national citizenship, 250
      234–5                           National Housing Bank, Thailand,
  forced, see forced migrations          359
  high-skilled labor, 235–6           National Slum Dwellers Federation,
  irregular, 247                         India, 251
  plural migrations in London, see    natural hazards; management of,
      plural migrations in London        xvii, 323
  policy formulations to integrate    natural resources: demand for, 271
      scale of future, 256–8          new city(ies), 3–5, 12
  reasons to move into cities,           competition for residents, 15
      236–44                             free market formation of, 77
  rural-to-urban, see rural-to-          small town governments in, 77
      urban migration                 new firms, xxiii, 16, 153, 160, 167,
  settlement dynamics in city,           188
      248–9                           new urban residents population in
  urban, see urban migration             MDRs and LDRs, 8–9
  within metropolitan areas,          New York City, 5
      325                                expansion plan in 1811, 5
Millennium Development Goals,            transformation of, 63–4
  United Nations, 16, 45n10,          non-capitalist mode of production,
  269                                    181
mixed-use cities, xxxv                non-governmental organizations,
monocentric cities, 380–1, 390           309
more developed regions (MDRs),        non-inflationary consistently
  5–12                                   expansionary (NICE), 242
mortgage(s), 347, 354, 425–7, 433     Non-SSA (NSSA) Developing,
  arrears, 424                           54–6
  debt, 359
  finance systems, 361, 434n5         oil shock of 1973–74, 277
  loans, 356                          Organisation for Economic
  preferential tax treatment for,         Co-operation and Development
      360                                 (OECD), 123, 178, 271
                                                               Index   449


organized manufacturing sector,        prefecture-level cities in China,
   185, 188, 193, 197                     94–5
organized sector, 66, 183–5, 188,      pre-industry urbanization, 57
   193, 195–6                          present-value-of-revenue (PVR)
   deurbanization of, 186–7               contract, 295–6, 301
   India’s urban shares in, 67         private:
   in manufacturing sector, 184           bargaining, 302
Ostrom, Elinor, 175, 250–1                developers, 13–14
overengineering entrepreneurship,         firms, xl, xxxix, 12, 61
   162                                    investment, xxxii, 40, 280, 318,
                                              328, 364, 414
peri-urban areas, 64, 67, xlii         productivity differences within
place-based economic policies,            country, 117
   117                                 property rights, 339–45
plural migrations in London,              ambiguities and conflicts over,
   238–9                                      340
pollution:                                formalization programs,
   caused by industrial sector,               344–5
       311–13                             housing finance development,
   industrial, see industrial                 341
       emissions                          legally owned property, 339
   lead emissions, 320                    legal titles, 340–1
   permit system, 314                     mitigation of, 341
   in residential area, 312               ownership rights, transfer of,
   trading pollution permits,                 340
       313–14                             public and private land
   vehicular, 317–19                          acquisition, 339
poor people, xxvi, 45n10, 195,            real estate transactions, 339
   346, 389, 407, 429; see also           registration of property, 341
   poverty                                tenure, legalization of, 343
population growth, 266–8                  tenure security, 341–5
Portes, Alejandro, 246                    title regularization programs,
poverty, xv–xvi, xxvi–xxvii, xliv,            341–5
   31, 45n10, 134, 173–4, 194–5,          zoning standards and, 344
   199–200, 205, 269, 328, 342,        public:
   344, 369, 405                          finance, 297–9
   informal sectors associated with,      goods, 310
       194                                housing production in
   in Latin America, 220                      developing countries, 337
   rural, see under rural                 investment, xxxviii, 358, 372
   urban, see urban poverty               sectors, see public sectors
450 Index


public-private partnerships (PPPs),          capital programs, 168
  xxxix–xli, 21, 32, 34, 279–81,             initiatives, 157–8, 162, 164
  291
  approach for, 295–7                     quality of life, 310, 322, 328
  availability contracts, 297
  cash flows, 298                         raise the doorsill: meaning of, 74
  circumstances for use of, 293–5         Randel, John (Jr.), 3
  contracting under, 293                  real estate developers, 322
  contract renegotiations,                refugees, 227, 250, 253
      299–300                             regional differences:
  coordination, multiple                      in China, 144
      jurisdictions, and                      in India, 121
      decentralization, 302–3             regional economic development
  cost of capital for, 303                    policies, 117, 132–42
  factors contributing to the             regions, maturity of urbanization
      success of, 280–1                       in, 23–6
  flexibility in, 300–2                   regression discontinuity analysis,
  implementation of, 304–7                    164, 170
  meaning of, 292–3                       religious faith, 246
  pitfalls of, 297–304                    religious migrants, xviii
  political benefits of, 299              remote-sensing, 320
  premium, 303–4                          renewable power equipment, 327
  present-value-of-revenue (PVR)          rental housing:
      contracts, 295–6, 301                   funding of, 357
  project-specific risks, 303                 liberalization of, 350
  public debt and budget                      public construction of, 357
      appropriations, 292                     public-private arrangements for,
  public finance, 297–9                           359
  rights of way, 294                          quotas for low-income housing,
  role of institutions in, 297                    358
  for urban highways, 296                 rental market, 345–51
public sectors, xvii, xxv–xxvi, xxxiii,       in 19th- and early-20th-century
  xxxviii, xl–xli, 79, 82, 149,                   347
  154–6                                       advantages of, 345
public services: social benefits from,        decontrol process, 350–1
  261                                         importance of, 345
public transit systems, 310, 316              inclusionary zoning, 348
  benefits of, 319                            investment in, 348
public transportation, 272, 291               lease termination and rent-
public venture:                                   setting rules, 351
  capital funds, 166                          low- and middle-income, 347
                                                                  Index    451


    as “low quality–high price trap”    sanitation, xvii, xxx, 202, 269, 321,
        for tenants, 346                    323–4, 378, 428
    for meeting housing demand,         Saunders, Doug, 235
        345                             sea walls, 328
    mortgage interest, 347              Self Employed Women’s
    owner-occupied units, 347–8             Association (SEWA), 195
    quality of rent-controlled units,   self-help housing, 337
        348                             self-organization of residents and
    reforms in, 347                         firms, 76–7
    rent control, 348–50                serviced developable land: supply
    restrictive zoning regulations,         of, 362–5
        347                             service delivery, 23, 38, 200, 202,
    and single-family housing, 347          364–5
    Swedish, 349                        services density of India (2000–05),
    tenants of rent-controlled units,       66
        348                             sewage, xviii, xxxviii, 15, 39,
    tenants quasi-ownership rights,         227–8, 264, 310, 323
        348                                 lack of facility xxxiii
rent control, 348–50                        treatment of, 324
replacement housing, global             Shenzhen city (China),
    demand for, 268                         development of, 3–4, 15–16
residential construction, 267           Shenzhen Speed, 242–3
resources needed by growing cities      Silicon Valley, xxv, 118, 121–3,
    in emerging markets, 35–7               127, 136, 154
rethinking cities:                      Singapore Economic Development
    interventions, xxx–xli                  Board, 41
    reasons for, xv–xvii                single-family housing, 347
    strategies of, xvii–xxx             skilled:
Romer, Paul, xxiii                          migrants, xxiii–xxxiv
Roosevelt, Franklin, 135–6                  workers, xxii, xxiv, xxvi, 19, 122,
rural:                                          124, 129, 214
    migrants, xxviii                    slumlords, 238, 347
    poverty, xlv, 31                    slums, xvi, xxvi–xxvii, xxx, 202,
    -to-urban migration, 37, 103,           204, 212, 229–30n2
        174, 176, 181, 322                  for developing world, xxxiii
                                            dwellers, 352, 359:
salary(ies), 116–17, 122                        slum-upgrading program,
    in China, 121                                  360
    level in U.S. metropolitan areas        housing, 25, 74
       of college graduates, 118–20,        removal, 337
       128                                  rise of global, 213
452 Index


   urban, see urban slums                 start-ups, 4, 189
   urban manufacturing in, 213            Stedman, Donald, 320
Small Business Investment                 Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA), 52, 69,
   Company (SBIC), U.S., 155–6               72, 178
small/smaller firms, xxx, 152–2,             hinterland income and transport
   152–3, 183, 188                               cost in, 70–1
smart city(ies), 234, 253                    rainfall shocks impact on, 72
smart governance in cities, 38–9             urbanization fostered by
Smith, Adam, xix, xxi                            agricultural booms in, 58
social housing eligibility for               urbanization level in, 54–7
   migrants, east London, 238–9           subsidies, housing, 351–9
social rule for converting private           capital grants and mortgage
   land into public space, 15                    programs, 354
social welfare, 275                          Chilean model of, 354
Society for the Promotion of                 concerns for public safety, 352
   Area Resource Centres, India,             demand-side, 352–6
   251–2                                     middle-income beneficiaries,
solar panels, 136, 327                           354
Solidarity for the Urban Poor                public housing production
   Federation, Cambodia, 252                     programs, 353
Solow, Robert, 151                           for public housing programs,
spatial concentration, 62, 91                    352
spatial differences in cities, xli, 91,      rental allowance programs, 353
   96, 112                                   supply-side, 356–9
spatial dispersion reduction:                targeting efficiency of, 355–6
   in China, 100–4                        suburban:
   in Mexico, 106–9                          areas, xxx, 64, 366, 381
spatial location of economic                 firms, 68
   activity, 186                          suburbanites, 271–2
spatial transformation in cities,         suburbanization, 67, 312, 321–2
   53–7                                   subway investment, 318–19
special economic zones, 4, 103,           sulfur dioxide, 313
   117, 145n1, 242, 248, 312                 trading market, 314
specialized business services,            superblocks, 13–14
   xxi–xxii, 134                          supply chain, 183–4, 312, 383
special purpose vehicle (SPV), 292,       sustainable cities, 254, 310
   294, 306
Special Zones of Social Interest,         Technical Assistance for Policy
   Brazil, 249                               Reform II, 348
standard of living, 261                   technological innovation, 36,
Starbucks, xxv                               151–2
                                                                 Index   453


technology transfer offices role in        Millennium Development
    entrepreneurial activities, 160            Goals, 269, 336
Thackeray, Raj, 236                     United Nations High
thick cities, 125–6                        Commissioner for Refugees,
thick labor markets, xxiii, 117,           250
    124–6                               United States (U.S.), 28, 57–9
thick markets for specialized service      city-size distribution as
    providers, 126–7                           benchmark, 96–100:
topographies of cities, 212                    comparison with China and
Town and Planning Act (1990),                     Mexico, 100–12
    United Kingdom, 358                    computer industry in, 61
Toxic Release Inventory dataset,           deindustrialization, 60
    314                                    federal policy of 1960s, 91
traffic congestion, 317                    hourly wage of workers in
transportation infrastructure,                 metropolitan areas, 116
    315–21                                 metropolitan areas:
    emissions, 317                             college graduates, 119–20
    environmental impact of, 316           public spending and ongoing
    fiscal costs of supplying, 318             deficits in, 150–1
    government investment in, 318          transport investments impact
    place-based investments, 318               on, 69
    quality of life, 319                   variables and sources for data
    regulations to reduce emissions,           collection, 94–5
        316                                workers living in educated cities,
    total urban emissions, 318                 xxiii
    vehicle ownership, 317              United States’ Energy Star standard,
transport investments:                     322
    in hinterland development, 72       unorganized manufacturing sector,
    role in developing countries,          184–5, 188, 193, 196–7
        65–9                            unorganized sector, 67, 193–6
                                           employment share for, 185–7
unemployment, 25, 37, 61, 117,             in services sector, 185
  125, 151, 222, 261, 388, 394,            urbanizing, 186–7
  405, 430                              unskilled workers, 124, 129
  compensation in U.S., 117             urban accommodation, 2
Union Carbide chemical disaster         urban areas, xx, xxii, xxiv, xxvii,
  (1984), Bhopal, 314                      xlii, 15, 18, 116, 235
United Nations (UN), 2, 5–6, 18,        urban bias, 69–76
  26, 89                                urban citizens, 309
  Global Strategy for Shelter to        urban clusters in India, 20–3
     the Year 2000, 337                 urban cultures, 215
454 Index


urban demographic change, 235              land use regulations: impact of,
urban development, 223, 250,                   368, 371
   264, 322, 361, 363, 380                 for lowest income groups, 337
   hierarchy of, 52                        market performance, 338
urban dweller, 405                         property rights, 339–45
urban economic growth, 273                 regulations and informality,
urban economics, 322                           369–71
urban economy(ies), 21, 23, 25,            rental market, 345–51
   210                                     self-help housing, 337
   multiple articulations between          serviced developable land,
      backward and advanced                    supply of, 362–5
      sectors, 211                         single-family housing, 347
   network effect, 214                     strategies for, 336
urban entrepreneurs, xxvi                  subsidies, 351–9
urban environments, 53                     zoning regulations and, 368
urban governments, 253, 312             urban imperative, xviii–xix
urban growth, patterns of, 264–73       urban infrastructure:
   in China, 267                           benefits of, 261
   demand for floor space, 266–8           build capabilities, 283
   in emerging countries, 264              building of, 274–6
   and need for a range of                 capabilities, 286–8
      improvements, 268–70                 car cities, rise of, 315–21
   physical capital investment and,        closure of gap in, 281–9
      264                                  communications capabilities,
   pressure on natural and capital             287
      resources, 270–3                     cost of, 261
   value creation, 273                     effective use of, 276–7
urban hierarchy, 81                        efficient delivering of, 277–9
   largest cities evolving role, 62–5      funding for, 273
   product and functional                  governance of, 282–3
      specialization, 57–62                institutions, 283–4
urban households, 19, 34, 266,             inter-jurisdiction coordination,
   272, 321, 326, 415, 424, 432–3              303
urban housing:                             optimizing existing and new
   factors affecting supply of,                infrastructure, 273–81
      361–71                               predictive modeling of, 287–8
   finance for, 359–61                     price of water and electricity,
   impact of regulations on supply,            326
      367–9                                processes of making, 285–6
   land and housing regulations,           public-private partnerships,
      337, 365–7                               279–81
                                                                Index   455


   quality of, 323                            faster transport impact on
   social and economic development                poor housing, 394–5
       objectives of, 276                 transformation into residential
   transportation infrastructure,             floor space, 395–6
       315–21                          urban living, xxii, xlii, 23, 214
urbanism, 243, 246–7, 253              urban manufacturing, xxviii,
urbanization, xv–xvi, xxxi, 18–19,        212–15
   26–7, 29, 31, 51–2, 83, 173,        urban migration, 26, 244, 251–2,
   203–5; see also formalization          257, 322
   in Asia, 54                         Urban Performance Index, 47n19
   end-product of, 403                 urban planners, 291, 312, 378–9,
   improves conditions in rural           383–4, 399, 410–11
       areas, 53                       urban planning, 276, 312
   interpreting lags in, 10–11         urban pleasures, xxii
   maturity in regions, see regions,   urban policy(ies), xlv, 90, 113
       maturity of urbanization in        in China, 104–6
   peaking in developing countries,       in Mexico, 109–11
       11–14                           urban pollution:
   policy implications on,                in household sector, 321
       193–201                            social benefits of limiting,
   of rural societies, 235                    313
   stages of, 338                      urban poor, xvii, xxxiv, 45n10,
   and transition to formality,           248, 250–1, 310–11, 321–4,
       180–93                             328–9; see also urban poverty
urbanization project:                  urban population, 19, 54, 72, 89
   building integrated social             for 1950–2010, 5
       system, 14                         in less developed nations, 2
   in developed countries, 2              limiting value of, 2
   estimation on completion of, 5         UN projection for, 8
   origin of, 1                        urban productivity, xvii
urban labor markets, xxi, xxxiii       urban poverty, xxvi, 174, 248, 342,
urban land, xviii, xxxi, 78, 250,         347
   253, 290, 362–3                        in Latin America, 347
   fraction of land submitted to          non-income aspects of, 342
       market forces, 396–403          urban regulation, in industrialized
   mode and length of transport           countries, 302
       network determines, 390–4       urban residents, xv–xvi, xxxi, xxxv,
   supply mechanism of, 381–3             2, 8–9, 210, 429
   supply of developable, 384–90          demand for municipal water by
       acceptable travel times,               2025, 36
          384–90                          Weber’s observation about, 224
456 Index


urban-rural consumption, 53–4        wages, xxx, 93, 141–2, 159, 176,
urban services, xxi, xxx–xxxi,          181–2, 188, 204, 228, 311,
   200–1, 212                           322–3, 325, 429
urban share of world population, 1      African, 427
   in MDRs and LDRs, 7, 9               rise in United States, xviii–xix
urban shift, 18, 31–2                   urban, xxii
urban slums, xvii, 177, 322          Ward, Peter, 253
urban space(s), 211, 215–16, 221,    Washington Consensus, 3
   226                               wastewater treatment systems, 262,
urban sustainability, 310               269
   pollution costs, caused by the    water-borne diseases, 323, 327
       industrial sector, 311–13     water pollution, xxxvii, 311, 321
urban villages, 74, 381              water supply, 202, 262, 269
urban water: demand for, 266,           clean water, access to, xi,
   269                                      xvi–xvii, xxx, 90, 321, 323,
Urban World: Cities and the Rise            329, 378
   of the Consuming Class report     Weber, Adna, xv–xvi
   (2012), 265                       welfare externalities of migrants,
U.S. Illegal Immigration Reform         London, 238–9
   and Immigrant Responsibility      wind turbines, 327
   Act of 1996, 227                  women in cities, obstacles and
                                        vectors to urban inclusion,
vehicle ownership, growth of, 317       215–22
vehicle pollution, 317               World Bank, xliii, 45n10, 64, 67,
   emission control regulations,        178, 198, 252, 309, 318, 323,
       319–20                           325
   reduction of, 320                    urban strategy, 338
vehicle-registration tax, 317        World Development Report
venture:                                (2009), 338, 340
   capital, 146n5, 153–7, 159–60,    world size distribution of cities,
       162–8                            81
   capitalists, 135–7, 146n5,
       154–5, 158–9, 166–7           Xiaoping, Deng, 3–4
   funds, 153, 160–1, 163, 166,
       170                           Zipf ’s law, 97–8
   investors, 160–2, 166             Zones of Special Social Interest,
visual orders of cities, 211–15         344
About the Editors and Contributors



Editors

Edward Glaeser is the Fred and Eleanor Glimp Professor of
Economics in the Faculty of Arts and Sciences at Harvard University.
He is the Director of the Rappaport Institute of Greater Boston
and was the Director of the Taubman Center for State and Local
Government, John F. Kennedy School of Government from 2004 to
2014. He regularly teaches microeconomic theory and occasionally
urban and public economics. He has published numerous papers
on cities, economic growth, and law and economics. His work has
focused on the determinants of city growth and the role of cities as
centers of idea transmission.

Abha Joshi-Ghani is the Director for Knowledge Exchange and
Learning at the World Bank. She headed the Urban Development
and Local Government Practice in the World Bank during 2007–12
and led the World Bank’s Urban Strategy in 2010. She also headed
the Global Urbanization Knowledge Platform during 2010–12. She
was the Chair of the World Economic Forum Global Agenda Council
on Urbanization in 2013. She has worked primarily on infrastructure
finance and urban development at the World Bank in South and East
Asia, Africa, and the Middle East. Before joining the World Bank she
worked for the Reserve Bank of India.
458 About the Editors and Contributors


Contributors

Alain Bertaud is an urban planner with over 30 years of interna-
tional professional experience in America, Europe, and Asia. He is
currently working as a consultant for the World Bank and for private
clients. He was previously a Principal Urban Planner in the Urban
Development Division of the World Bank. His most recent work
involves advising municipalities in land use and land regulatory
issues as they relate to land markets.

Paul Collier is Professor of Economics and director of the Center for
the Study of African Economies at Oxford University. His research
focus includes the causes and consequences of civil war, the effects
of aid, and the problems of democracy in low-income and natural-
resource-rich societies. He also works on a wide-range of macroeco-
nomic, microeconomic, and political economy topics concerned
with Africa. He is the author of The Bottom Billion: Why the Poorest
Countries are Failing and What Can Be Done About It.

Klaus Desmet is Professor of Economics at Universidad Carlos III
de Madrid. His research focuses on regional economics, international
trade, economic growth, and diversity. He has held visiting positions
at a number of institutions, including the University of Illinois,
Stanford University and the Bank of Spain. He is a Research Fellow
at the Centre for Economic Policy Research.

Richard Dobbs is a director of the McKinsey Global Institute
(MGI), McKinsey’s business and economics research arm, and a
director (senior partner) of McKinsey based in Seoul. From 2004 to
2009, Dobbs co-led McKinsey’s Corporate Finance Practice, where
he was also responsible for research and development. Richard has
written numerous articles about the implications of the financial
crisis for companies and managing in a downturn.

Eduardo Engel is Professor of Economics at Yale University.
Previously he was a faculty member at the University of Chile, where
he taught economics and directed the Center for Applied Economics.
He held positions as Visiting Professor at Stanford University
                                About the Editors and Contributors   459


(1998–99) and Assistant Professor of Public Policy at Harvard
University (1992–94). He has published widely in the areas of mac-
roeconomics, public finance and regulation.

Brandon Fuller is deputy director and research scholar at the New
York University (NYU) Stern Urbanization Project. He is also serv-
ing as interim deputy director for NYU’s Marron Institute for Cities
and the Urban Environment. Prior to joining NYU, Fuller was direc-
tor of the Charter Cities non-profit. Previously he worked for Aplia,
an education technology company, during its startup phase. He was
also an adjunct professor of economics at the University of Montana,
where he earned a Master of Arts degree in Economics in 2003.

Alexander Galetovic is Professor of Economics at the Universidad
de los Andes in Santiago. His current research interests are the deter-
minants of industry structure, antitrust, the economics of regulated
industries (particularly electricity and telecoms), and the economics
of public private partnerships.

Ejaz Ghani is Lead Economist in the Macroeconomics and Fiscal
Management Global Practice of The World Bank. He has worked on
Africa, East Asia, South Asia, Corporate Strategy, and Independent
Evaluation Unit at the World Bank. He has written and published
extensively on economic growth, macro policies, poverty, employ-
ment, entrepreneurship, urbanization, gender, trade, decentraliza-
tion, and agriculture.

Sonia Hammam is an independent consultant on urban develop-
ment. She worked at the World Bank from 1995 to 2011, where she
has held positions of urban advisor, and sector manager for urban
development in the Middle East North Africa region, South Asia and
East Asia. Earlier, Hammam was at USAID where she held the posi-
tion of Director of Urban Policy and Programs in Washington and
served as the Regional Housing and Urban Development Director in
Warsaw, Poland.

Vernon Henderson is the Professor of Economic Geography at
the London School of Economics. Previously, he was the Eastman
460 About the Editors and Contributors


Professor of Political Economy and Professor of Economics and
Urban Studies at Brown University, and a Research Associate of the
National Bureau of Economic Research. He has conducted research
on aspects of urbanization and local government finance and
regulation in various countries and his recent work is on urbanization
in Sub-Saharan Africa with a focus on migration and climate change.
His teaching interests include urban economics, urbanization in
developing countries and the economics of China.

Matthew E. Kahn is a Professor at the UCLA Institute of the
Environment, the Department of Economics, and the Department
of Public Policy. He is a research associate at the National Bureau
of Economic Research. Before joining the UCLA faculty in January
2007, he taught at Columbia and the Fletcher School at Tufts
University. He has served as a Visiting Professor at Harvard and
Stanford.

Ravi Kanbur is T.H. Lee Professor of World Affairs, International
Professor of Applied Economics and Management, and Professor of
Economics at Cornell University. He holds an appointment tenured
both in the Charles H. Dyson School of Applied Economics and
Management in the College of Agriculture and Life Sciences, and in
the Department of Economics in the College of Arts and Sciences.
Kanbur’s main areas of interest are public economics and develop-
ment economics.

Michael Keith is Director of the ESRC Centre on Migration,
Policy and Society at the University of Oxford. He holds a personal
research chair in the Department of Anthropology and a Professorial
Fellowship at Merton College, Oxford. COMPAS works on migra-
tion and its dynamics and is funded by the Economic and Social
Research Council as the principal migration research center in the
UK. Keith’s research has focused on issues of urbanism, city change
and multiculture.

Joshua Lerner is the Jacob H. Schiff Professor of Investment Banking
at Harvard Business School, with a joint appointment in the Finance
                                About the Editors and Contributors   461


and the Entrepreneurial Management Units. He graduated from
Yale College with a Special Divisional Major which combined phys-
ics with the history of technology. He worked for several years on
issues concerning technological innovation and public policy, at the
Brookings Institution, for a public-private task force in Chicago, and
on Capitol Hill. Much of his research focuses on the structure and
role of venture capital and private equity organizations.

Enrico Moretti joined the Berkeley faculty in 2004. He holds the
Michael Peevey and Donald Vial Career Development Chair in
Labor Economics. He is also a Research Associate at the NBER
(Cambridge), a Research Fellow at the Centre for Economic Policy
Research (London) and a Research Fellow at the Institute for the
Study of Labor (Bonn). He is the Director of the Infrastructure
and Urbanization Program at the International Growth Centre
(London School of Economics and Oxford University). His research
interests include Labor Economics, Urban Economics and Applied
Econometrics.

Herbert Pohl is founder of Jones Pohl Group, an infrastructure
investment group. Previously he was a global leader of McKinsey‘s
Infrastructure Development Practice, covering cities, regions, and
ministries of transportation. He has served more than 35 clients
in infrastructure and transportation over the past 12 years, during
which he has worked with some of the leading players in infrastruc-
ture and transportation across the globe, including Hong Kong,
India, Malaysia, and Brazil.

Jaana Remes is a senior fellow and Partner at the McKinsey Global
Institute (MGI), McKinsey‘s business and economics research arm.
Since 2003, Remes has co-led MGI‘s research on productivity and
competitiveness. Her most recent research sheds light on the patterns
of global urban growth through the lens of MGI’s global Cityscope
database of 2,000 cities.

Paul Romer is Professor of Economics at NYU’s Stern School of
Business and director of its Urbanization Project. Prior to joining
462 About the Editors and Contributors


Stern, Romer taught at Stanford’s Graduate School of Business,
where he took an entrepreneurial detour to start Aplia, an education
technology company dedicated to increasing student effort and
engagement. Romer is a research associate at the National Bureau of
Economic Research and a fellow of the American Academy of Arts
and Sciences.

Esteban Rossi-Hansberg is a Professor of Economics and Woodrow
Wilson School at Princeton University. He performs research in
macroeconomics, international trade, and urban economics. His
research focuses on the internal structure of cities, the distribution of
economic activity in space, economic growth and the size distribu-
tion of cities, the effect of offshoring on wage inequality, the role
on information technology on wages and organization, and firm
dynamics and the size distribution of firms.

Saskia Sassen is the Robert S. Lynd Professor of Sociology and
Member, The Committee on Global Thought, Columbia University.
For UNESCO she did a five-year project on sustainable human
settlement with a network of researchers and activists in over
30 countries, as part of the 14 volume Encyclopedia of Life Support
Systems. She has received several awards, most recently being doctor
honoris causa from Delft University (Netherlands), and others from
DePaul University (USA) and from Université de Poitiers (France).
She is the Chair of the new Urbanism competition at the Venice
Biennale of Architecture (2010).

Tony Venables, CBE, is Professor of Economics at the University of
Oxford where he also directs the Centre for the Analysis of Resource
Rich Economies. He is a Fellow of the British Academy and of the
Econometric Society. He also served as Chief Economist at the UK
Department for International Development, professor at the London
School of Economics, research manager of the trade research group
in the World Bank, and as advisor to the UK Treasury.

Jonathan Woetzel works for McKinsey & Company and is based in
Shanghai, China. He advises clients in a range of industries—includ-
ing energy, materials, technology and industrial—helping transform
                               About the Editors and Contributors   463


local companies into global leaders, and developing policy recom-
mendations for government. He has led McKinsey‘s Asia Energy
and Materials practice, the McKinsey Global Institute, McKinsey‘s
macroeconomic research institute, in Asia, and its Corporate Finance
practice in China.
 ‘Glaeser and Joshi-Ghani bring together insights from thought leaders
    on the key issues of economic growth, competitiveness, housing,
 infrastructure, environmental sustainability, informality, and inclusion.’
                 —Isher Judge Ahluwalia, Chairperson,
           Board of Governors, Indian Council for Research on
                    International Economic Relations

 ‘[N]early two-thirds of South Africans live in urban areas. The challenge
    now is to ensure that urbanization is truly transformational for the
ordinary citizen and makes a difference to their lives... As Cape Town and
other African cities plan for the future, it will be vital to take these findings
                     and policy guidance into account.’
                    —Patricia de Lille, Executive Mayor,
                        Cape Town, South Africa

 ‘Overwhelmed by the rapid and unstoppable changes, we are only now
  beginning to see the path towards a more humane, fair, and equitable
  world for all... [The book] aims to understand the complexity of the
                        urbanization phenomena.’
             —Antoni Vives, Deputy Mayor for Urban Habitat,
                        Barcelona City Council

‘Urbanization is transforming the socio-economic and political dynamics
 globally as developing country cities see rapid economic growth and the
           center of economic power shifts to the global south...
       [This book brings] together valuable policy perspectives on
                     competitiveness and urbanization.’
            —Klaus Schwab, Founder and Executive Chairman,
                       World Economic Forum




                                                       ISBN 0-19-945777-8




                                                    9 780199 457779
www.oup.com                                                    ` 995
