           GENDER EQUALITY COMMUNITY OF PRACTICE FOR FINANCE MINISTERS

                                       OCTOBER 11, 2015

                                       Meeting Summary

The third meeting of the Gender Equality Community of Practice (CoP) for Finance Ministers was
convened at the World Bank Group (WBG) and International Monetary Fund (IMF) Annual
Meetings in Lima, Peru on Sunday, October 11, 2015.

CoP Co-chair Jim Yong Kim, WBG President, opened and chaired the meeting, which saw three
new finance ministers join the group: from Paraguay, Peru and Sweden. Finance ministers from
Bangladesh, Mauritania and Rwanda took part, with Egypt, Morocco and Romania represented at
non-minister level. The CoP chair welcomed Christine Lagarde, IMF Managing Director, as a
guest to the meeting, along with the President of the African Development Bank (AfDB) Akinwumi
Adesina, Nigeria’s former finance minister Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala, and Purna Sen, UN Women
Policy Director, sitting in for UN Women Executive Director Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka (CoP co-
Chair).

Members discussed financing for gender equality results, building on momentum generated at the
2015 Addis Ababa conference on Financing for Development and by the adoption of new
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). A country case study on land reform in Mauritania,
commissioned by the CoP and prepared by the WBG gender team in collaboration with the
Government of Mauritania, was delivered. A discussion summary follows below.

The meeting agenda, a list of participants, and the CoP Charter can be found in the annex.

Discussion highlights:

   -   Jim Yong Kim issued a call for ministers to make more use of multilateral institutions such
       as the WBG to support their gender equality agendas. The WBG is prepared to support
       finance ministers with technical expertise and financial resources to promote women’s and
       girls’ opportunities in all sectors, but the request must come from governments. He said
       that the WBG gender innovation labs represent a key tool that governments can use to
       discover what works in promoting gender results, what doesn’t work, and why.

   -   Jim Yong Kim announced that a new corporate-level gender strategy would be presented in
       December 2015, shifting the focus to results and deepening the WBG’s support of countries
       in closing gaps in women’s and men’s economic opportunity. It is an agenda well-suited
       for closer collaboration with finance ministries.

   -   IMF Managing Director Christine Lagarde called on all finance ministers to make gender
       equality a topic of IMF’s regular Article 4 consultations. IMF is eager and ready to support
       finance ministers in looking at interventions that can help close gaps between men and
       women in labor force participation, as well as in other areas. She also called on the
       ministers present to broaden the circle by each bringing one additional member to the
       group’s next meeting.
                                                                                                 1
   -   Rwanda’s finance minister Claver Gatete presented a series of interventions introduced in
       the country following the 1994 genocide, and how gender equality was front and center in
       many of them. The government reformed laws to improve women’s access to well-paying
       jobs and to inheritance rights, and introduced policies and programs to support women’s
       labor force participation and control over land. And they engaged the National Statistical
       Office to improve the availability and quality of sex-disaggregated data. Finally, to help
       promote female entrepreneurship, the government created a dedicated fund for
       businesswomen. He called on other finance ministers to consider these initiatives in their
       own countries.

Next Steps:

To allow for a more in-depth discussion of effective and tested policy options, the next CoP
meeting will be held in April 2016 at the time of the IMF/WBG Spring Meetings in Washington
DC, with participation of finance ministry officials at the level of Permanent Secretary and Budget
Director.

The meeting will discuss evidence-based policy options that have been found to be effective in
closing economic opportunity gaps between men and women. The meeting will have a particular
focus on practical solutions, such as: what steps to take to effectively increase women’s
agricultural productivity; control of assets, access to good jobs; and entrepreneurship rates. The
meeting will draw on evidence-based solutions that have been tested in the real world—many of
which were produced by the WBG Gender Innovation Labs, which lead the CoP’s technical
advisory team. The meeting will also look to feature successful interventions drawn from
ministries’ reform efforts, for potential replication across countries.

The next high-level meeting of the CoP is scheduled for the IMF/WBG Annual Meetings in
October 2016.

Summary notes:

WBG President Jim Yong Kim opened the meeting by welcoming the adoption of the SDGs
and emphasizing the need to focus on closing gaps between women and men, boys and girls,
to achieve the goals. He cited research indicating that doing more to close gender gaps can raise
incomes significantly in developing regions: a fact that should be stark to finance ministers in a
time of low global economic growth, at the end of the commodity super cycle, pending interest
rate hikes and the flight of capital away from emerging markets.

He called for action to promote women’s equal access to good jobs and financial services, like
bank accounts and credit, and for better opportunities to leverage their labor and assets through
initiatives that help increase productivity and through better access to transportation services. To
accomplish this, he asked finance ministers to increase their scrutiny of every dollar of public
spending so that they garner results where they really matter for women and girls. He underlined
that the WBG wants to be a partner in enabling knowledge and resources for new initiatives and
investments.

                                                                                                  2
To prepare the WBG to better support member countries on this agenda, he said, a corporate gender
strategy is under preparation and will be finalized before 2016. For the first time it will cover the
whole WBG, facilitating the use of the full arsenal of lending and non-lending products to support
countries in closing gaps between females and males.

IMF Managing Director Christine Lagarde announced that the IMF stands prepared and eager
to support finance ministers in bridging gaps between men and women. The fund recently made
gender a voluntary topic for assessment as part of the IMF’s annual Article 4 consultations with
countries, and that several countries had in fact requested this. She called on all finance ministers
present to follow suit. Ms. Lagarde lauded the work of the Mauritanian government to promote
women’s access to titles as part of their land registration reform, as described in a case study
delivered to the CoP, and said that the IMF would be eager to partner with the government to speed
up progress.

Ms. Lagarde proposed that there are central areas where finance ministers have the leverage to
impact gender quality. In the sector of education, finance ministries can put systems and financing
in place to ensure that girls reach the same levels of education as boys—through regular or special
programs such as conditional cash transfers. Second, women’s employment is low in many
countries, and this is costly. Legal barriers and lack of adequate services limit women’s
opportunities and need to be addressed. Citing Peru, she said that a mere five years after removing
legal barriers, women’s labor force participation had increased, showing that this can be a quick
win. Further, she said, in countries with low female labor force participation, the right action can
be to allocate significant spending on child care centers. Finally, tax systems should be designed
to first and foremost be people-friendly, not as some countries now have family-friendly, since
that creates incentives for one spouse to stay at home instead of earning a salary or becoming an
entrepreneur.

She challenged the finance ministers present to each bring one additional finance minister to the
next meeting to ensure more substantial participation.

Former Finance Minister of Nigeria Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala presented Nigeria’s You Win
Program, a business planning competition for small and medium enterprises run with the support
of the WBG and DFID. While a large share of Nigeria’s SMEs are run by women, only a small
share of applicants in the competition came from women-owned businesses, so the government
launched a special round for women. She said that results indicate that these women-owned
businesses were able to create 10,883 jobs directly, and that the program led to a 23 percent
increase in profits for new firms and a 20 percent increase in survival over the next couple of years
for existing firms.

Rio de Janeiro State Secretary of Social Assistance and Human Rights Teresa Cosentino
presented the Lilac Railway, a transit project in the Rio de Janeiro State which was completed with
WBG funding and technical assistance. To promote women’s ridership this project aims to create
a safer transit system, with measures to reduce the risk of violence and harassment, while also
incorporating elements designed to promote female labor force participation. The initiative came
about after Rio state’s request for technical expertise and financing from the WBG, and, said
Teresa Cosentino, could serve as a template for other countries.

                                                                                                   3
AfDB President Akinwumi Adesina shared his vision for how ministers of finance could best
work with multilaterals to promote gender equality. He pledged that the AfDB is going to fast
track efforts on women’s empowerment and he called on finance ministers to complement
multilaterals’ work by using the tools at their disposal in their own countries. Specifically, he
emphasized the importance of going beyond sex-disaggregated budgets to creating accountability
matrices to monitor whether the budget is achieving the desired results. He suggested key areas
for the AfDB and finance ministers to collaborate on, such as in setting up an affirmative finance
action facility for women, and recommended considering special tax incentives for women-owned
businesses. He closed by emphasizing the need to move beyond words and focus on achieving
real-world results.

During a lively discussion, CoP members weighed in on these and other topics. Rwanda’s finance
minister Claver Gatete called for action and, in particular, for a stop to discussions on isolated
success stories and instead for backing up talk with policy or legal instruments. He suggested an
international index to rank countries on how well they did this. Abul Maal Abdul Muhith, reported
on the successes in Bangladesh in increasing women’s access to paid jobs, and outlined some of
the remaining challenges they are now working on, including on legal barriers and pay gaps.
Santiago Pena Palacios detailed the policies adopted in Paraguay to increase female labor force
participation, starting with conditional cash transfers and moving on to efforts to promote financial
inclusion along with new incentives to increase women’s labor force participation, and the positive
effects this has had on the economy. Alonso Arturo Segura Vasi spoke of his ministry’s efforts to
introduce a gender equality perspective in Peru’s budget programs, and the introduction of specific
goals to see more spending reach women and girls.

Other ministers and participants all weighed in on a range of topics.




                                                                                                   4
Annex 1: Meeting agenda


                                  MEETING AGENDA

                      Community of Practice for Finance Ministers
                           Financing for Gender Results

                         8:30-10:00 AM; Sunday, October 11, 2015
              Mateo Salado room, Lima Convention Center, 4th floor, Lima, Peru

                             Breakfast will be served from 8 am.


8:30 - 8:40   OPENING
              Jim Yong Kim, President, World Bank Group

8:40 - 8:50   Christine Lagarde, Managing Director, IMF

8:50 - 9:00   Discussion

9:00 - 9:20   KICK-OFF INTERVENTIONS ON HOW TO LEVERAGE RESOURCES TO CLOSE
              GENDER GAPS
              Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala, Former Minister of Finance, Nigeria
              Teresa Cosentino, State Secretary of Social Assistance and Human Rights of the
              Rio de Janeiro State, Brazil
              Akinwumi Adesina, President, African Development Bank

9:20-9:50     DISCUSSION SESSION
              MODERATED BY KYLE PETERS, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT, WORLD BANK GROUP

9:50-10:00    CLOSING
              Purna Sen, Director of Policy Division, UN Women
              Kyle Peters, Senior Vice President, Operations, World Bank Group




                                                                                               5
      Annex 2: Participants
             Community of Practice of Finance Ministers for Gender Equality
                                                  Speakers

World Bank Group        Jim Yong Kim, President

IMF                     Christine Lagarde, Managing Director

Nigeria                 Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala, Former Minister of Finance

Rio de Janeiro State    Teresa Cosentino, State Secretary of Social Assistance and Human Rights

AfDB                    Akinwumi Adesina, President

UN Women                Purna Sen, Policy Director

World Bank Group        Kyle Peters, VP of Operations

                                                 Ministers

Bangladesh              Abul Maal Abdul Muhith, Minister for Finance

Mauritania              Sid'ahmed Ould Raiss, Minister for Economic Affairs and Development

Paraguay                Santiago Pena Palacios, Minister of Finance

Peru                    Alonso Arturo Segura Vasi, Minister of Economy and Finance

Rwanda                  Claver Gatete, Minister of Finance and Economic Planning

Sweden                  Magdalena Andersson, Minister of Finance

                                        Other Heads of Delegation

Morocco                 Jilali Kenzi, Director of Treasury

                                      Ex-officio Invitees and Observers

Paraguay                Jose Molinas Vega, Minister of Planning

Romania                 Ioana-Maria Petrescu, Former Minister of Finance

IMF                     Anne-Marie Gulde-Wolf, Deputy Director of the African Department

IMF                     David Robinson, Deputy Director of the African Department

IMF                     Kalpana Kochhar, Deputy Director in the Strategy, Policy and Review


                                                                                                  6
Annex 3: Charter

               Gender Equality Community of Practice for Finance Ministers

                                          October 2014

Background

Ministers of Finance can play a critical role in promoting gender equality using instruments such
as the national budget, tax regulations, and institutional rules and regulations.

At the 2013 World Bank Group/International Monetary Fund Annual Meetings, World Bank
President Jim Yong Kim welcomed Minister Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala’s proposal to create a
Community of Practice (CoP) of Finance Ministers to advance gender equality, and offered to host
the group’s meetings at the WBG/IMF Spring and Annual Meetings.

There is growing interest in identifying more effective ways to promote economic policies, tools,
and reforms that reduce economic gaps between males and females as well as opportunities that
enhance the agency and voice of women and girls in economic life. These are areas in which
collaboration can foster mutual learning, and where partnerships between countries at different
income levels will help advance the agenda.

The World Bank Group invited ministers of finance from a diverse set of countries to the inaugural
meeting on April 13, 2014, to draw on the innovative and recent approaches they have developed
to promote women’s and girls’ opportunities.



Objectives and Proposed Approach:

    o Promote financing for gender results;

    o Make national budgets more effective in supporting women’s and girls’ opportunities and
      reducing gender gaps by working through national budget processes and other finance
      ministry operations;

    o Promote learning and cross-fertilization by sharing innovative finance ministry-led
      approaches; and;

    o Support political momentum for gender equality goals in post-2015 agenda and associated
      financial commitments.

To meet the overall objectives, CoP members will seek to promote cost-effective, evidence-based
policy solutions by:

-   Increasing the visibility of CoP members’ initiatives for gender equality results nationally and
    globally,


                                                                                                  7
-   Candidly sharing with the group experiences on what works and what doesn’t, which
    institutional arrangements best help advance necessary reform, and specific modalities for
    monitoring and evaluation;

-   Examining and discussing the rigorous technical evidence of what works in promoting gender
    equality, what doesn’t work, and why.

                  Based on experiences and evidence, experiment, evaluate and adopt or advocate
                   for new interventions and policies on gender at the national level

                  Disseminate at the international level key lessons learned, particularly in venues
                   where finance ministers and other policymakers gather

Program of Activities

1. Selected Events

The CoP will meet at least every six months at events and venues where finance ministers are
scheduled to meet, such as the WBG/IMF Annual and Spring Meetings. The meetings will be co-
chaired by the World Bank Group President and UN Women’s Executive Director, and will
showcase innovative approaches and results of the group’s work.

2. Knowledge Sharing

Part or all of the minister-level meetings of the CoP will be held behind closed doors to encourage
a candid discussion of results and challenges, and to provide space to openly address what
specifically was achieved and through what means, what didn’t work, and why. One option is to
have one country share experiences in some depth during each meeting, restricting attendance to
ministers and technical level “sherpas.” Summarized records of the meetings will be prepared and
disseminated by the CoP secretariat, while respecting the confidentiality of the discussion. In
addition, high-level and public events will be organized as appropriate to provide a platform for
CoP members to share their innovative work.

Summary reports and recommendations from the minister-level meetings will highlight countries’
innovative practices, along with major decisions made at the high-level meeting. The World Bank
Group will develop a webpage to this end, and will use the social media platforms to host and
disseminate useful resources and innovative solutions emerging from the CoP and elsewhere.

3. Learning

Meetings of principals will be preceded by a longer technical-level meeting of sherpas, organized
as mutual learning, briefing sessions for conveying evidence-based policy advice and supported
by the technical advisory team (discussed below). These meetings will likely be held in
conjunction with the World Bank/IMF Annual Meetings prior to the principals-only meeting.

In addition, regional meetings and technical workshops can be organized for interested parties (e.g.
finance ministers, other policy makers), where best practices can be shared. These can be organized

                                                                                                   8
and hosted by members of the CoP or by other partners, including donor countries, supported by
the technical advisory team.

4. Monitoring and Evaluation

The key to an effective CoP will be the development of a set of indicators that finance ministers
can use to monitor progress on gender equality. A number of finance ministers are already working
on this, and drawing on their initiatives as well as post 2015 indicators there is scope to develop a
solid monitoring framework.

5. Linkages to Ongoing and New Activities and Instruments

            o The World Bank Group uses Development Policy Operations (DPOs) or other
              lending instruments to provide budget support to governments undertaking structural
              and budgetary reforms. The five DPOs approved in FY13 with gender priority actions
              amounted to over $1 billion. Through the CoP, the Bank aims to support countries as
              they deepen their focus on gender using DPOs. While DPOs are increasingly more
              gender-informed, with one third integrating gender into the design, program and
              results framework in FY13, there is room for improvement. The scope for priority
              actions with potential for transformational change for women’s and girls’
              opportunities will be explored.

            o UN Women’s work on gender responsive budgeting fits well with the scope of the
              CoP, and UN Women’s Regional Centers of Excellence can provide crucial support
              to CoP members interested in pursuing this approach.1

            o Data2X, an initiative of the UN Foundation, USAID, US State Department, and
              Hewlett Foundation to enhance gender-relevant data collection and analysis by
              mapping global gender statistics and gaps, and exploring the use of “Big Data,” can
              provide useful data for the CoP. Through its new leveraging initiative, DFID will be
              providing technical advice and support for nationally owned solutions to promote
              gender equality. This initiative can create opportunities for CoP members looking to
              use their budgets to promote gender results.



CoP Membership and Organization

Membership

The CoP comprises a core group of leaders who have shown commitment and willingness to use
their positions as Ministers of Finance to promote gender equality. It will be affiliated with a
broader group of actors who are interested in promoting and supporting these ministers in their
work.



1   http://gender-financing.unwomen.org
                                                                                                   9
Sherpas

To ensure continuity in CoP activities, and that they are not restricted to the twice-annual meetings
of the principal and minister-level members, ministers will appoint Sherpas to engage with each
other and with the CoP secretariat and with support teams between meetings, and to help prepare
ministers’ meeting participation.

Secretariat

 While member countries’ finance ministers make up the core members of the CoP, a small CoP
secretariat will be set up in the World Bank Group’s Cross Cutting Solutions Area on Gender. The
secretariat will arrange principal-level and Sherpa-level meetings as part of the WB/IMF Spring
and Annual Meetings, administer member lists and invitations and prepare meeting materials for
participants and the meeting chairs, and draft and disseminate meeting reports.

Support teams

To assist CoP members, two support teams will be put in place: a global outreach team in UN
Women and a technical advisory team in the World Bank.

Global Outreach Team: Drawing on its global reach and its preeminent position in the global
political and development sphere, UN Women will lead the COP Global Outreach Team (GOT).
Using existing platforms and global network of offices, UN Women will:

-   Increase the visibility of CoP member’s gender initiatives;

-   Share knowledge and accomplishments on the global level, including through the Knowledge
    Gateway for Women’s Economic Empowerment;

-   Support the political momentum for gender equality goals in post-2015, and other such goals,
    and associated financial commitments.

Technical advisory team: A technical advisory team (TAT), led by the World Bank, will support
the CoP in its specific tasks. The World Bank’s Africa Region Gender Innovation Lab, together
with other regional departments’ gender innovation labs, will lead the C oP technical advisory
group, drawing on the growing body of evidence-based policy advice under production. In leading
the technical advisory group, the World Bank will:

-   Provide technical advice through regular briefings at technical-level meetings and through
    regular and short briefings to the minister-level CoP meetings. Initial key areas of focus will
    include agriculture, land, youth employment (including school to work transitions), and
    entrepreneurship;

-   Provide technical advice on demand. Individual ministers and sherpas who are interested in
    more in-depth briefings on specific thematic areas and issues can request this from the
    technical advisory team;
                                                                                                  10
-   Act as a clearinghouse for evidence-based policy advice by collecting and distributing rigorous
    technical evidence of the specific programs and activities that most effectively promote gender
    equality, what the economic benefits are of doing so, and what the cost of inaction is. Evidence
    will be collected from research and impact evaluations produced both by the World Bank and
    by other research and development agencies.




                                                                                                 11
