     Project co-financed by the European Regional Development Fund through OPTA 2007 – 2013




Romania Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth Program




OUTPUT A2.3
Building Institutional Capacity for Implementing the
National Climate Change Strategy in Romania




November 2015

[Type a quote from the document or the summary of an interesting point. You        [ [ [ [ [ [
This report corresponds to the deliverable “Report on institutional capacity building measures,
including legislative measures aimed at clarifying responsibilities and ensuring coordination of
different governmental institutions for implementing the priority sector investment programme”
(Output A2.3) in the Advisory Services Agreement on Romania Climate Change and Low Carbon Green
Growth Program signed between the Ministry of Environment and Climate Change1and the
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development on July 23, 2013.




1
Now, Ministry of Environment, Waters and Forests

                                                   2
Table of Contents
Acknowledgements ................................................................................................................................ 5
Abbreviations and Acronyms ................................................................................................................. 6
Executive Summary ................................................................................................................................ 9
1.     Introduction .................................................................................................................................. 12
2.     Current Situation of Institutional Arrangements ........................................................................ 14
     2.1.     Legal and Policy Framework ................................................................................................. 14
     2.2.     Engaging with the International Climate Change Community.............................................. 14
     2.3.     National Level Institutions with CC Responsibilities ............................................................. 15
     2.4.     Local level arrangements ...................................................................................................... 18
     2.5.     Other relevant bodies ........................................................................................................... 18
     2.6.     Industry and private sector ................................................................................................... 18
     2.7.     NGOs ..................................................................................................................................... 19
     2.8.     Romanian Best Practices ....................................................................................................... 19
3.     National Commitments and International Best Practices .......................................................... 21
     3.1.     National Commitments ......................................................................................................... 21
     3.2.     European Best Practices ....................................................................................................... 22
     3.3.     Kyoto Article 10 Commitments ............................................................................................. 26
     3.4.     Guiding Principles of International Climate Finance............................................................. 26
4.     Assessment of Institutional Capacity Gaps and Areas of Improvement .................................... 27
     4.1.     Capacity gaps/needs in terms of engaging the international CC Community ...................... 28
     4.2.     Administrative capacity gaps/needs at the national level .................................................... 29
     4.3.     Administrative capacity gaps/need at the local level ........................................................... 35
5.     Strengthening Institutional Arrangements ................................................................................. 37
     5.1.     Legal Framework ................................................................................................................... 38
     5.2.     Taking Part in the International CC Community ................................................................... 41
     5.3.     Measure for improving administrative capacity at the national level .................................. 42
     5.4.     Measure for improving administrative capacity at the local level ....................................... 44
6.     Financing of Climate Actions ........................................................................................................ 47
     6.1.     CC Project Financing Sources ................................................................................................ 48
     6.2.     Capacity gaps/needs for improving project financing capacity ............................................ 51
     6.3.     Options for climate finance capacity building ...................................................................... 54
7.     Monitoring and Evaluation .......................................................................................................... 57
8.     Public Engagement ....................................................................................................................... 59
9.     Concluding Remarks ..................................................................................................................... 62


                                                                           3
Annexes ................................................................................................................................................ 63
   Annex 1. Summary of implemented and planned European policies and measures ....................... 63
   Annex 2. Inventory of Effective Climate Change Legislation ............................................................ 68
   Annex 3. List of relevant Romanian entities involved in Climate Change policy-making. ................ 71
   Annex 4. Romania’s regional development arrangements .............................................................. 72
   Annex 5. Romania’s national capacity building context ................................................................... 73
   Annex 6. NCCC Reform...................................................................................................................... 75
   Annex 7. Road Map for Institutional Capacity Building .................................................................... 76
   Annex 8. Compact tables of needed capacity building measures .................................................... 81




                                                                            4
Acknowledgements
This report is an output of the World Bank’s Romania Climate Change Reimbursable Advisory Service
(RAS) Program at the request of the Government of Romania (through its Ministry of Environment,
Waters and Forests MEWF). It was prepared by a team comprised of Bianca Moldovean, Dumitra
Mereuta, Lavinia Andrei and Liviu Gheorghe during the period of April-July, 2015. Jian Xie and Thierry
Davy participated in the discussions and provided suggestions during the study.
The work benefits from discussions and consultation with officials from a variety of ministries and
national institutions, particularly Mihaela Smarandache, Narcis Jeler, Gabriela Popescu, Gherghiţa
Nicodim, and Mihaela Ştefănescu of the CC Directorate of MEWF; Elena Popescu of Romanian Ministry
of Energy Small and Medium Enterprises and Business; and Emil Calota of Romania National Authority
for Energy Regulation (NAER). The work also benefits from comments from Sameer Akbar and
Christophe Crepin of the World Bank.
The World Bank’s Romania Climate Change program is managed by Jian Xie and Erika Jorgensen, under
the general guidance of Paula Caballero, Mamta Murthi, Kulsum Ahmed, and Elisabetta Capannelli
from the World Bank.




                                                  5
                Abbreviations and Acronyms
ACOP     Administrative Capacity Operational Program
BAU      Business as usual
CAP      Common Agricultural Policy
CC       Climate Change
CCS      Carbon capture and storage
COP      The Conference of the Parties
CP       Climate Partner
CPN      Climate Partners Network
EBRD     European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
EEA      European Economic Area
EFA      Environment Fund Administration
EGO      Emergency Governmental Ordinance
EIA      Environmental impact assessment
EIB      European Investment Bank
ESCO     Energy services company
ESIF     European Structural and Investment Funds
ETS      Emissions Trading System
EU       European Union
FRMI     Forrest Research and Management Institute
GD       Governmental Decision
GDP      Gross Domestic Product
GHG      Greenhouse gases
GIS      Green investment scheme
GoR      Government of Romania
ICLEI    Local Governments for Sustainability - international association of local
         governments
ICT      Information and communications technology
IPCC     Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
IPPC     Integrated pollution prevention and control convention
ISO      The International Organization for Standardization
JI       Joint implementation
LAG      Local action group
LAU      Local authority unit
LCGGP    Low Carbon Green Growth Program
LEADER   Liaison Entre Actions de Développement de l'Économique Rurale
LULUCF   Land use, land-use change and forestry
M&E      Monitoring and evaluation
MAC      Mobile air conditioning systems
MARD     Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development
MCSI     Ministry of Communications and the Information Society
MDBs     Multilateral Development Banks


                                     6
MEF       Ministry of European Funds
MEFSP     Ministry of Employment Family And Social Protection
MESMEsB   Ministry of Energy, Small And Medium Enterprises and Business
MESR      Ministry of Education and Scientific Research
METT      Ministry of Economy, Trade and Tourism
MEWF      Ministry of Environment, Waters and Forests
MFA       Ministry of Foreign Affairs
MFF       Multi-annual financial framework
MPF       Ministry of Public Finance
MRDPA     Ministry of Regional Development and Public Administration
MT        Ministry of Transport
NAER      The National Authority for Energy Regulation
NAPS      National Authority for Public Servants
NCCC      National Commission for Climate Change
NEPA      National Environmental Protection Agency
NGO       Non-governmental organizations
NIS       National Institute of Statistics
NKB       Austrian National Climate Change Council
NKK       Austrian National Climate Change Committee
NMA       National Meteorological Administration
NPC       National Prognosis Commission
NRDIEP    National Research and Development Institute for Environmental Protection
NSEGE     National Service for Estimating GHG Emissions
NUTS      Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics
OP        Operational Program
OPTA      Operational Program for Technical Assistance
PNDR      National Program for Rural Development
PNR       National Reform Plan
PPP       Public–private partnership
PPU       Public Policy Unit
RAS       Reimbursable Advisory Service
RDI       Research and Development Investment
RES       Renewable Energy Sources
RMA       Romanian municipalities association
ROF       Internal rules of operation
SEA       Strategic Environmental Assessment
SMEs      Small and medium enterprises
SWD       Staff Working Document
UK        United Kingdom
UN        United Nations
UNEP      United Nations Environmental Program
UNFCCC    United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
WB        The World Bank


                                    7
8
Executive Summary
Romania has committed to the development of a low carbon and green growth path, making green
growth and action on climate change a national priority. At the national level, in 2013 Romania
adopted the National Climate Change Strategy 2013-2020 as well as the National Strategy for
Sustainable Development 2013-2020-2030. At the European level, the country adheres to the goals of
the Europe 2020 Strategy as a member of the European Union, and is part of the process for
establishing 2030 emission reduction targets of greenhouse gases (GHG). At the international level,
Romania as a signatory of the Kyoto Protocol has committed to reducing emissions and being part of
the global effort to evaluate, adapt to, and reduce the impact of climate change (CC).
An updated and more operationalized Romania National Climate Change and Low Carbon Green
Growth Strategy for 2016-2030, supported by an action plan in 2016-2020, has been developed.
Romania’s Low Carbon Green Growth Program (LCGGP), managed by MEWF with the technical
assistance of the World Bank, operationalizes the strategic path the country has chosen. As mentioned
above, the Government of Romania has already adopted a national CC strategy. To make it more
effective, the LCGGP will be used to update and operationalize the current Climate Change Strategy
for 2013-2020, supported by an action plan for 2016-2020. The CC Strategy and Action Plan, along
with several additional reports, extends the timeline and operational planning of the initial CC
strategy.
Romania will need to substantially build up its institutional capacity in order to respond to an
evolving CC policy and implement the climate actions laid out in the new Strategy and Action Plan.
Even as the country makes efforts to reach its 2020 targets, the European Union is seeking consensus
for 2030 policies. Furthermore, within the larger international community, the aim of the 2015 COP in
Paris is to establish further commitments and policy targets. Romania will need to develop the tools
and institutional capacity to actively participate in these international negotiations, and subsequently
design responsive, evidence-based policies at the national level.
The capacity building (CB) measures in this report are proposed in the context of a larger national
effort to improve administrative capacity. Ever since Romania was negotiating entry into the
European Union, and to various degrees since then, the country has been trying to reform its slow–
moving and heavily bureaucratic administrative apparatus. This remains a stumbling block today, as
shown in Annex 5 and is of particular concern for such a rapidly evolving policy area as CC. However,
Romania has made commitments to improving overall administrative capacity in order to achieve the
Europe 2020 goals, as seen in its National Strategy for Strengthening Public Administration. This report
strives for synergy with those efforts, with the ultimate goal of efficiently implementing the LCGGP.
The purposes of the report are to analyze the current situation and areas for improvement in the
capacity of implementing National Climate Change Strategy and provide recommendations on
institutional capacity building. The report takes a gradual and long-term approach to addressing the
challenge of building institutional capacity. The up to 2030 timeline means that measures proposed in
the LCGGP will need to be revised over time, but the initial capacity building will need to be fairly
intense in order to ensure a solid basis on which to build. The report has taken into account the
currently slow pace of the legislative process in defining the timeline as having three stages: (1) the
short-term—2016-2017; (2) the medium term—2017-2020—since the multi-annual financial



                                                   9
framework (MFFF) and many European and national Strategies stop the planning process in 2020; and
finally (3) the long term—2020-2030—in order to provide a framework for efforts post-2020.
The breadth of actors who will be responsible for implementing the LCGGP expands across all
sectors and levels. Possibly the most significant challenge for the implementation of the LCGGP is the
fact that it is not seen as a multi-stakeholder issue but as the responsibility of the Ministry of
Environment, Waters and Forest. Concurrently, the number of sectors that will need to actively
monitor their GHG emissions continues to evolve and it has already been legally expanded to include
aviation and marine transport. Furthermore, CC policy will need to be implemented following the
subsidiarity principle, starting at the most appropriate level, including by local authority units (LAUs),
the private sector, households, and the civil society as a whole.
A reformed National Commission for Climate Change (NCCC) can be the nexus of the coordination
and implementation of CC policy. The NCCC has rarely met in a consistent manner, and operated
under the sole responsibility of the MEWF, mainly approving Joint Implementation projects and not
focusing on other climate policies. However, in order to implement the LCGGP inter-institutional
coordination with regards to CC, NCCC will need to become functional and effective. Furthermore, the
GoR will need to take responsibility for CC and ensure that it can receive and use feedback from the
scientific and business communities, and take civil society input as a whole into account when
formulating further climate action programs on the basis of the LCGGP.
The creation of a Climate Partners Network will bring all stakeholders to the table and leverage their
cumulative climate change knowledge. NCCC’s reform will allow it to have a channel for receiving
input, but this in itself is not sufficient for fostering engagement with climate change across all levels.
As a public-private initiative, the Climate Partners Network (CPN), would include all relevant
stockholders and give them a way to organize, share information, and drive effective climate action.
The CPN, which is inspired by a best practice in Norway, provides a solution for societal dialogue and
knowledge transfer that carries a small administrative burden and low costs.
All recommended actions will rely on increasing the public’s level of awareness, engagement, and
participation. Across Romania the interest in and knowledge of CC and its effects are limited, including
within public administrations, project managers, and designers and civil society as a whole. Therefore
in order to ensure that interest and commitment to implementing the LCGGP is maintained, it will be
essential to raise the status of CC and slowly build the general public’s level of knowledge and the level
of expertise among policy makers and project managers.
Monitoring and evaluation processes will need to provide the fodder for policy adjustments based
on scientific research, national priorities and market needs. Romania’s policy making and program
design has not been historically built on a substantial basis of evidence. The policy process currently
makes the aggregating, monitoring, and evaluating of data onerous and highly time consuming, if it is
collected at all. The LCGGP has already provided Romania with some modelling instruments, for which
it will have to build capacity. However a more robust monitoring and evaluation framework around
CC data will need to be adopted for all future strategies, programs and projects.
In order to create effective capacity building measures, CC will need to be treated as national
priority, comprehensively integrated into all levels of policymaking and budgets planning. The small
amount of funds dedicated to CC programs, and the lack of effort to track the impact of those
programs that were implemented over the years have shown that CC has not captured the imagination


                                                    10
of the Romanian administrations. The fact that the great majority of available ETS funds remain locked
behind a non-functional law, is perhaps one of the best examples of how little attention CC
investments have received. Nor is climate change part of the national conversation, except for the
immediate aftermath of national disasters. This might change though, since European funds require
that a minimum of 20% be used for climate action during the 2014-2020 period, and GHG emissions
are now tracked as indicators for some of the operational programs. The national and local budgets
will need to actively include CC considerations and allow for long term planning based on a solid basis
of evidence. Public-private partnerships and pilot projects will be useful implementation tools in these
efforts. However, capacity building for the implementation of the LCGGP is only a part of the larger
national effort that Romania will have to undertake in order to create an enabling environment for CC
investment.




                                                  11
1. Introduction
Romania has already been affected by climate change. The IPCC projections indicate that the climate
will warm up over this century at least in line with global projections and precipitation patterns will
shift so as to make winters wetter and summers drier. Already, in 2007, Romania experienced the
warmest year in two decades (average temperature 11.5° C against a 25 year average of 8.4° C)2,3 and
the most severe drought in the last 60 years while in 2005 there were historic floods, which caused 76
deaths and significant property damage. The effects of these extreme weather events adversely
affected the country through significant economic loss in agriculture, transport, energy supply, and
water management. Consequently, mitigation and adaptation to climate change are increasingly
important priorities for Romania.
Thus, the government of Romania (GoR) is shifting its development path towards a climate resilient,
low carbon and green economy. Driven by international developments, CC legislation is largely in
place. However Romania has found it difficult to integrate CC policies across sectors and to identify
priority actions based on clear evidence. Therefore, through the Ministry of Environment and Climate
Change4, the Government has requested the World Bank to provide reimbursable advisory services
(RAS) to help meet the Europe 2020 Strategy goals and increase Romania’s CC implementation
capacity. The main outputs are the National Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth Strategy5
and CC Action Plan, which will guide Romania’s actions on CC and low carbon development until 2030.
This report accompanies the strategy and is part of component A of the Romania: Climate Change and
Low Carbon Green Growth Program, which is focused on implementation capacity building.
In order to implement its CC strategy and take advantage of available CC financing, Romania will need
to improve its institutional capacity. According to the Romanian Partnership Agreement with the
European Commission, about 30 billion euros will be available under ESIF for the period 2014-2020.
Of these the EU Commission has decided that 20%, meaning about 6 billion euros for Romania, should
be dedicated to CC compatible mitigation and adaptation actions in relevant sectors. In the Strategy,
the World Bank has developed an analytical and knowledge base for policy simulations and decision
making, but actual implementation will be the responsibility of national authorities. In the report
describing the Administrative Capacity Operational Program, as well as in the Romanian National
Reform Plan, authorities have recognized that there are important inefficiencies in the way institutions
function and collaborate.
The purposes of the report are to analyze the current situation and areas for improvement in the
capacity of implementing the national Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth Development
Strategy and provide recommendations on institutional capacity building. The information presented
in this report has been garnered from research by a team using primary and secondary sources, as
well as extensive discussions with the main institutions and civil society actors involved. The team
made an effort to capture a wide array of perspectives, in order to ensure that the proposals would
be amenable to authorities, civil society and the business community as well. Considering that CC


2
 http://www.weatherbase.com/weather/city.php3?c=RO&name=Romania.
3
 Globally in 2014 the combined land and ocean average surface temperature for the January–October period
was 0.68°C above the 20th century average of 14.1°C. Indeed the first ten months of 2014 were the warmest
such period on record. http://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/sotc/global/2014/10
4
 Now, Ministry of Environment, Waters and Forests
5
 Referred to as the Strategy in this document.

                                                    12
awareness is low and that CC expertise in Romania is limited, the report proposes a gradual approach
to build on current capacity while engaging with more of the relevant stakeholders.
After the introduction chapter, the current situation as well as the CC commitments that Romania has
undertaken are presented in chapter 2. Chapter 3 provides the possible good practices that could
provide inspiration for further reform. A contrast of the commitments with the current capacity and
the available good practices has been substantiated in the analyses of capacity gaps that need to be
addressed in chapter 4. The next chapter provides the avenues for breaching those gaps and
sustainably building CC capacity in order to ensure the smooth implementation of the Strategy. Project
management and financing is treated separately in chapter 6 since it has been an issue of particular
concern and difficulty for the GoR. Finally, chapter 7 sets out the basic elements of a public
engagement campaign that will be essential for making CC a national issue present in the awareness
of the public authorities, civil society and general public alike. A comprehensive list of the proposed
measures and their time horizons can be found in Annex 1.




                                                  13
2. Current Situation of Institutional Arrangements
2.1. Legal and Policy Framework
The current legal and policy framework consists of international legislation of which Romania is a
party, European directives transposed into the national legislation, and regulations and decisions that
apply, and Romanian legislation itself. The responsible authorities primarily attempt to fulfill the
requirements of the UNFCC Convention regarding policies and measures, institutional capacity,
inventory, monitoring, and reporting, as well as the European policy on climate change and cross-
cutting policies and measures, known as the climate-energy package. The list of EU policies and
measures related to climate change is pretty large and should be part of the strategy of each member
state. A summary of the implemented and planned policies and measures is presented on the working
document SWD (2014) 336 final - Progress towards Achieving the Kyoto and EU 2020 Objectives6.
Annex 1 presents the Inventory of EU legislative acts in the area of climate change. National climate
change legislation serves to transpose international legislation, and there has been no attempt to
initiate any other type of national climate change laws. Annex 2 covers a selection of the essential CC
legislation that has been transposed into national laws.
In principle, the main national institutional coordination mechanism in Romania is the National
Commission for Climate Change (NCCC). It was meant to create inter-ministerial coordination as well
as to involve civil society in policy-making. However, although it was established in 2006, it has been
operating only on an ad-hoc basis, mainly for during the period when Joint Implementation Projects
needed approval. In late 2014, the legislative act establishing the commission was updated in an
attempt to make it more effective. The newly reorganized NCCC is meant to be operating both at
political and technical level and contains a broad range of institutions, playing a major role in
strengthening the inter-institutional cooperation. The newly structured commission at the time this
report was written has not yet been convened.

The Environment Law (updated EGO 195/2005) includes a requirement for other line ministries to
have a department dedicated to dealing with environmental issues. In practice, since the passage of
the law budget cuts and hiring freezes have meant that the departments have largely disappeared or
been reduced to one staff member that has environmental responsibilities in addition to his or her
main tasks. On an important side note, a Memorandum was approved at the governmental level in
2009, which referred to an obligation for each ministry to have dedicated personnel on climate
change, but it was also never implemented.

2.2. Engaging with the International Climate Change Community
Romania has always been at the forefront of Climate Change, as evidenced by the fact that it was the
first country in Annex 1 to ratify the Kyoto Protocol. In fact, much climate change policy and
implementation in Romania has moved with the international agenda. As such, it is essential that
Romania is capable of making sound, well-documented arguments in international forums in order to
protect its national interests, while moving the climate change agenda forward sustainably.




6
http://data.consilium.europa.eu/doc/document/ST-15012-2014-ADD-2/en/pdf

                                                  14
                                         The most important international climate change
                                         forums in which Romania actively participates are the
                                         UNFCCC, Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
                                         (IPCC) and the European Union. Both institutions
Institutional History of Climate
                                         employ comitology, and most of their work and
Change Responsibility
                                         policymaking are produced in expert working groups
                                         whose outputs are later refined, and if need be ratified
                 1992-2000               and implemented by member states.
         1 MEWF Staff Member             The Ministry of Environment, Waters and Forests
       Reports on GHGs are being         (MEWF) is currently the only national authority for CC
          performed by NRDIEP
                                         and it upholds the national interest during international
                 2000-2004
                                         talks, in collaboration with the Ministry of Foreign
         2 MEWF staff members
                                         Affairs and with the approval of the Romanian
Reports on GHGs are still performed
                                         Government. Romania also has an EU Permanent
                 by NRDIEP
The first form of the NCCC is created    Representative Cabinet who will, if possible, articulate
    primarily to overview JI projects    the national position if ministry staff are not present at
                    2005                 particular meetings. In the case of the UNFCCC there is
NEPA is created and has a CC division    an assigned national counterpart within the MEWF,
     with 4-5 staff in charge of GHG     who, sometimes with a small team, participates in COPs
                 inventory               and other relevant sessions. Furthermore, due to the
                 2006-2011               breadth, level of expertise, and sheer number of
 The MEWF created a CC office with       meetings that require participation, the MEWF has
   5-8 staff. Personnel numbers vary     assigned the participation in certain technical expert
       over the period and many          groups to relevant research institutions, such as the
experienced team members leave for       NMA or the FRMI.
            the private sector.
   In 2007 the NEPA CC division gets     2.3.    National Level Institutions with CC
  responsibility over the ETS and the
                                         Responsibilities
         National GHG Registry
                    2011                 The Ministry of Environment, Waters and Forests
     Romania loses Kyoto Protocol        (MEWF) is the national authority on climate change. It
    eligibility due to issues with the   coordinates the integration of environmental protection
 National Registry and the inventory     requirements in national law and sectoral policies,
   team staff increased with other 8     including setting up judicial, institutional, administrative
                  persons                or financial instruments in order to stimulate the
                2012 - 2013
                                         integration of CC in sectoral policies according to GD no.
  The MEWF becomes the MECC and
                                         38/2015. MEWF also has the responsibility of reporting
   the NEPA team is brought instead
                                         to international and European institutions on climate
 under its authority (16 people). The
                                         change.
     overall CC team has 42 people.
                2014 -2015               The Environment Fund Administration (EFA) is an
   The MEWF returns to its previous      institution under the authority of the MEWF, which
 title and the CC directorate now has    collects various environmental taxes and levies. It also
                  28 staff.              develops financial instruments and programs open to
                                         targeted groups, though very few have been concerned
                                         with climate change due to their limited exposure to the

                                             15
topic. The programs that have been implemented, such as a car allowance rebate system or a small
residential housing renewable efficiency program, have had limited to no monitoring or evaluations
of CC indicators.
National Environmental Protection Agency (NEPA) is the main institution with responsibilities in the
monitoring of environmental quality and of implementation environmental policies, also under the
authority of the MEWF. In 2013 its CC division was moved to the MEWF itself and therefore it no
longer has any responsibilities in implementing CC policy beyond limited data gathering through its
county level EPAs.
The National Meteorological Administration (NMA) is under the coordination of the MEWF. It is
governed by public law and it is responsible for extreme events monitoring and meteorological
research (including climate change) in Romania.
The Ministry of Economy, Trade and Tourism (METT) is the central public authority responsible for
developing policies and strategies in the fields of industrial policy, competitiveness, trade and tourism.
However, at this time, there is no programming document that could include CC considerations. In the
Directorate of Industrial Policy there is one person with responsibility over environmental issues,
mainly by reporting on variables monitored due to various directives in the environmental acquis.
The Ministry of Energy, Small and Medium Enterprises and Business (MESMEsB) is responsible for
energy policy/strategic planning, development policy for the creation of SMEs and for developing a
balanced business environment. MESMEsB manages the equivalent allocated emission allowances
and the implementation of the associated National Investment Plan, which was developed in order to
help the Romanian industry sector limit their emissions. There are two people in the General
Directorate for Energy and Environment who deal with environmental issues, again generally related
to reporting on relevant variables (waste, biofuels, etc.). Overall, knowledge about climate change
implications within the ministry is rather low, and collaboration with MEWF is very limited.
The National Authority for Energy Regulation (NAER) is a regulatory body under the authority of the
Romanian Parliament. It plays an important role by regulating the energy market, energy efficiency
and renewable energy. NAER is responsible for monitoring and reporting on the implementation of
National Action Plan for Energy Efficiency, as per Directive 2012/27/UE.
The Ministry of Transport (MT) is responsible for all transport sectors (air, sea, road, rail), as well as
the afferent infrastructure (roads, railways, air infrastructure, shipping, etc.), with the exception of
urban transport, which is covered by local authorities. It is responsible for national infrastructure
policy as well as for the economic policy of transport.
The Ministry of Regional Development and Public Administration (MRDPA) is responsible for regional
development, cohesion and territorial development. This includes spatial planning, urbanism, thermal
rehabilitation of buildings stock; it is also responsible for administration reform, taxation, and local
finance. Due to its regional authority the MRDPA has the potential to play an important role in CC
policy development at the territorial level in both reducing GHG emissions and adapting to the effects
of CC.
National Authority for Regulation of the Communitarian Services for Public Utilities is under the
coordination of MRDPA and is responsible for regulation and monitoring at the central level of the
activities in the field of the communitarian Services for Public Utilities, according to Law 51/2006,


                                                   16
republished and updated in 2013. Considerations on improving the energy efficiency and CC related
standards for public services, for example, will require the assistance of this institution.
The Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MARD) is the central body responsible for
policies on agriculture, rural development, conservation and sustainable land development, and
irrigation and drainage measurement. It plays a key role in policies and measures on CC adaptation.
The National Institute of Statistics (NIS) represents a main source of data and information for the
GHG Inventory. GD no 1570/2007 as amended by GD no 668/2012 established very clear
responsibilities for the NIS to collaborate with the MEWF on the GHG Inventory, most importantly on
the energy balance, industrial processes, etc.
The Ministry of European Funds (MEF) is responsible for managing four operational programs7 for the
2014-2020 programming period, and will therefore play an important role in the way that the 20% of
funds intended for climate change programs are used.
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) plays an important role in international climate change
diplomacy and negotiations. It is the national coordinator and technical point of contact for the
“Europe 2020 Strategy”.
The Ministry of Public Finance (MPF) is one of the administrators of international climate change
financial instruments used by the Romanian state (ex: trade of AAUs, EU – ETS auctions revenues,
savings from the New Entrance Reserve of Joint Implementation etc.). The MPF created its own
department dedicated to administering income from the auctioning of EU-ETS certificates.
The National Prognosis Commission (NPC) is responsible for short, medium and long-term socio-
economic prognosis and modelling in accordance with the government program and national
strategies. It has been involved in the work of developing the modelling under the Component C of
this RAS.
The Ministry of Education and Scientific Research– should play an important role on climate change
research and education but has not yet made climate change a priority.
The National Institute of Public Health is subordinate to the Ministry of Health and has four National
Centers. One of the four centers, the National Center for Monitoring Risk in the Community
Environment, prepares an annual report on "Impacts of climate change on human health” which it
sends to the Ministry of Health.
The National Institute for Hydrology and Water Management is a research institute specializing in
integrated monitoring of water resources. The institute elaborated on the Flooding Risk Management
Strategy, and generally manages information related to flooding.
The Institute of Forest Research and Management is a research institute concerned with monitoring
and researching Romania’s forest fund; this institute has an important is responsible for the Land Use,
Land-Use Change and Forestry (LULUCF) chapter of the GHG Inventory.
The National Research and Development Institute for Soil Science Agrochemistry and Environment
is a research institute under the authority of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development and
is specialized in the study of soil quality, agriculture and environmental protection.


7
Operational programs for Large infrastructure; Competiveness; Human Resources and Technical Assistance

                                                  17
The Institute of Geography of the Romanian Academy is an academic institution specializing in natural
geographical framework and environmental research.
The National Institute for Research-Marine Development “Grigore Antipa” is the National Center for
Oceanographic and Environment Data and the national operator for integrated monitoring of the
physical, chemical, and biological marine environment. It is a Regional Activity Centre for
environmental issues in the management of fisheries and other living marine resources. This institute
is under authority of MEWF.
The National Research and Development Institute GeoEcoMar works in the field of geology,
geophysics and geo-ecology with an emphasis on aquatic environments, marine, deltaic and fluvial.
The National Research and Development Institute for Environmental Protection (NRDIEP) is under
coordination of MEWF and works in the development of fundamental and applied research and
technology, preparation of studies, summaries and forecasts for national programs, and strategies in
environmental protection.

2.4. Local level arrangements
The Local Environmental Protection Agencies (EPAs) have 41 offices throughout Romania at the
county level. These report to the NEPA but are also subordinated to MEWF and may report straight to
it. They are responsible for the implementation of the environmental policy and legislation. Regarding
climate change they act mainly as some data providers for the national GHG Inventory system.
The Local Authority Units (LAUs) at the county, city or locality level do not have any legal obligations
to implement local climate change policies. There are only a few examples of LAUs that have decided
to implement local policies on a voluntary basis. Most of those are generally part of the Covenant of
Mayors.

2.5. Other relevant bodies
The Covenant of Mayors is the main European movement involving local and regional authorities,
voluntarily committing to improving energy efficiency and increasing the use of renewable energy
sources in their territories. Covenant signatories commit to meeting and exceeding the European
Union 20% GHG reduction targeted by 2020. Romania has 56 mayors who have signed the Covenant,
most of whom represent municipalities, followed by cities and one county council (Arges). Of these,
45 have already submitted their action plans and committed to an emission reduction target. The
submitted and approved action plans can be consulted on-line on the web page of the Covenant of
Mayors8. Municipalities that have submitted the Action Plan earlier (2011 – 2012), have already
started to monitor the results.

2.6. Industry and private sector
Industry and private sector CC interests are primarily voiced by those who are part of multinational
companies; they benefit from the support of the company’s headquarters in developing individual
strategies and studies. They will lobby the ministries through their representatives, particularly when


8
 Found in the Actions section here: http://www.covenantofmayors.eu/actions/sustainable-energy-action-
plans_en.html?city=Search+for+a+Sustainable+Energy+Action+Plan...&country_seap=ro&co2=&date_of_appr
oval=&accepted=

                                                  18
new targets or standards are negotiated at the EU level, or when new directives are transposed into
national legislation. The company studies and papers will often be presented to the ministry along
with written positions and an expectation of dialogue and meetings. These practices are often used
by those belonging to high GHG emission sectors, such as the cement industry, steel industry etc.
Others have found that climate change policy can help improve their market position, as in the case
of railways that have a relatively small climate change impact.
It is important to note that there are no institutional tools to communicate with these representatives.
In fact, any kind of communication is done on a voluntary basis, and only at the request of those
stakeholders.

2.7. NGOs
The Romanian Municipalities Association (RMA) is represented in the Committee of the Regions in
Brussels, and has a representative office there. RMA also supports and assists municipalities that have
signed the Covenant of Mayors in their effort to fulfill their duties. It is an associated member of ICLEI.
RMA will often fundraise for implementing projects that help their constituents complete the
inventory or prepare the CC action plans. Without RMA’s in fundraising and contracting expertise,
many municipalities would have difficulties in submitting their CC action plans. The organizations
representing other territorial units have expressed minimal or no interest in CC issues, including the
Romanian County Councils Association, Romanian Cities Association and Romanian Commune
Association. Also there is currently no coordination between MEWF, those associations and local
authorities.
There are a few non-governmental organizations (NGOs) involved in environmental policies, but few
that focus on CC. Terra Mileniul III is one of the few, and it has maintained a singular and consistent
focus on the issue for over 18 years. It also develops awareness activities and assists local authorities
in creating local strategies to reduce GHG emissions, often partnering with RMA. Terra Mileniul III is
also the founding member of the Federation Climate Action Network Romania that is comprised of 13
Romanian NGOs and is the focal point under UNFCCC article 6.
REC Romania also develop CC projects and help improve knowledge of CC challenges and energy
efficiency opportunities for local authorities, NGOs and other target groups.
Greenpeace Romania also carries out awareness campaigns on climate change. As in the case of local
authorities, there is not any mechanism for communication and coordination between MEWF and
NGOs, and many opportunities for fund raising or projects implementation are consequently missing.
In Romania there are a number of investors' associations and councils, and other representatives of
interest groups. Annex 3 presents a list of other entities who have also been actively engaged in talks
with the MEWF on the topic of CC.

2.8. Romanian Best Practices
There are some good practices in Romania. At the local level, the local authority of Avrig City shows
one example of leadership and clear vision on how to meet the risks and opportunities of climate
change. After setting up its local action plan, the local authority of Avrig publicly presented its vision
on how to reach the target for 2020, and also accessed money in accordance with its priorities. Avrig



                                                    19
city set its target at 22% reduction until 2020. To reaching this target, they set up three main pillars,
each of them with specific objectives, as follows:
1) Energy Management
    a) Creating a structure responsible for the implementation the local energy plan.
    b) Monitoring the reducing public buildings consumption.
2) Awareness and Education
    a) Awareness of environmental protection.
    b) Awareness of producing and using renewable resources.
    c) Education around using modern techniques of energy production.
3) Green Energy Acquisition
    a) Developing an aggressive marketing policy.
    b) Accessing specific programs.
    c) Supporting citizens in buying this type of energy.
At the regional level, the Central Region is the first Romanian region to start developing a regional
climate change policy, based on a program financed by the Norwegian EEA Grants (RO 07). The
program supports the local public authorities in three municipalities in Romania’s Central region in
their implementation of current legislation on climate change by developing strategies and plans
about adaptation to climate change. The program will also support the execution of meteorological
studies on regional and local climates. Moreover, the program will pilot climate change adaptation
solutions for the transport, energy, and construction sectors. The program’s beneficiaries are regional
and local decision makers and authorities, the research and education community, NGOs, civil society,
and the general public.




                                                   20
3. National Commitments and International Best Practices
This chapter first introduced the commitment of the Romanian government to strengthening its
institutional capacity for climate actions and then provide some international best practices in policies
and measures to address climate change. They together help set the bar for institutional improvement
in Romania.

3.1. National Commitments
The GoR has committed to fulfilling the ample requirements of the UN and EU for combating climate
change. It is committed to fulfilling climate change obligations due to EU membership. While the
legislative framework of these commitments has been discussed in section 2.1, the commitments
come with a set of targets for emission reductions. Since 2007 the installations covered by the EU ETS
provisions are participating in the trading mechanism established by Directive 2003/87/EC based on
the “cap and trade” principle.
 Smaller installations, and those in less energy-intensive sectors, face country-specific targets stating
that emissions from non-ETS sectors cannot be more than 19 % higher in 2020 than they were in 2005.
Furthermore, Romania has committed to achieving, by 2020, a 24 % share of energy from renewable
sources in their gross final energy consumption (up from 18 % in 2005).
Improving cross-sectoral CC integration will be part of Romania’s overall effort to address
dysfunctional horizontal policymaking processes. In the Partnership Agreement, Romania noted a
distinct lack of coordination between ministries and entities that coordinate intra-sectoral
responsibilities and a high degree of administrative fragmentation. In fact, the MEWF, METT, and MT
in particular are mentioned as being in need of administrative capacity measures. In the document
the GoR commits to providing support to help these ministries develop their administrative capacity
and their responsibilities regarding the use of Cohesion funds. Since CC policies are fundamentally
cross-sectoral, and will be a part of many programs supported by Cohesion funds, the proposals
included in this report should garner the full support of Romanian authorities.
Romania’s efforts to improve public administration management and expertise will also help boost
CC administrative capacity. The National Reform Plan discusses a reassessment of the management
standards in public administration units, including the formulation of new national strategies for
training public servants. This would include specialized training programs on priority sectors, including
on the subject of climate change, for many employees, not just those in management positions.
Essentially, the focus will need to be on providing support for MEWF staff to get management skills,
while staff in other ministries build up their CC knowledge, resulting in an overall increase in capacity.
Furthermore, the National Reform Plan states that over 400 public servants would be instructed on
the EIA and SEA procedures, which would be immensely useful in the implementation of CC M&E.
In Romania’s Environment Law the GoR included a requirement for all central public authorities to
integrate environmental policies into all sectoral policies. In article 80 of EGO 195/2005, all central
authorities are obliged to revise their sectoral strategies and policies with environmental policies in
mind, to seek environmental approval for relevant plans and programs. And, perhaps most
importantly, to have units with personnel specialized in dealing with environmental concerns. If these
provisions were leveraged to clearly include CC awareness and knowledge, Romania’s CC
administrative capacity would increase significantly.


                                                   21
3.2. European Best Practices
There are various experiences in implementing climate actions in developed world, especially in EU
countries. The following represents some of the cases that may prove useful to Romania.

3.2.1.   Multi-stakeholder approach - Austria
Austria’s approach to making and implementing CC policies is a good example of the decentralization
of the decision making process and multi-level implementation.
In Austria, according to the sixth Austrian National Communication on Climate Change, the Federal
Ministry for Agriculture and Forestry, Environment and Water Management has a coordinating
function with respect to the overall climate change policy.
However, responsibility for measures to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and to fulfill other
obligations of the UNFCCC and the Kyoto Protocol is distributed across several federal ministries and
other territorial authorities (Länder, municipalities). Different committees have been established In
order to support the coordination of climate-change-related measures.
In 2011, based on the Climate Change Act, two groups on climate change were founded by law: The
National Climate Change Committee (NKK) and the National Climate Change Council (NKB).
The NKK consists of high level representatives of the Länder, six federal ministries involved in climate
change (Environment, Finance, Economic, Transport, Health, Justice), and the four “Social Partners”
(Trade Unions, Chamber of Labour, Chamber of Commerce, Chamber of Agriculture).
The NKK is supported by the so called National Climate Change Council (NKB), which is composed of,
i.e., representatives from science, energy and industry interest groups, environmental NGOs and the
six political parties represented in the first chamber of the Parliament (Nationalrat).
Both groups are co-chaired by the Head of Environment Department of the Federal Ministry of
Agriculture, Forestry, Environment and Water Management and one representative of the Länder,
alternating on a rotating basis.

3.2.2.   Program Design – United Kingdom
Developing programs that support the implementation of climate change strategy and action plans is
another important issue necessary for robust climate action outcomes. Planning of the programs
requires funds and the allocation of human resources as well as dedicated institutions. The UK
government has valuable experience managing such programs,9 and targeting them appropriately. In
order to implement the Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan, a number of programs were
developed and financed by the UK government:

        The Sustainable Consumption and Production Program will help reduce emissions across the
         economy by helping individuals, organizations and the Government operate in a more
         sustainable, and lower-carbon, way.
        The Waste and Resources Action Program is Defra’s principal delivery body responsible for
         implementing the Government‘s policies to minimize waste and improve the efficiency of



9
 DEFRA Climate Change Plan 2010 - https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/defra-s-climate-change-
plan-2010

                                                  22
         material resources. They are currently focusing on four priority areas: packaging, food waste,
         collection systems, and quality of materials.
        The Green-Works furniture reuse program sells high quality furniture from large organizations
         back into local communities – charities, small businesses, and volunteer organizations – for a
         fraction of their original price, or donates it to poor communities overseas.
        The Government also supports a number of programs to encourage businesses to sustainably
         consume water, such as the Enhanced Capital Allowance scheme for water efficient
         technologies.
        The Community Energy Saving Program addresses both carbon reduction and fuel poverty.
3.2.3.   Dedicated Implementation Funding – UK, Poland, Slovenia
The creation and sound management of a dedicated fund to support climate action can be a
cornerstone for efficient policy implementation.
One example is the UK Green Deal Home Improvement Fund,10 which functions as an incentive scheme
open to all homeowners in England and Wales aiming to improve their household’s energy efficiency.
Poland11 is also using a National Fund for Environmental Protection and Water Management, and the
Voivodeship Funds for supporting measures to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, improve energy
efficiency, develop renewable energy sources, and modernize energy generation.

3.2.4.   Employing subsidiarity
Slovenia has instead relied on the principle of subsidiarity and has placed considerable responsibility
for climate change on LAUs and regions, as described in its Sixth National Communication UNFCCC. In
Slovenia, all municipalities prepare a local energy concept which is approved by the ministry
responsible for energy. Municipalities adopt important decisions to reduce GHG emissions, which is
also within the scope of drafting municipal spatial plans.
To prepare local energy concepts, implement efficient energy use measures, and exploit renewable
resources in municipalities, there are eight local energy agencies. They were set up by the
municipalities with support from the state and from European programs. The agencies connect these
municipalities to a wider geographical area.

3.2.5.   Climate Partners – Norway

Climate Partners are regional Private/Public Partnership networks in Norway focusing on how to
reduce Green House Gas emissions and develop a green economy within a region. There are currently
two regional networks: Klimapartnere Agder and Klimapartnere Hordaland, each of which may contain
counties, cities, some other public partners including universities and research centers, and a number
of private companies. These 45 partners employ a total of 22,000 people. The Climate Partner
regions cooperate closely, and share knowledge and best practices on a frequent basis. Climate
partners in Norway work together on:

        Developing products and services for tomorrow’s low-carbon society.


10
  https://www.gov.uk/green-deal-energy-saving-measures/overview
11
 Poland Sixth National Communication -
http://unfccc.int/national_reports/annex_i_natcom/submitted_natcom/items/3625.php

                                                  23
        Inspiration, methods, and tools for cutting GHG emissions in their own businesses
        Influencing the policies and conditions for sustainable innovation.
        Networking and knowledge sharing internationally through cooperation with the United
         Nations Environmental Program and ICLEI.
        Promoting the organizations and the regions locally, nationally, and internationally.
The partners are obliged to:
      Hold an environmental certification (Eco-lighthouse, ISO or similar recognized standards), or
         start certification in the first membership year.
      Prepare annual climate footprint reports following the international GHG Protocol.
      Prepare an action plan to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in their own organization.
      Pay an annual membership fee.
Producing and sharing knowledge. Increased knowledge provides a better basis for strategic choices
towards a low-emission society. Climate Partners collaborates with national and international experts
in the field to produce publications in relevant disciplines. Climate Partners share their knowledge by
making these publications freely available on www.klimapartnere.no

Communication and dialogue. Communicating their own climate commitment with credibility in an
inspired way is important for Climate Partners. Therefore a priority for the network is cooperating on
increasing knowledge around climate management, as well as climate-and environmental
communications. Climate Partners uses its international network to create meeting venues and
dialogues with prominent, inspirational, and key decision makers.

Results. Climate Partners shows remarkable and tangible results. Partners in Agder, who have
prepared Climate Footprints over four years, have reduced GHG emissions by 21%. A number of new
green products and services have been developed, including a concept for certified green conferences
and climate neutral publications. In addition, focus and projects have led to implementing new hybrid
buses in the city of Arendal, new low-emission buildings, and climate leadership programs, including
employee involvement and an increased focus on green purchasing in particular from the public
partners around developing a green regional market. Partners in Hordaland have just started and hope
to achieve similar results using the same methods.

3.2.6.   Good Public Engagement
Austria12 has a clearly defined policies regarding education on environment, which was implemented
in 1979. Since 1979, Environmental Education (EE) has been a principle of instruction and has been
integrated into the curricula of general education and—since the beginning of the 1990s— also into
those of the vocational school system.
The Constitutional Decree “Environmental Education in Schools” (edited 1985, re-published 1994)
defines the main aims of EE: Action competence; experiencing of democratic attitudes, and behavior
in order to enable learners to be active in political life. This decree was the first national document to
support EE-oriented project teaching, and was the stimulus and the basis for the development of EE
in Austria.



12
 Austria’s 6th National Communication UNFCCC

                                                   24
The Austrian Strategy for Education for Sustainable Development was tabled by the Federal Ministry
for Education, Arts and Culture, the Federal Ministry for Agriculture, Forestry, Environment and Water
Management and the Federal Ministry of Science and Research and passed the Austrian Council of
Ministers on November 12, 2008.
Finding pathways to make CC knowledge easily accessible as part of higher education has been
important for Denmark as well. Denmark is offering a good example of an e-learning course in Climate
Change Impacts, Adaptation and Mitigation, developed by the University of Copenhagen in close
cooperation with the Danish Meteorological Institute, UC Berkeley and Australian National University.
The course focuses on the impacts of climate change, and the human response to climate change.
Through remote learning the course can be taken from anywhere in the world and it is open for master
degree students and continuing education students with a relevant bachelor degree in natural science,
social science and economics (www.climate-change.dk).
Another example of cooperation between the university and business sectors for complying with the
new requirements of green growth can be found in Belgium13. A training session organized jointly by
the Universities of Louvain and Liège on strategic carbon management was set up under the
competitiveness cluster GreenWin (horizontal axis —training) in 2012. In fact, the number of green
jobs in industries linked to ecology is increasing significantly; there are therefore clearly opportunities
for growth and jobs. Sectoral agreements between the industrial sector (chemicals, paper, steel, glass,
cement, etc.) and Wallonia show the business world’s awareness and commitment of to the question
of greenhouse gas emissions.
The introduction of climate change into vocational and professional education and training is very
important as well. Germany14 is a good example of integrated curricula and inter-sectoral
qualification. All newly created or revised occupations in the trade/ technical and
commercial/administrative fields that are recognized as requiring official qualifications follow the
principle of integrated action contexts and contain at least one element in their job descriptions
relating to environmental protection. In addition, environmental protection is included in the training
curricula. For example, environmental occupations and those in the chemistry and pharmacy fields
include relevant aspects of sustainable development under the “responsible care” part of the job
description. Commercial occupations in the tourism and travel industry likewise include special
qualifications in sustainability and the environmental aspects of tourism.
The expansion of renewable energy affects all sectors that use renewables to generate energy. Existing
occupational training curricula now incorporate skills and knowledge in the field of renewable energy,
ensuring a broad skills base in this field.
Involving commercial entities has also been successful in Switzerland. Many Swiss companies are
undertaking voluntary efforts to minimize their climate-impacting emissions and contribute to climate
protection. Some have even decided to voluntarily compensate their (unavoidable) CO2 emissions,
mainly by using carbon offset projects.
     Examples of climate-neutral services: The first fully climate-neutral hotel chain in the world is
      located in Switzerland. In addition to their effort to reduce emissions through energy efficiency


13
    Belgium’s 6th National Communication UNFCCC
14
    Germany’s 6th National Communication of CC UNFCCC

                                                    25
     and other climate-friendly measures, the hotel chain offsets its remaining emissions. Swiss youth
     hostels also offer guests the option of a climate-neutral overnight stay. Examples of other climate-
     neutral services are flights, printing, sending of letters and packets, heating, driving, or car sharing
     etc.
    Examples of climate-neutral products: There are several companies offering climate-neutral
     products, such as food and drinks, T-Shirts, bouquets, vegetable gardening, etc.
3.3. Kyoto Article 10 Commitments
Germany could be a good example for ways in which to fulfill Kyoto article 10 commitments around
aid to developing countries. The International Climate Initiative, which the federal government set up
in 2008, supports activities in developing countries, and emerging economies and transition countries.
A key element in the International Climate Initiative’s public awareness activities is its website at
www.bmu-klimaschutzinitiative.de/international. Brochures and events back up the website.
Although Romania’s status has so far ensured it has no responsibilities under Article 10, it has taken
on voluntary commitments in terms of CC aid for Moldova.

3.4. Guiding Principles of International Climate Finance
The Multilateral Development Banks (MDBs)15 set out their principles for monitoring climate finance
in the 2014 Joint Report on MDB Climate Finance,16 issued in 2015. The Document contains guidance
sections for finance tracking methodologies. This could be a valuable input in Romania’s efforts to
create the guidelines for the projects discussed in the strategy.
Mitigation. The MDBs had agreed to a set of common principles for climate mitigation finance tracking
that they use in their reporting17, since internal methodologies may otherwise vary. In Romania the
general approach will largely rely on Implementing Regulation EU 215/2014, but the MDB principles
may still provide a good starting point for guidelines.
The approach of EU Regulation no. 215/2014, built on the Rio Markers, is not as effective in evaluating
adaptation projects, and here the MDB approach may be more useful. In terms of adaptation finance
tracking the MDBs have set out three principles:
     (1) Placing the projects in the CC vulnerability context, based on a strong evidence base – which
         in Romania would mean using and understanding the results of national and regional climate
         modelling;
     (2) Making an explicit statement of intent to improve adaptation to CC through the project –
         which would include a thorough discussion of specific local factors;
     (3) Articulate a clear and direct link between project activities and reducing climate vulnerability.
         In the case of MDB’s, only those project activities that explicitly address CC are reported as
         climate finance, which does not seem feasible in Romania considering current legislation and
         the administrative burden it would create.


15
  Includes the African Development Bank (AfDB), the Asian Development Bank (ADB), the European Bank for
Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), the European Investment Bank (EIB), the InterAmerican
Development Bank (IDB), and the International Finance Corporation (IFC) and World Bank (WB) from the
World Bank Group (WBG).
16
   http://www.worldbank.org/content/dam/Worldbank/document/Climate/mdb-climate-finance-2014-joint-
report-061615.pdf
17
   http://www.worldbank.org/content/dam/Worldbank/document/Climate/common-principles-for-climate-
mitigation-finance-tracking.pdf

                                                     26
4. Assessment of Institutional Capacity Gaps and Areas of
   Improvement
With primary legislation in place, Romania needs to find ways to implement programs and monitor
their performance. A serious impediment to effective CC action is the fact that CC is fundamentally a
cross-sectoral policy implemented by the MEWF, which has authority over only a fraction of the
relevant issues. For example, ETS funds have stayed largely untouched due to an implementation
mechanism that is incapable of analyzing national CC sectoral priorities and selecting appropriate
projects. Other ministries, who had the possibility to access the funds made minimal or no attempts
to do so. Conversely, even when a policy is put into place there have been no available tools for
monitoring performance, as in the case of housing stock energy efficiency programs. Climate change
finance18 has spurred innovation internationally, and Romania will need to build its capacity and
expertise if it is to implement the strategy effectively and make good use of the funds it is able to
access.
Private climate research and development, as well as overall CC investment, will need to be
supported and fostered by public policy. The Strategy identifies key actions different sectors of the
economy must take in order to reduce GHG emissions relative to the current Business As Usual (BAU)
scenario. The relevant sectors are: energy, transport, industrial processes, agriculture, forestry, other
land use, and waste. In order to meet the GHG emissions reductions targeted for 2030 overall,
Romania can no longer count on “economic shocks” as it did in the first commitment period (2008 -
2012 vs. 1990). Additional investments will be needed in order to reach the target while the country
maintains an acceptable level of economic growth, and while some public funds will be available, the
bulk of investments will need to be made by the private sector. This is particularly important for
Romania, as the Strategy identifies several household energy efficiency measures that have negative
costs (the benefits exceed the costs).
As new international CC commitments are created, Romania will need to be less reactive and engage
more stakeholders. Developments within the EU and UNFCCC mean that new targets are being
designed for 2030. So far in EU CC negotiations, Romania has been largely passive and failed to make
its voice heard at times, due to the lack of support structures for formulating a clear and timely
message. If Romania is to become a more active player in the climate arena, it will need the tools to
quickly analyze the potential impact of various policies may have within the country in order to
formulate a national position, so it can argue with a stronger voice. It also means that there should be
a procedure to ensure that the array of stakeholders likely to be affected by new CC legislation is kept
informed of developments and consulted quickly so that authorities have a comprehensive
understanding of any cross sectoral impact.
CC expertise is extremely limited at the operational level, which impacts all aspects and levels of CC
policymaking and the capacity for future planning. The Romanian educational system has not yet
adapted to the current market requirements and political changes to introduce climate change
specializations into the curricula. There are some technical programs in terms of construction,
particularly on energy efficiency, but those are generally of limited scope. In addition, climate change
forums and platforms are missing at the regional or local levels in particular, and there are no
exchanges of good practices between stakeholders. Thus any accumulated expertise is not shared or

18
        Such as IEE, Life, Horizont 2020

                                                   27
maintained. Consequently, there are only a few Romanian experts who have either been trained
abroad, or worked in the field in Romania. The private sector will attract most of those experts,
therefore public institutions often cannot find the type of personnel they will need to effectively
design and implement CC policies.

4.1. Capacity gaps/needs in terms of engaging the international CC Community
Romania lacks the capacity and coordination necessary to participate effectively in international CC
debates and European policy-making. The CC agenda will likely continue to be driven by international
developments, which in turn will impact the implementation of the Strategy. Furthermore, since so
much of Romanian CC legislation is essentially the transposed European legislation, participating
actively in the European process is a matter of national interest and will be highly impactful on the
implementation of the LCGGP. Following discussion with authorities and experts, four major issues
hindering Romania’s ability to more successfully engage with the international community were
identified: representation, synergy, expertise and evidence based policy making, and transparency.
Representation – Romania currently lacks a strong voice in the international climate change arena.
Cost cutting measures have reduced the staff of public authorities, and there have been times with no
Romanian representatives or very small teams at committee meetings. Furthermore, the UNFCC focal
point will participate in all CC related workgroups taking place without necessarily having a high
degree of expertise in most of the debated topics. In addition, there are technical groups that require
specific technical expertise and in that case staff of appropriate subordinate research institutions will
be sought. Institutions like NMA and the FRMI, among others, represent Romania successfully, but
experts for other technical groups have generally been harder to find. While there are qualified
Romanian professionals, the process of finding and assigning them can be opaque or non-existent.
Synergy – Successful negotiation of cross-sectoral issues like CC requires functional intra-
institutional communication at the national level. CC policy negotiations require effective trans-
sectorial policy coordination, which will need further attention. Since CC is not high on Romania’s
political agenda, sectoral issues with CC implications will be considered solely on criteria used by the
authority responsible for the sector, rather than attempting to work in synergy with the Strategy.
Furthermore, the information needed to make these decisions in an integrated way is frequently only
available to the sectoral authority, with no easily available channels for communicating it efficiently
to other relevant authorities.
Expertise and evidence based policy making – Romania has technical experts but not an ample
capacity for policy analysis. The Romanian GHG Inventory and Registry are now quite effectively
reporting on GHG emissions in Romania and the functioning of the ETS scheme. However this type of
data in itself is not sufficient for making decisions regarding the impact of any particular new policies
being negotiated at the international level. The type of socio-economic information needed for
negotiating on LULUCF for example cannot be based simply on carbon emission levels, which are
immediately available to the MEWF. Since there is so little cross-sectoral information and expertise
on evaluating it, in the case of major policy decisions ministries will initiate the procurement of studies
undertaken by third parties. However, due to bureaucratic processes or lack of funding, the studies
will often be initiated very late in the negotiating process, and they will be rushed and costly.
Furthermore, the third parties will largely need to do the cross-sectoral coordination and obtain the
information from the other relevant national authorities, delaying the process even further since data


                                                    28
transparency is so low. As a result Romania will often only be able to formulate a position late in the
negotiating process, and not always on the most solid evidence basis.
Transparency – Reaching a climate change negotiating position for Romania is challenging and does
not involve a stakeholder consultation process. Despite public disclosure legislation the actual
engagement with the public, and more importantly with researchers and experts, remains limited.
Positions in the negotiating process are not made public prior the meetings and do not benefit from
exposure to the public eye. Furthermore, since technical input is limited and negotiating a national
position on any given policy at the EU level occurs late in the process or not at all, final decisions will
often be taken at the last moment by the top leadership without any explanations to or further debate
from other stakeholders.

4.2. Administrative capacity gaps/needs at the national level
CC is not generally seen as a national priority in Romania, except in the situation of dealing with
urgent national disasters. Few line ministries have taken CC up as an issue on their agenda or react
promptly to the requests of the MEWF on CC. The CC as a whole does not generally stir much interest
in governmental debates. The lack of interest is reflected in the comparatively low allocation of funds
within the national budget towards climate change19. The issue only surfaces in the aftermath of
significant failures, such as Romania’s loss of eligibility for participation in the flexible mechanisms of
the Kyoto protocol, or major natural disasters associated with climate change, such as drought or
flooding. When it is brought up in parliamentary debates, it is seen exclusively as an issue of
environmental protection, though aspects of social protection are considered when associated with
floods.

4.2.1.   Administrative capacity gaps/needs at the ministerial level
The CC policymaking process is highly bureaucratic and can at times be slow and ineffective. The
procedural steps associated with any decision making mean that even minor changes to legislative
acts can take nearly a year to enter into law. The number of internal and external approvals necessary
has meant that even relatively small changes to the document regulating the NCCC have taken quite
long to become official. The same issues that make policymaking cumbersome and inefficient
nationally also affect CC policymaking, particularly since it is by nature cross-sectoral, and requires a
long term approach without having immediately visible results. CC also has a multitude of public policy
implications that do not manage to move past the theoretical stage in Romania. It should be
emphasized that all ministries have a department of public policy, which should be consulted in the
first steps of public policy development. Unfortunately, these departments are rarely responsible for
more than just reporting to the General Secretariat on Government policies or working on narratives
about the Government Program, including within MEWF.
Sound long-term planning, including indicator monitoring and evaluation, has not been used
consistently so far. As mentioned before, CC awareness among national level authorities is quite low.
While the concept of CC is somewhat known, the policy implications for each sector are not. Few
sectoral strategic planning document to date has clearly defined either objectives on CC or implicit
targets and monitoring indicators. The most attention paid to the topic is the use of the phrase “in the
context of climate change” or other similar declaratives. One unfortunate example is the Waste


19
 http://www.mfinante.ro/proiectbuget2015.html?pagina=domenii

                                                    29
Management Strategy (approved by GD no. 870/2013). The priority objective in chapter 4.3 says
"Correlation of waste management policies with those of Climate Change” and lists monitoring
indicators for reporting on waste collection. The National Research Development and Innovation
Strategy only vaguely mentions energy, environment, and climate change research as a priority.
Another example for this lack of long-term planning capacity is the implementation difficulty of the
SEA procedure, which includes CC related aspects. In accordance with the SEA Directive, any type of
development strategy or plan with environmental implications should undergo the SEA procedure in
its formative stages. This would save time completing the procedures involved in SEA. Unfortunately
CC awareness is also low among local SEA consultants, which can often result in vague targets and
improper indicators.
Inter-ministerial collaboration is difficult. The MEWF, which advocates for CC at the ministerial level,
has fairly low negotiating power with other ministries, and therefore has difficulty in making itself
heard and understood. There is one interesting example of this, namely the National GHG Inventory.
On the one hand it is produced by compiling data though functional partnerships with other
institutions. The impulse to make the data flow reasonably efficiently is the fact that reporting GHG
Inventory is a legal obligation to the EU, EEA and UNFCCC. On the other hand, line ministries and
various entities contributing data essentially never receive feedback regarding their inputs. There is
no policy for presenting results during Government meetings so that other ministers might know how
their sectors contribute to the total GHG emissions, or how to determine the most cost-effective
measures to reduce or adapt their sector’s effects on CC. This explains the reaction of the middle
management staff of line ministries who perceive climate change only as a constraint and cannot
understand that CC policies also offer opportunities, especially in the context of the new 2014-2020
financial programming period. Furthermore, at the level of line ministries, there is a lack of dedicated
staff in charge with climate change related matters. This generates further difficulties for MEWF in the
inter-institutional dialogue.

The capacity of decision-making at sectoral level needs to be clarified and improved . In Romania,
the energy sector is responsible for 58% of total greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions (excluding LULUCF;
70% when including transport) and has contributed 58% of the overall GHG emission reduction since
1989. The Marginal Abatement Cost Curve study recently done by the World Bank for LCGGP shows
that several household energy efficiency measures have negative costs (benefits exceed the costs),
this includes energy efficient lighting, air conditioning, and household appliances (refrigerators and
washing machines). And yet authority over energy efficiency is not clearly defined in Romania: the
department of energy in the MESMEsB is responsible for energy policy, and NAER can propose soft
policies and monitors the implementation of the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan in compliance
with Law 121/2014. But this responsibility overlap has nevertheless seemed at times to become an
accountability void.

The transport sector in Romania is responsible of 12 – 13% of total GHG emissions but the entire policy
on transport has limited coordination due to the overlapping responsibilities of the various actors –
the Ministry of Transport is mainly responsible with the national transport infrastructure, local and
regional authorities are responsible for the local and regional infrastructure, the Department of Energy
in the MESMEsB is responsible for biofuels. This makes decision-making on climate policy difficult in
the transport sector.



                                                  30
The agriculture sector accounts for 15% of the total GHG emissions (excluding LULUCF). The
integration of climate policy became important only in the last few years due to the multiannual
financial framework 2014 – 2020 that requires action on greening agriculture, emissions reductions
and adaptation to climate change. The implementation of the current National Program for Rural
Development, which includes those type of measures, will require increased expertise in the field of
agriculture and CC.

The same situation will be faced by all the other sectors where measures for mitigation or adaptation
to climate change are provided in the Operational Programs or discussed in the Strategy.




                                                 31
Table 1: 2011 World Bank Functional Review of Environment, Forestry and Waters - Outstanding Issues20
         Policy and strategy formulation and
                                                        Operational capacity, systems, and procedures                       Cross-Cutting Issues
                      management
                                                      ►        Despite the fact that most of the EU
                                                       environmental legislation and institutional
                                                       structures to implement and enforce it are in
  ►        Delays in activities when the                                                                    ►         Human Resources policy and strategy is
                                                       place, and while the system will continue to
  Government changes, resulting in managerial                                                               mainly focused on traditional personnel
                                                       require fine-tuning and adjustment, one of
  changes and political appointments, and                                                                   administration       and     transactional  roles
                                                       Romania’s biggest challenges relates to human
  impacting consistency of managing the strategic                                                           (recruitment and compensation), with no
                                                       resources capacity and the enabling environment
  priorities, irrespective of the political change;                                                         performance management system in place to
                                                       (including information technology, coordination,
  ►        Weak policy making and performance                                                               support strategic objectives and allow staff
                                                       and accountability) for implementation;
  monitoring capacity, partly because of a weak,                                                            contributions to be recognized and measured in
                                                      ►        Poor and slow communication among
  unempowered Public Policy Unit (PPU), and also                                                            terms of value-added for the sector.
                                                       MEWF‘s directorates; lack of implementation and
  because of a highly centralized and somewhat
                                                       follow-up of the provisions of the Internal Rules of
  opaque priority setting and performance                                                                   ►         Lack of an integrated Information
                                                       Operation (ROF) for MEWF. While the ROF
  management process.                                                                                       Technology system (in the MEWF) with reliable
                                                       contains over 200 pages of detailed attributions
  ►        Over-reliance on the Minister and the                                                            networking, firewall, resource sharing, backup
                                                       for each structure within MEWF, it does not
  College process (also chaired by the Minister) for                                                        facilities. And a communications system (e.g.,
                                                       address either the functional relations among the
  too many decisions and clearances, including                                                              intranet) and lack of operational databases (e.g.
                                                       different Directorates or their concrete outputs.
  routine management and oversight decisions and                                                            on      permitting    and     enforcement)   and
                                                      ►        Weak inter-ministerial cooperation (e.g.
  overburdening the minister and his cabinet with                                                           data/knowledge products to support work-
                                                       operation of Inter-ministerial Committees): For
  too many activities, with potential negative                                                              related activities and learning.**
                                                       instance, the inter-ministerial committees on
  impact on overall effectiveness.*
                                                       climate change and sustainable development are
                                                       not held on a regular basis, and follow up
                                                       mechanisms are weak.
*Please note that the use of the College has varied significantly depending on the minister appointed at the time.
** Basic environmental data was introduced, but has low performance and is already outdated. Information and communications technology (ICT) and data
transfer modes are limited, and overall data security is low with the exception of the GHG registry. The institutional website has taken a new form essentially
with each incoming minister with little to no attention paid to the upkeep of informational structure. Minimal legally required information and media events
are the main content of the website as it stands.

20
     Find the full report at: https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/12292

                                                                                  32
4.2.2.   Administrative capacity gaps/need within the MEWF
Little progress is made by the Government to implement the recommendations provided in the
functional review. In, 2011, the World Bank delivered a functional review on Environment, Water and
Forestry. The report reviewed the administrative capacity of the MEWF in an effort to help the
government of Romania meet convergence requirements. The report made in-depth
recommendations, many of which have not yet been followed, leaving some of the same issues
outstanding. We have highlighted some of the most serious issues impacting the effectives of the
MEWF in Table 1 above. Therefore, the rest of this section will focus primarily on matters that are of
particular relevance to the CC unit within the MEWF.
Internal communication within the MEWF is also more challenging than it should be. Different teams
in the CC directorate have different areas of responsibilities—EU-ETS, National GHG Inventory, Non-
ETS—and often perform their work without consistent inter-department communication. The same is
true for the level of communication between the CC directorate and other directorates within the
MEWF. Therefore producing integrated and comprehensive legislation is a painfully long and
inefficient process, prolonged by the bureaucratic processes of providing inputs and obtaining
approvals.
Operationalizing CC knowledge into effective public policy making is the highest challenge facing
Romanian authorities. While the Strategy relies on substantial data and provides a significant step
forward, the role of implementing it, and the action plan around it falls to national authorities. While
Romanian expertise is high on targeted technical subjects, the ability to capture the full picture of CC
implications for a policy area is limited. The reliance on EU and UN policies is in some part due to
Romania’s inability to use CC data to make functional public policies effective at the national level. A
significant number of MEWF CC directorate staff, for example, have primarily implementation
responsibilities and limited knowledge of how public policy is supposed to be crafted, since they were
trained to maintain the GHG inventory or the ETS and only later started to work within the ministry
with no further training on public policymaking. In fact at the time of the writing of this report there
is no unit within the directorate responsible for policymaking as such, and very few staff members.
The MEWF has maintained few active partnerships, primarily only with institutions that are essential
to their capacity to fulfil international reporting responsibilities. That includes the NIS, which
contributes to the National GHG Inventory, or the NMA, which provides climate and meteorological
analyses. However, even these relationships normally remain minimal, i.e. a request for information
without any expectation of a continued dialogue. Representatives of sectoral interest groups, like in
the case waste or cement, will maintain an informal dialogue through representatives who come and
visit the ministry, but comments on policy remain informal since draft legislation usually is only
published for consultation, by the letter if the law, in its final stages, after all other ministries have
approved it and any significant changes would require another round of approvals from each ministry.
Research centers or other civil society institutions find it even more difficult to interact with the
ministries compared to other public institutions. Even those that have a history of collaboration hit
bureaucratic hurdles when trying to formalize partnership agreements.
High institutional turnover and instability has been a feature of Romanian CC policymaking. When
the name Ministry of Environment and Climate Change was adopted in 2012, there was a belief that
climate change would finally enter the list of Government priorities. At the same time the staff in
charge of ETS and the GHG Registry from the National Environmental Protection Agency was

                                                   33
transferred to the ministry. In practice, the move occurred several months later creating uncertainty
among all team members. Unfortunately, after the elections in December 2014, the Government was
reorganized and the Ministry of Environment has once again been redefined as the Ministry of
Environment, Waters and Forests. Due to the reorganization, the General Directorate of Climate
Change went from 42 staff members to less than 30. Some employees were redistributed to be
responsible for other sectors in the MEWF, on which they had limited knowledge, and others have left
the ministry entirely, leading to a significant loss of expertise. Such reorganizations have occurred
annually, or every two years, and staff selections are rarely based on performance reviews or a need
analysis.
The CC unit is understaffed and has insufficient capacity for policymaking. All of the three units in
the CC directorate are primarily preoccupied with reporting to international institutions- the national
GHG Registry, the ETS service, and the national GHG Inventory. Although the number of staff members
is comparable to other units in the MEWF, all other sectors have representatives in the local EPAs,
whereas CC is only operated within the ministry itself. The National Service for Estimating GHG
Emissions (NSEGE) unit limited staff that needs to cover a multitude of topics, from regulating carbon
markets for non-ETS sectors to adaptation, monitoring and evaluation, special projects and interacting
with other ministries during policy negotiations. The staff is therefore often over-extended, covering
topics with which they have little experience.
The level of expertise among the MEWF staff varies substantially. While there are experts with deep
knowledge of the topic they cover, there are also staff with more limited administrative skills, without
these differences necessarily being reflected in pay grade or responsibilities. Annual reviews have
been introduced, but tend to be perfunctory and ineffective in motivating employees. Workplace
dynamic is also sub-optimal because staff in leadership positions are not required to have training in
management skills. The high degree of turnover has amplified the overall human resources issues,
particularly in concert with the emphasis on freezing or reducing staff numbers and restrictions on
hiring new civil servants. The hiring freeze has produced counterintuitive results, with employees
being transferred to other sectors for which they have little relevant experience. A CC specialist is
formed over time and requires exposure to the topic, continuous documentation, and good internal
communication within the team, but few of these conditions are maintained for Romanian civil
servants working on CC, who have to make challenging personal efforts to build expertise.
Employee pay within the MEWF does not promote staff retention. In Romania, the average pay of
public servants working in central authority units depends on the ministry’s sectoral responsibilities.
The MEWF has among the lowest average pay, sometimes three time lower than in other ministries.
In 201121 the MEWF pay on average was 1781 lei, compared to 7892 lei for MFA, 4612 lei for the
Ministry of Justice, and 4612 lei for MADR. Moreover, pay is differentiated by rank within the ministry,
but actual performance evaluation is effectively irrelevant. Low pay does not help maintain job
satisfaction or performance, especially considering the high amount of responsibility assigned to staff
and the lack of technical expertise of the supervising authorities. After staff has gained some job
experience quite frequently they are quickly recruited by the private sector, without any ethical
sectoral restrictions.




21
     http://www.evz.ro/topul-celor-mai-mari-salarii-din-ministere-930679.html

                                                       34
At the moment Romania has almost no effective, rapid tools for assessing the impact of CC policy .
Romania does not have procedures for assessing the socio-economic impact of GHG emission
reductions measures or the impact other sectoral measures have on overall GHG emissions. The
country produces national statistics, prognosis, and modelling annually, but none of the tools are
responsive or can be easily used by ministries throughout the public policymaking cycle. Within
Component C of this RAS, the World Bank has developed in-depth analyses at the sectoral and macro-
economic level, sectoral analyses and modeling in energy, transport, urban and water sectors, macro-
economic modeling, and macro-economic impact assessment. However at the moment there is no
national capacity for maintaining and using these tools after the World Bank team is no longer
involved.
Monitoring and evaluating projects with CC components will be extremely challenging during the
next financial period. While this issue is discussed further in Chapter 6, it is important to note that
much responsibility for the framework of M&E for the next financial period will fall within to the
MEWF. The MEF will be responsible for managing most of the OP from which funding for CC related
projects is likely to be drawn. However, they will rely on intermediary bodies for design of the actual
financing programs, and in fact they have integrated the MA SOP within their organization.
Unfortunately the staff of the MEF and MA SOP have little technical experience with CC issues or how
to best design appropriate M&E mechanisms, and therefore they will come to the unit in the MEWF
for help. The answer to these type of requests is likely to put further strain on MEWF personnel.

4.3. Administrative capacity gaps/need at the local level
There is a lack of incentives for local authorities to create or implement climate change policies.
There is currently no legislation, plan or program that makes climate obligations binding for local
authorities (LAU 1&2) or that even engages them in any way. Individual cities, particularly those that
are part of the Covenant of Mayors, have created local strategies for dealing with CC. Brasov for
example has created an energy efficiency body and produced a fairly comprehensive sustainable
development strategy. However, any such initiatives have been taken at the regional/provincial or
local level on a voluntary basis, with often limited monitoring of CC indicators and no aggregation or
sharing of good practices or any type of incentives from the national level.

Institutional capacity for stepping up climate actions at local level is largely underdeveloped. Local
authorities usually do not have the staff or expertise to design local CC planning documents. There
have been housing stock energy efficiency improvement national programs which allocated project
implementation responsibilities to local authorities. This led to lengthy delays since LAUs were
unprepared for the administrative burden, causing some investments from the 2007-2013 period to
continue even today. In addition, there has been no climate change modeling available that could be
easily used by LAUs, though the NMA for example has argued that it has the capacity, if not the
funding, to produce such models. LAUs need technical and logistical support for developing,
implementing and monitoring comprehensive CC programs. However, due to austerity measures LAUs
could probably not all justify structures with exclusively CC responsibilities, but better connections
with other actors are not cultivated to compensate for that loss. Nevertheless successful local CC
planning has usually involved the support of two non-state actors: the Romanian Energy - Cities
Network or the Romanian Municipalities Association (RMA).




                                                  35
Community engagement around climate change priorities is largely missing at local level. The only
mobilization of communities occurs post disasters, if a connection is made to climate hazards (floods,
warm waves, etc.). Even in those cases the correlation to long term prevention policies is nearly never
made. With the notable exceptions mentioned above, dialogue with other climate change
stakeholders (NGOs, companies, agencies, etc.) is minimal at the local level. The public awareness
programs accessible to local communities are missing in part due to the limited number of Civil Society
Organizations dealing with CC and the lack of financial support for such projects. There is a only
relatively small federation of NGOs, the Climate Action Network Romania which is involved in climate
change projects implementation al the local levels, but it does not cover the entire country and it has
limited expertise and funds. For further clarity of this section, a short description of Romania’s
regional development arrangements can be found in Annex 4.




                                                  36
5. Strengthening Institutional Arrangements
In order for CC policy to be effective in Romania it must be treated as both a national priority and a
cross-sectorial responsibility. Currently the MEWF is the only institution legally responsible for CC,
despite the fact that its actual authority covers at most a tenth of what CC policies need to cover. It is
overwhelmed, and is likely to become further overwhelmed as carbon pricing becomes increasingly
integrated within European markets. Instead, CC responsibilities need to become a part of the
activities of all relevant line ministries as well as the national government. If Romania is to become a
successful low-carbon economy, cross-sectoral CC policies must provide a backbone of long term
planning that is cognizant of externalities and focused on energy efficiency. That is why the NCCC
needs further reforms, supported by accompanying changes in line ministries, in order to make it an
effective national decision making support body.
CC policies need to have the support of the public, authorities, and industry alike, and will need to
be integrated into overall national reform efforts. Romania has several strategic planning documents
proposing capacity building measures, some of which are presented briefly in Annex 5. The changes
proposed in this report, in terms of a willingness to have a higher grade of expertise while sharing
information and decision-making, are aligned to those strategic documents and will rely on Romania’s
ability to change institutional culture and practices. A more inclusive and informed process is needed,
one which can only occur when more of the stakeholders are involved and made aware of the
extensive CC implications for their individual sectors.
The creation of the CPN would provide a nexus of CC knowledge as well as a link between public
and private stakeholders, without adding an overwhelming administrative burden. The Climate
Partners (CPs) would build a network through which the NCCC would engage with stakeholders,
enhance the basis of CC knowledge, and aid the implementation of CC programs. Being based on a
PPP, it would act as a forum for the coordination of a knowledge platform, providing missing links to
the private sector, local level and civil society. Seeing as Romania does not have a good, transparent
policy history, and tends to make national institutions heavily bureaucratic, this formula would
increase flexibility while lowering costs. Furthermore, as a repository of knowledge it would guarantee
the gradual increase of Romania’s overall CC awareness as it builds membership and prestige. The
network’s (CP) initial set up and development will require an allocation of public funds until it becomes
functional and begins expanding. It can become self-sustainable later on with the introduction of
membership fees and other forms of grants as it consolidates. A potential financing source for this
network is the ACOP. The projects implemented by the CPN could also afford the financing of a
secretariat that would make the network functional and diminish pressure on the MEWF staff.
In the medium-long term, strategy implementation will need to be accompanied by changes to the
educational system. Previous educational reform efforts have tended to not take global economic
changes and trends into consideration. This has led to a near complete lack of experts in sectors key
to the Green Growth program’s long term goals, like climate change or developing a low carbo n
economy. Education in the near future should be based on needs that are established in partnership
with administrative and economic factors and in consideration of market and development priorities.
Life-long learning programs could reduce shortfalls and should therefore be encouraged and
implemented, particularly for public servants. An efficient use of ESIF could help in fulfilling this
objective.


                                                   37
Entrenched practices will need to be changed gradually and accompanied by appropriate M&E
procedures. Since Romania applied for entry to the EU, many strategic assessments have discussed
administrative capacity building as central to Romanian development. Nevertheless a high degree of
resistance and rigidity is inherent in the system. Seeing as this report accompanies the National
Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth Program, which covers the 2016-2030 period, it
recommends a staged, long-view approach that continually adds blocks to make CC gain acceptance,
as well as a broad and multi-level policy making structure. Every step of the way will need to be
accompanied by technical and financial monitoring and evaluation mechanisms which will need to be
calibrated so as to not cause unnecessary burdens, but which maintains a focus low carbon
development as an end goal.

5.1. Legal Framework
The legal framework needs to be fine-tuned to allow for inclusive and open CC policies, supported
by the smart use of ICT. A thorough review of public authorities’ data sharing and transparency
practices and policies would reveal that transparency legislation is respected at most in letter, not in
spirit. For example, the websites of central public authorities often get an overhaul whenever the
minister changes with no effort to maintain either a continuity of data or clear archives. Well-
organized web content that is frequently updated, and easily accessible archives, would also go a long
way towards reducing the number of public information requests, therefore reducing administrative
burden. Inter-institutional channels of communication will also need to be updated to allow for the
easier transfer of information, backed by ICT investments made possible through the Administrative
Capacity Operational Program (ACOP). Most importantly for the success of the proposals made in this
report, in terms of the relationship between the CPs and the public, a baseline of transparency needs
to be established and maintained beyond the minimal data currently shared on authorities’ websites.
This would include updates on progress in policy negotiations at the international level, with
exceptions made only for clearly defined reasons of state secrecy.

5.1.1.   Climate Partners Network (CPN)
Create the legal framework for the CPN in Romania. In Norway the concept of Climate Partners was
constructed on the basis of a public - private partnership (PPP), an approach that would also be
optimal in Romania’s implementation. While Romania has little experience with successfully
implementing PPPs it can instead draw on the experience of the LEADER22 approach in agriculture.
During the period 2007-2013, Romania had some successes and some failures in the bottom-up
approach to local development. But the use of Local Action Groups (LAGs) may prove particularly
valuable as a basis for rooting the Climate Partners into the local level. In order to be effective
however, the Climate partners must also have a voice and access to the national and international CC
arenas. At the national level they can actively engage with the NCCC and technical groups through
relevant representatives.
The network would initially be built on the institutions and resources already in place , including
interest groups, research institutions, NGOs and others already engaged in CC activities. As previously
discussed, there are not many entities engaged with the topic, but the list would be gradually
increased, perhaps starting with those mentioned in Annex 3. The CPs would gain the recognition they

22
  The EU maintains an excellent resource site on the LEADER approach at:
http://enrd.ec.europa.eu/en/leader/leader-tool-kit

                                                    38
deserve, have more clear ways of communicating with relevant authorities, and a forum for sharing
and building expertise and knowledge. Furthermore, as CC awareness increases among the public,
becoming a CP will become a matter of prestige and social capital. At the international level those who
currently engage in lobbying EU institutions directly can more effectively coordinate and support each
other and Romania’s positions once they become CPs. However, it is important to note that the CPN
is not meant to create an echo chamber, particularly given the diverse interests of those affected by
CC policies. Instead, it can focus debate, ensure that all points of view are understood, and that CC
decision making is transparent and evidence-based.
The relationship to the NCCC will be symbiotic, and the two programs must develop and grow
together. The series of individual and somewhat sporadic partnership agreements which now exist
would be replaced by a network of solid links maintained for as long as members remain active and
adhere to the relevant standards for that type of membership, such as ISO certifications for
companies, CC strategies for LAUs, consistent engagement with CC for NGOs, etc. There is also a need
for the MEWF staff to set aside time for coordinating the secretarial tasks of the NCCC and maintain
an open dialogue with the CPN.
The CPN needs to be flexible, use smart ICT, and carry small administrative costs. Rather than create
more state institutions, the network would function as a network of overlaying interest and regional
clusters relying largely on the capacity of the CPs themselves after the initial set up stage. Any
administrative tasks could be done by CP NGOs for example, and be funded initially by grants and later
through membership fees. In order to accomplish all of this, the network would need to employ ICT
solutions to gather and share CC data effectively, and become a repository of good practices. The
CPN’s value proposition would need to be built into a mixture of access and expertise, although the
fees should not become a barrier to entry.

5.1.2.   NCCC
The NCCC’s legislative set-up must insure that it becomes a functional and powerful coordinating
body. Although the Governmental Decision was modified in 2014, it needs to be adjusted further in
order to be effective in implementing the National Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth
Strategy and foster the move to a successful low carbon economy. The new proposal for the NCCC
has a political and technical tier, similar to its current structure, but it will have several technical
working groups instead of just one. The proposed technical groups would be focused on relevant
sectors: CC Financing, Energy, Transport, Agriculture, Local Development, Adaptation, SMEs and
Industry and Research and Awareness. Further special technical groups could be convened as needed.
A plan with this proposed structure can be found in Annex 6. The commission’s legislative reform
would need to be initiated by the MEWF, and supported though its budget. However, reforming the
NCCC and setting up the technical working could be initiated during the period 2016-2020 through an
ACOP project.
The NCCC will need to have a consistent structure and schedule. The technical groups would include
assigned staff from line ministries, whereas the higher tier would include members at the state
secretary level or above. Political tier meetings could be convened once per trimester while the
technical groups could meet monthly or as frequently as needed. Line ministry staff involved in the
technical groups would slowly build their expertise to become CC specialists as initially proposed in
the 2009 Memorandum. It is not recommended for the staff member in charge of environmental
issues also deal with climate change, particularly for those line ministries whose portfolios require

                                                  39
extensive CC expertise, due to the extent of these responsibilities. The technical groups would analyze
legislative proposals, discuss developments in European and international legislation with CC
implications, establish negotiating positions, monitor sectoral CC implications or financing, share good
practices, or ask for technical support. The National level commission would play the same role it
currently does: Provide direction and approve the technical group’s outputs. This final form of NCCC
would also rely on Climate Partners for expertise and a connection to relevant stakeholders and
interest groups, and will help in setting up Romania’s negotiating positions
Table 2. Staged changes to NCCC structure over time

       Managing Authority                    Advantages                         Disadvantages
                                                                      High strain on MEWF capacity.
 1. Chaired and administered by                                       Poor public exposure.
                                    Existing level of expertise.
 MEWF (currently).                                                    Little inter-institutional
                                                                      coordination.
 2. NCCC Chaired by Prime
                                                                Medium strain on MEWF
 Minister’s Cabinet*. (2020)      National exposure for CC
                                                                capacity.
  - Technical groups - Support issues.
                                                                Somewhat limited inter-
      from relevant public MEWF Raises climate agenda.
                                                                institutional coordination.
      authorities.
 3. NCCC Chaired by Prime
 Minister’s Cabinet*. (2030)      National exposure.
                                                                The CPN needs to be well
  - Technical groups - Support Raises climate agenda.
                                                                established and have a solid
      from     relevant    public Higher CC policy making focus
                                                                PPP basis.
      authorities & Climate and capacity.
      Partners Network.
* The MEWF would organize and operate as the secretariat for NCCC’s higher tier.
National authorities must claim ownership of the CC issue. The issue of CC must have higher visibility
and remain consistently on the public agenda, instead of emerging only briefly after a disaster. The
most feasible institutional option therefore is to place some decision-making power at the appropriate
level, under authority of the Prime Minister’s Cabinet. However, since the Cabinet’s capacity is also
limited, the bulk of the administrative and management tasks would need to be accomplished
elsewhere. The proposal, based on Table 2 above, and would essentially ensure that administrative
burdens be shared by the MEWF and CPN, while allowing the Cabinet to lead the political tier of the
NCCC.
Table 3. Legal Capacity Building measures

                           Implementing Timeline
     Activity Name                                                          Notes
                              Agency     (S,M,L)
                                                          This measure is proposed in the context of
                                                           larger efforts to improve transparency, and
 Adopt an open data                                        carries minimal risk.
                             MEWF and
 policy regarding CC                                      Require moving beyond current minimal
                              NCCC              S
 information and policy                                    standards, and a review of current
                             members
 processes                                                 practices.
                                                          Some associated costs for employing smart
                                                           ICT to organize the data made public. POCA



                                                    40
                                                            financing is available for this type of
                                                            initiative.
                                                           This measure will be important for the work
                                                            of CP in technical groups and beyond.
                                                           The pace of the Romanian legislative
                                                            process introduces a degree of uncertainty,
                                                            particularly because there is low familiarity
 Create the public-             MEWF
                                                            with public-private initiatives.
 private framework for     initiative, GoR     S
                                                           During initial stages of creating the network
 CP                           approval
                                                            the MEWF will need to be involved.
                                                           Appropriate funds must be allocated for
                                                            initial set-up of the network.
                                                           As the network develops, more
                                                            responsibilities will be added, including
                                                            involvement in NCCC and maintaining and
                                                            publicizing the CC Financial Toolbox.
 Extend the capacity            MEWF                       There is a degree of risk, since significant
 and responsibilities of   initiative, GoR    M-L           effort will need to be made to extend and
 the CP network               approval                      grow the CP network.
                                                           In the long term, the CP network is meant
                                                            to have minimal administrative costs,
                                                            covered by membership fees or project-
                                                            based funding.
                                                           As the CP network grows and national
                                                            authorities take more responsibility for CC
                                MEWF                        policies, the NCCC’s law will need to be
 Reform the NCCC           initiative, GoR   S, M, L        amended several times.
                              approval                     A degree of uncertainty remains as NCCC
                                                            has never been a highly effective
                                                            coordination body.
 Review SEA and EIA                                        Low risk and costs, since CC concerns are
                                MEWF
 national legislation to                                    already part of discussed environmental
                           initiative, GoR     S
 better integrate CC                                        issues, but higher quality standards will be
                              approval
 concerns                                                   needed for CC evaluation and planning.


5.2. Taking Part in the International CC Community
Strengthening and reorganizing the NCCC will play an essential role in making Romania more
effective in climate change negotiations. Effective implementation of the working groups will give
the MEWF informed counterparts in other ministries, as well as a channel of communication to CP
experts, researchers and civil society. Any new international policy proposals will be effectively
confronted with the perspective of this multitude of stakeholders and be far more likely to obtain any
needed approvals quickly.
Negotiation positions must be set up in advance, based on a solid evidence base and incorporating
input from all relevant stakeholders. Obtaining the necessary background data, as well as reaching
consensus among the stakeholders on negotiating positions, will need to be a priority of the
collaboration between the NCCC and CPN. The proposed position of the authorities, along with the
data supporting it, should be available in advance for public and media. The CPN will also play an

                                                   41
essential role in the process; it will need to build consensus among its members prior to participation
in the NCCC technical groups and present a consistent argument during discussions with authorities.
Romania needs to find ways to resolve the representation issue, particularly considering the culture
of international institutions, where expertise and length of participation are highly valued. This
involves two different elements: personnel and negotiating positions. Romanian representatives for
international negotiations need to be well compensated, have good communication skills, and a high
level of expertise in the topics for which they represent the country. Since so much of CC policy is
driven by developments in the international arena, it is essential that the MEWF and GoR prioritize
effective participation in international CC negotiations. However, areas where budget constraints
remain the choice of participants and workgroups should be strategic and well justified, and, where
possible, replaced with remote meeting participation using ICT. Negotiators should have a mandate
that follows the position discussed in the NCCC technical groups and which is approved in the usual
manner.
Table 4. International Participation Capacity Building measures

                        Implementing       Timeline
   Activity Name                                                              Notes
                           Agency          (S, M, L)
                                                          Expertise and training standards will need to
                                                           be set for those representing Romania in
                                                           policy negotiations.
                                                          Policies for selecting outside expert
 Revise policies for      MEWF and
                                                           representatives will need to be transparent,
 selecting             relevant national       S
                                                           and competitive.
 representatives          authorities
                                                          If budgets are strained, the selection of
                                                           participatory events should be strategic and
                                                           replaced with virtual meetings where
                                                           possible.
                                                          While state secrecy might be justified at
 Improve the
                                                           times, the default for most cases should be
 transparency of          MEWF and
                                                           full disclosure of most reports regarding
 the policy            relevant national      S-M
                                                           policy negotiations.
 negotiating              authorities
                                                          Minimal risk, since this is an accepted
 process
                                                           practice in several EU member states.
 Improve the              MEWF and                        Costs may be lowered and results improved,
 preparation for       relevant national      S-M          since any studies will need to be initiated in
 policy negotiation       authorities                      advance of deadlines.

5.3. Measure for improving administrative capacity at the national level
Climate Partners would make the implementation of the National Climate Change and Low Carbon
Green Growth Strategy and Action Plan far more likely to succeed. A structure similar to the one
used in Norway, adapted to Romania’s environment, would offer stability and coherence to the
relationship between CC policymakers and other stakeholders. However its implementation would
need to be smart, and backed by a clearly defined list of responsibilities and opportunities. The Climate
Partners would be integrated into the functioning of the NCCC and develop to have interest based or
regional clusters. Membership would include a fee and, depending on the type of member, require
adherence to certain standards. Member types would include research institutions, LAUs, NGOs,


                                                    42
companies, unions and so on. While Climate Partners would not supplant existing support structures
like the RMA, the system would complement that type of work and create a support network for those
interested in the benefits of climate action. This would help maintain and slowly increase the level of
CC awareness in Romania, and eventually spur the number of implemented CC projects.
Climate change will need to be more thoughtfully integrated into strategic public planning. MEWF
needs to take a stricter approach during the SEA and insure that CC considerations are integrated and
associated with the appropriate indicators. If the NCCC is reformulated as discussed, ministries will
have experts who participate in the appropriate technical groups, and will likely be better able to
integrate CC issues from the planning stages of strategic documents. The same would apply to the EIA,
as any projects seeking to integrate CC considerations could rely on the expertise gathered and made
available by Climate Partners. In addition, work in the technical groups will slowly build CC knowledge
within the other line ministries, although that should be supported by trainings as necessary.
The MEWF needs to improve the working conditions and retention rate for CC staff as part of the
national effort to improve administrative capacity.23 This would involve maintaining a degree of
institutional stability to ensure that employees are no longer moved from the unit in which they have
the highest level of expertise without justification. Well-staffed units responsible for policymaking,
monitoring of CC funds use and one responsible for maintaining the relationship with the NCCC and
CPN will be needed. Furthermore, an increase in the average pay and number of staff would need to
be accompanied by higher standards set for their credentials in public policymaking and management
skills, particularly for anyone in leadership positions. Performance evaluations will also need to be
more thorough and have clear consequences.
Public servants will need training on integrating CC into policymaking. Offering comprehensive
courses on CC is essential for capacity building in Romania. Selected staff of the MEWF, or even
international experts could add these classes to the roster of the National Agency for Public Servants,
or they could participate in other accredited training programs on the topic. Conversely, staff of the
MEWF could take classes in order to improve management skills and public policy making.
Furthermore, whichever authorities take responsibility for managing the models delivered through
this RAS will need ample training in order to maintain them, update the databases, and use these to
determine policy impacts. In addition, Romanian universities, with the support of the Ministry of
Education and Scientific Research, should update their curricula and introduce new post-graduate
programs in order to provide more in-depth training.
A more careful targeting of climate actions is needed. Owing to geographical location or socio-
economic status, Romania has many areas and many people particularly vulnerable to climate change.
Using ICT and modeling to identify those most vulnerable to CC, as well as designing programs that
would have CC impact while aiding them, will be a keystone of implementing the strategy. The NMA
has experience with nationally mapping climate impacts, and should be further supported in
improving their capacity, including in terms of ICT. Identifying vulnerable groups and targeting
programs to assist them will need to correlate climate data with socio-economic information gathered
from relevant authorities. This planning will have to be done from the beginning stages of program
design, discussed in technical groups, and presented to CPs so as to ensure that the administrative
burden is not overwhelming for the very vulnerable groups targeted initially.


23
 See Annex 5 for a list of guiding national documents.

                                                         43
Macro-economic modelling focused on Climate Change and developed by the World Bank will need
to be maintained and put to use by national authorities. As part of the development of the National
Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth Program, the World Bank has developed in-depth
analyses at the sectoral and macro-economic levels, sectoral analyses and modeling in the energy,
transport, urban, and water sectors, and conducted macro-economic modeling and macro-economic
impact assessments. Ideally the macro-model will be managed by the NPC while the sectoral models
will be maintained by relevant sectoral authorities or research centers. Inter-institutional agreements
will need to ensure that the institution managing the model works closely with relevant authorities
and produces policy impact assessments when needed. However the capacity for communicating and
using the data in order to inform policymaking will need to develop across national institutions. As this
capacity develops, over time the modelling results and implications can be discussed in special
technical group meetings of the NCCC.

Table 5. National CC Capacity Building measures

                         Implementing       Timeline
   Activity Name                                                             Notes
                            Agency           (S,M,L)
 Improve CC staff
 hiring standards                                         Measures taken in the context of national
 and retention                                             administrative capacity reform.
                          GoR & MEWF            S
 policies. Review CC                                      Involves an increase in personnel cost for
 unit structure and                                        the MEWF.
 staff numbers
 Create CC expert
                                                          Increased personnel costs.
 position in              Relevant line
                                               S-M        This measure is essential for building
 relevant line             ministries
                                                           national CC capacity.
 ministries
 Instituting and
                                                          Will be essential for the coordination of CC
 populating                 National
                                                           action in Romania.
 sectoral technical      Authorities and        S
                                                          Some cost, primarily supported by the
 groups of the                CPN
                                                           national budget.
 NCCC
                         National Agency                  Initially higher costs, decreasing as national
                            for Public                     expertise grows.
 CC training for civil
                            Servants,         S,M,L       New curricula in Universities could be
 servants
                           Education                       problematic due to the lack of resource
                             Ministry                      persons/teachers.
                                                          This measure would increase Romania’s
                                                           capacity for evidence-based decision
 Increase CC
                         Relevant units       S,M,L        making.
 modelling capacity
                                                          National funds may need to be used for
                                                           setting these units up.

5.4. Measure for improving administrative capacity at the local level
Local level CC efforts will need to be aligned with national priorities. The Strategy creates a pathway
towards green growth that will assign significant responsibility at the local level, particularly with
regards to energy efficiency improvements and the urban sector. The proposed strategy will require
a consistent dialogue between the national and local levels, which can be enhanced through


                                                    44
participation of the LAU in the CP Network. Furthermore, issues relevant to the LAUs will be discussed
in the NCCC Technical Group Local Development, where the LAU’s could either participate directly or
send CP representatives. Furthermore, depending on the CC most affecting the area, LAUs could form
clusters with those facing the same challenges, such as recurrent flooding or draught.
Support schemes and smart incentives will need to be designed for LAUs. At the moment local
authorities have very little political or economic interest in engaging on climate change issues. Once
CC ranks higher on the national agenda and public consciousness, the political incentive will become
increasingly apparent. However national authorities will need to provide incentives and support to
make the economic benefit of planning for CC obvious and create programs to address it. National
competitions such as “The city that recycles the most” have proved popular to date in Romania. Similar
competitions, based on national priorities and available funding, could be organized across the
country. Currently the Ministry of Regional Development and Public Administration24 is implementing
a program financed by Switzerland they are looking for a national agency that will implement
European Energy Award.25 This program should also be supported by the MEFW in order to encourage
CC initiatives at the local level and fill the gaps between the national and local levels.
For example, a national program for improving household energy efficiency could be synchronized
with a competition between localities. Furthermore, the Covenant of mayors has already proved
successful in Romania and has EU support. Providing incentives for more LAUs to become CPs, and
supporting them in integrating CC into local planning, should be made a priority. However in order for
climate change to be a credible priority, a certain and predictable budget should be allocated with
priorities outlined. Particularly in the initial period, a program could be set up for CP NGOs to work
with local partner authorities and recruit them as CPs. The standard for entry could be membership in
the Covenant of Mayors, particularly since ESIF funding is available for local level CC planning. This will
require 2 stages—the first, a competition for developing local and regional inventories and strategies
for reducing climate change; the second, identifying budget allocation for strategy implementation,
as was the case with Development Polls.
Creating local expertise will be a necessary first step for building local CC capacity . There are LAUs
in Romania that have already built their CC expertise, Brasov is one example. However climate change
is a vague topic for most LAUs, with planning for it quite low on the agenda. The availability of funds
during the next period will likely lead to an increase in interest, but without local expertise
participation in national or international programs can be challenging. There are three elements to
increasing local CC expertise: providing local-level CC impact assessments, working with other CPs,
and increasing the CC awareness of local authority personnel. Local authorities have already
attempted to use these approaches, with varying degrees of success. However, having a consistent
approach to these initiatives, with some planning in the NCCC technical committee, will provide
clearer direction. The CC assessments can be in part provided by the NMA, as well as experts or NGOs
who are CPs. Increasing the local civil servants’ CC awareness and understanding can be done through




24
         http://www.mdrap.ro/comunicare/presa/comunicate/reluare-apel-candidaturi-institutionalizare-
premiu-european-pentru-energie
25
         http://www.european-energy-award.org/fileadmin/Documents/Download/eea-optimising-activities-
2012.pdf

                                                    45
ACOP funded training programs or even through APMs, as recently occurred in Sibiu through an EEA
grant.26
Monitoring and evaluation mechanisms will need to be crafted for the local level. Since local
authorities have such little CC expertise, and so far have never had any responsibilities directly related
to CC, they also have no knowledge of how M&E will need to be performed. However, considering the
requirements of the Energy Efficiency Directive 2012/27/EU and the need to identify national best
practices, qualitative and quantitative M&E needs to become integral to any project or program with
a CC component. The experts working on SEA and EIA will be the ones selecting the relevant CC
indicators for local authorities to monitor, but the procedures should not create an excessive burden.
Furthermore, for ESIF funded projects the reporting of monitoring data is delivered to the managing
authorities through intermediary bodies. However, in the case of projects funded from other sources,
the CP network could instead act as the primary data gatherer and deliver the information to the
national level authorities through the NCCC.

Table 6. Local Capacity Building measures

                         Implementing        Timeline
     Activity Name                                                              Notes
                            Agency              (S,M,L)
                                                            Low cost involved (ex: a national city
 Encourage and
                                                             competition).
 incentivize local
                           MEWF and                         Support can be received from CPs.
 authorities to                                S-M
                            the CPN                         Low risk, since this is an EU initiative.
 become CoM
 members                                                    Provide funds based on specific program
                                                             (s).
 Develop a support
                          MEWF, CPN                         Some cost involved.
 structure for LAUs                            M-L
                          and MRDPA                         ESIF funding can be identified.
 signatories of CoM
                            National
                                                            Some costs involved.
 Provide CC training       Agency for
                                               S,M,L        CP partnerships may be useful.
 for LAU staff               Public
                                                            Low risk.
                            Servants
 CC M&E training for                                        Some cost involved.
                               CP               M,L
 LAUs                                                       ESIF funding can be identified.




26
        http://www.eeagrants.ro/en/-/a-iii-a-instruire-in-domeniul-adaptarii-la-schimbarile-climatice

                                                      46
6. Financing of Climate Actions
Due to the nature of CC, it faces some unique challenges around spurring investment. The long- term
and scientific nature of CC, as well as continued uncertainty over its impact, creates specific challenges
for attracting investment in climate action projects. Beyond the usual investments risks, low carbon
investments also face uncertainty over the predictability and time horizon of CC policies. There also
are specific technology and operational risks related to aspects of intellectual property, adaptability,
energy efficiency and performance of new low-carbon technologies. The return on investment for CC
may also be lower compared to proven technologies and traditional projects, unless there are
appropriate market mechanisms in place to compensate for the additional risk. Access to affordable
capital for climate investments therefore may often be difficult, particularly for smaller projects which
face the same due diligence and transactional costs without the larger gross returns of larger projects.
Finally, the low level of CC awareness and of opportunities afforded by CC across the public and private
sectors also act as a powerful barrier to investment. Therefore government policies will need to
provide well balanced incentives in order for the country to receive the infusion of capital it requires.
Consequently, the efforts to shift to a low carbon economy are focused on lowering risk and creating
an enabling environment. Basic capacity building for a more climate conscious economy includes
reducing knowledge and skill gaps, and helping to overcome market, human and institutional capacity
barriers. Concurrently, the efforts to build capacity must be accompanied by solid monitoring and
evaluation procedures in order to evaluate and report on the effectiveness of any chosen actions.
However, creating an enabling environment for CC investment (EECCI) involves a mixture of policy,
regulatory and institutional changes that lower risk and incentivize investment in low carbon
technologies and services. The creation of the enabling environment evolves a thorough reform of the
business and investment climate as well as the policies to target and incentivize green investments.
Therefore the creation of an EECCI goes beyond the scope of this report, which is focused primarily on
capacity building.
As CC knowledge grows PPPs can become a cornerstone of climate action. In Romania the climate
agenda is often viewed by the private sector as a way of increasing operational costs or slowing
economic growth. Public partnerships can make climate action less daunting and a natural part of
growing a balanced low carbon economy. The scale of CC investment needed in Romania, including
transportation and building stock, means that many climate projects will require public-private
coordination. Furthermore, public funds are not meant to, nor are they sufficient to cover, all the
investment needs described in the Strategy. Therefore a solid framework for PPPs can provide a
formula for cost-effective innovative projects, which include minimum management, monitoring, and
performance standards for lowering emissions or improving resilience.
There are various types of funding sources available for financing the climate actions. In order to
identify the best opportunities for improving the capacity for climate action, the next section provides
an overview of funds available in the period 2014-2020 for the projects and programs discussed in the
Strategy. While funding sources are also discussed elsewhere in the action plan, this document also
contains a brief overview to provide background for aspects of capacity building. As such, the main
beneficiaries and implementation arrangements are discussed in section 6.1, while implementation
performance is reviewed in section 6.2. The funding sources are discussed below in the order of area
covered, from European, to bi-lateral, national, local, and private funds. The European Structural and
Investment Funds (ESIF) and other European programs are discussed briefly, since they are analyzed

                                                   47
in depth in the other documents of the National Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth
Program. Funds received through bilateral national agreements, as well as private funds, are also
considered. However, in order to ensure the development of the sector and compliance with EU
legislation, the national budget should become the main source of funding for the next period.
Romania needs to improve its capacity for taking advantage of funding opportunities and
channeling investments towards climate action and the implementation of the National CC Strategy
and Action Plan. Low absorption rates during the previous 2007 – 2013 MFF have shown that Romania
has little expertise in creating and supervising effective CC programs, even when funding is available.
Furthermore, aggregated data of outputs or performance for CC indicators is not available, nor was it
collected in a consistent manner. Based on the previous analysis of institutional capacity, gaps specific
to project management, with relevance to the implementation of the LCGGP, are also identified.
Finally, options for improving CC capacity are presented in the last section.

6.1. CC Project Financing Sources
6.1.1.   European Cohesion Funds and other EU Funding Instruments
There is a catalytic role for EU funds in terms of CC mitigation and adaptation. For Romania, a major
opportunity to support a less carbon-intensive economy is the new requirement that structural funds
be used to finance climate change compatible projects and investments. In its Multi-annual Financial
Framework (MFF) for 2014-2020 the EU has agreed that climate related expenditure shall correspond
to at least 20 % of the ESIF over this period, equivalent in Romania to about 6 billion euros. These
funds will play an important catalytic role, though they will not be sufficient to cover all of the actions
proposed in the strategy. The managing authority for these funds at the national level varies, as seen
in the table below.

                                                         6.1.2.     Life+ and Horizon 2020 Programs
  Operational        Management        Intermediary
   Program            Authority            Body     The EU has made a significant effort to create
      Large                            METT, MEWF, synergy among the instruments and investment
                         MEF                        funds used to stimulate the resilience and
 infrastructure                         MESMEsB
   Regional             MRDPA           Regional (8 competiveness of MS. Climate change is being
 development                              units)    mainstreamed among most, among which Life+
Competiveness            MEF           MCSI, METT and Horizon 2020 are probably the most
Administrative                                      relevant.
                        MRDPA                -
  Capacity                                          The LIFE program has a climate component
    Human
                         MEF           MESR, MEFSP that can also be useful for Romania. LIFE is the
   Resources                                        only European instrument dedicated to the
    Rural                                           environment, and its climate component has
                        MARD                 -
 Development                                        tripled its budget since the previous period to
   Technical                                        864€ million for 2014-2020. The program offers
                         MEF                 -
   assistance                                       funding for pilot, demonstration, and best
 Fishery and                                        practice projects across three priority areas:
                        MRDPA                -
Maritime Affairs                                    mitigation, adaptation and governance and
                                                    information. In addition to grants, funding can
                                                    now also be channeled through two pilot


                                                    48
financial instruments managed by the European Investment Bank (EIB): Private Finance for Energy
Efficiency (PF4EE)27 and the Natural Capital Financing Facility (NCFF).28 Both instruments target SMEs,
private individuals, small municipalities and other public sector bodies.
The Horizon 2020 Program offers important opportunities to expand CC research. As the EU
Framework Program for Research and Innovation considers CC a societal challenge. The Climate
action, environment resources, and raw materials component of Horizon 2020 has a budget of €3
billion which will be used to finance research into CC innovation and improving sustainability. The
focus of most of the European instruments is to alleviate the risk and comparative costs of climate
investments, and Horizon 2020 is one of the tools the EU sees as important for reducing innovation
opportunity costs.

6.1.3.     European and International funding institutions
                                            The EBRD, through the Global Environment Facility has
     EIB Climate action financing
                                            invested 5.1 mil $ in climate change projects in Romania. The
     in Romania 2009-2013
                                            EIB, in collaboration with the MRDPA, has invested 674 mil €
                                            in climate action programs during 2009-2013, covering up to
                                   19%
                     25%                    75% of program investment costs.29 The EIB also has the
                                            European Local Energy Assistance (ELENA) program that helps
                                            LAUs prepare energy efficiency and RE projects, which could
      Energy                        28%
                      27%                   be highly useful in Romania. Both institutions continue to have
      Transport               1%            credit lines that are CC related which could be accessed by the
                                            Romanian public or private sector. They also agree that
      Water, sewerage, solid waste, urban
      development                           Romanian public sector project promoters will need additional
      Industry, services, agriculture       support in order to more consistently access funding.

      Small and medium-scale projects      The International Finance Corporation (IFC) has also made a
                                           commitment to Romania in the Country Partnership Strategy
2014-2017 where it is mentioned that the: "IFC will also address bottlenecks to growth in areas that
IBRD is not playing a role in, such as infrastructure, including through PPPs with an emphasis on climate
change, innovation and new technologies especially for exporters."

6.1.4.     Bilateral agreements Funds
The EEA and Norway grants represent contributions from Iceland, the Principality of Liechtenstein,
and the Kingdom of Norway to reduce social and economic disparities within the European Economic
Area and strengthen bilateral relations with the 16 beneficiary states in southern and central Europe.
On the basis of this bilateral Agreement, funds were provided to local authorities in order to
implement Adaptation Projects in the Central region as well as to NGOs for implementing various
environmental projects, including some related to climate change.




27
  PF4EE has a budget of 80€ for the 2014-2017 period, with an anticipated 8-fold leverage effect. It will lend to
intermediary banks in MS while providing protection against losses associated with making loans for energy
efficiency projects. It will be complemented by technical assistance to financial intermediaries.
28
   NCFF has a budget of 100-125€ for the 2014-2017 period and will provide loans and investments in funds to
support projects that help preserve natural capital, including adaptation to climate change.
29
   http://www.eib.org/infocentre/publications/all/activity-report-2014.htm

                                                       49
The Swiss Funds. The Swiss financial contribution aims to reduce the economic and social disparities
within the enlarged European Union and between different regions of beneficiary countries. Under
the Swiss-Romanian Cooperation Program, the amount earmarked for Romania is 181 million CHF for
a commitment period of 5 years and a disbursement period of 10 years. One component of the fund
is “Improvement of the environment” with the main focus on energy and transport. The Swiss Funds
have a financing component open to NGOs working in the fields of environment and climate change.

6.1.5.   National Funds
The Romanian national budget co-funds CC projects or supports the institutions responsible for CC.
Seeing as the national budget is not organized by projects it is difficult to say what amount of funds is
invested in CC. The national budget investments in CC action have primarily taken the form of support
for the institutions responsible for CC, mostly those coordinated by the MEWF like NMA, or co-
financing CC related projects, like the development of this strategy. More direct investments have
been made in reducing disaster risk, or post-disaster, for example in an effort to make the flood prone
areas more resilient.
The Environment Fund Administration (EFA) is the main institution formally using its revenue to
finance environmental programs. It has administered the two main programs that use their funds,
each with multiple sessions: a car allowance rebate system (RABLA), and a small residential housing
renewable energy program (Casa Verde). Both were versions of programs implemented elsewhere in
Europe and were quite popular, although they met with multiple implementation issues. The second
has had case-by-case assessments of payment requests that carried on for years after sessions ended.
The fund manages environmental projects addressed to a wide category of beneficiaries: operators,
NGOs, municipalities, schools and institutions of education, public institutions, research and
development institutes, associations of owners, individuals and SMEs, which by the implementation
and development of programs, contribute to improve living conditions and at the same time raise
public awareness of environmental issues. Its revenue is constituted from the national budget and
environmental taxes. EFA also, when developing programs, can use funds obtained from international
sources. In fact, at the moment there is an ongoing project for financing geothermal and hydro
renewable energy sources financed by EEA Grants. The maximum co-financing rate is 50 % for
operators, 60 % for administrative units, and 90 % for NGOs and educational institutions.
Revenue obtained from auctioning ETS allowances can be used to finance climate actions.
During 2012 – 2014, Romania has collected about 260 mil. € from the ETS auctioning revenues (of
which, 71% is dedicated to climate change projects, or some 184 mil EUR) and expects some 170 mil.
EUR for 2015 (of which, 50 mil. would be transferred to the state budget, while about 120 mil. EUR
would remain for GHG-reducing projects). By some estimates Romania will generate about 1.4 - 2.8
billion euro over 2013-2020, depending of the price of CO2 on the market. Romania intends to use
71% of these revenues for climate action, much more than the 50% recommended by EU regulations.
The increase of revenue coming from these allowances is a good opportunity for Romania to finance
climate actions. This additional source of financing should target efficient actions that will help reach
the current national strategy’s strategic objectives. Unfortunately the legislation governing the use of
these funds (Emergency Governmental Ordinance (EGO) 115/2011) is impractical, and funds have only
been used for various national projects through emergency procedures, without a methodology for
measuring impact.


                                                   50
6.1.6.   Local Funds
Climate change investments by LAUs are a rare occurrence at the moment. In Romania LAUs have
responsibility over public utilities and transport within town limits. Some LAUs have made efforts to
reduce public utility costs by improving the energy efficiency of public lighting and wastewater
management installations. There have also been efforts to increase the use of renewable energy for
public buildings, though few have materialized thus far. LAUs will also have to contend with the
requirement to increase the energy efficiency of public buildings, per Directive 2010/31/EU regarding
the energy efficiency of buildings. There are no aggregated national numbers on the size of the
investments, but limited local funds have meant that no serious CC investments have been made using
local funds exclusively. Instead, local authorities have worked with national authorities or
international programs in order to co-finance CC related investments. LAUs have for example been
made responsible for administering some aspects of the national building stock energy efficiency
program. The implementation of that program was highly problematic and carried significant
administrative costs, with no monitoring of results or performance assessments. A few LAUs have
partnered with international institutions through which they finance local programs, as was the case
with Bucharest’s energy efficiency for residential housing program, but this is the exception not the
rule.30 However, some LAUs have used taxation to encourage private sector investment in energy
efficiency. In many urban centers the TRACE studies performed in Romania by the World Bank have
found that City Councils have introduced tax breaks for households that self-financed thermal
insulation work.

6.1.7.   Private funding sources
Romania already has policies that incentivize private sector investment in green technologies, the
most important of which are the ETS and Renewable Energy schemes. While it is true that the bulk
of Romania’s decrease in emissions is due to the loss of economic activity, the implementation of the
ETS scheme has pushed companies to make investments in more efficient production equipment or
even in producing their own renewable energy.
Private sector companies have also taken voluntary action, as elsewhere in Europe. Most
corporations and larger companies active in Romania have adhered to international management
standards, including risk management standards. The assessed risk often includes extreme events,
though companies do not include CC in their long term operations planning per se. CC related
innovation, and research and development investments by the private sector in Romania, are low, but
partnerships with international financiers or international patent owners have met with some success.
Households will need to continue making CC related investments. Investments in home insulation
have been particularly popular, as shown by the city hall’s moves to cut taxes for those who have
made these types of investments. Romanians have also been interested in renewable energy,
particularly in solar panels used for water heating. Unfortunately there are currently no national level
estimations of how much has been invested by households.

6.2. Capacity gaps/needs for improving project financing capacity
To address CC in an effective and sustainable way, claiming CC as a national priority will need to be
reflected in the structure of national and local budgets. So far public funds investment in CC action

30
 http://www.eib.org/infocentre/publications/all/landmark-projects-in-the-eu.htm

                                                   51
has been quite limited, and also difficult to assess due to the assignation of funds to institutions rather
than programs. Furthermore the restrictions on multi-year national and local budgets act as an added
structural issue for efficient CC planning. While public funds are limited, the intelligent allocation of
funds to climate actions will have multiple co-benefits, which can be reaped through the
implementation of the LCGGP.
Efficient inter-institutional dialogue will be needed for the design of climate action programs. The
directions and programs discussed in the strategy will need to be implemented by national authorities,
through a process that is designed to be co-operative. This is particularly important in the case of ESIF
funds, as seen in section 6.1.1., For example, when designing investment programs in sectors they
have no direct control over, the MEF will rely heavily on its Intermediary bodies. Since CC is an issue
that transcends the authority managing it however (the MEWF) this means that staff in all
intermediary bodies and managing authorities will need to have a thorough understanding of how to
integrate CC considerations into the formulation of investment programs.
Although as the financial arm of the MEWF, the Environment Fund Administration (EFA) hasn’t acted
as an engine for climate action. While it has administered some programs, their implementation has
been slow and no CC indicators have been monitored. Communication on climate change and the
programs it was running was only done during the initiatives’ announcement; it become almost
completely opaque during the project selection and implementation stages, there were hardly any
impact assessments. The indicators used by the EFA have in fact been primarily financial, with no
intent on connecting performance to rewards. The institution itself has been in a state of near constant
flux, with near constant changes in leadership and structure. In the press and among the public at
large it is seen as a highly politicized, bureaucratic, and inefficient organization. Previously, project
sessions have been announced and terminated with nearly no warning, and some applications were
still ‘being processed’ years later. The Rondine31 project may be an opportunity for the
implementation of more efficient CC action, but it is remains ongoing, and is therefore difficult to
evaluate.
The use of funds obtained from Romania’s auctioning of ETS allowances is not governed by
functional legislation. The European legislation establishing the ETS held that the funds could only be
used for climate actions and so the MEWF was expected to administer it, but it did not have the
capacity to manage the financial aspects of auctioning allowances on international markets. Instead,
that responsibility was assigned to the MPF through EGO no. 115/2011 which established institutional
arrangements in Romania. Unfortunately the procedure for the use of the auctioning profits involved
line ministries, the EFA, and government approval, the mechanics of which are so impractical and
counterintuitive that it has never been used, nor is it likely to be used. Any use of those funds has been
made through emergency governmental ordinance, assigning financing to one project or another of
political importance at the moment, with little to no effort to justify them as climate actions. Any
attempts to reform the law have failed so far. The use of ETS revenues is treated separately in a specific
report under the LCGGP, which considers the possibility that these funds could be the basis for setting
up a dedicated CC Fund, together with other funding sources.
The largest stopgaps to using EU funds during the previous MFF have been the ineffective processes
and long reimbursement delays. Romania has had the smallest absorption rate for Cohesion Funds


31
     http://www.rondine.ro/en

                                                    52
among European countries during the 2007-2013 period, at only 52.2 % as of the end of 2014. This
rate is 20% lower than the European average and has been highly criticized by the press and the public.
Rapidly changing legislation and a heavily bureaucratic process with projects and payments being
delayed for years have eroded the public’s trust, and disincentivized investors in Romania (both
Romanian, and international) from providing co-payments for projects developed around ESIF funding
opportunities.
Co-financing has been problematic due to both a lack of funds and a lack of capacity. ESIF as well as
Life+ both require that co-financing be provided by local partners. For NGOs creating awareness-
raising programs, for example, this proved to be a serious impediment, particularly since public
authorities were unwilling to provide any assistance or set up partnerships in implementing such
projects, even when a program was clearly in the public interest. For public authorities, particularly
LAUs, there is a lack of interest and capacity, since staffers who would need to initiate and manage
projects often also have other duties and very limited training. Furthermore, identifying sources of
financing in strained local or institutional budgets for projects with long development cycles is highly
problematic.
Cooperation on climate action between the public and private sector is hampered by inconsistent
PPP implementation. The concept of PPP has a long history in post-communist Romania; however, in
the most recent 15 years, not many projects have been developed using this type of contract. The
legal framework was changed several times (2002, 2006, 2010, 2011, 2014, 2015), and there was a
period of time when the PPP, being a part of the public tendering procedure and contracts, was not
expressly regulated (2006 - 2010). As a consequence, most of the relationships between public
authorities and private investors were regulated through concession contracts. The best example with
respect to PPP contracts (as concession contracts) is one of managing public lighting systems in
Romanian cities. By using this type of contract, public authorities were able to improve the quality and
the efficiency of the service without spending their capital for investments. Based on the regulation
issued in 2010 (Law no. 178/2010), by the end of 2012, the database of PPP projects contained 23
projects, out of which 5 were related to renewable energy sources (RES), transport, and, consequently,
to climate change. In 2014, it was established that the PPP contracts would be managed by the State
Department for Foreign Investment and PPPs. After the Romanian Constitutional Court found the law
unconstitutional in June 2014, it was again reformed, approved by the Romanian Parliament in June
2015.
Local Authority Units (LAUs) are legally restricted from implementing multiyear budget planning,
which constrains their ability to implement CC Action Plans . Financing decisions related to energy
efficiency must be compatible with rules regarding public budgets. Furthermore, the energy savings
reflected in reduced energy bills leads to lower local budgets over the next financial year. This is due
to the fact investment costs related to energy efficiency are drawn from the budget’s expense
category, while energy bills are paid through the operational budget. Thus Romania’s ability to finance
or co-finance long term policies, even when there is local consensus, is severely restricted. LAUs
should be able to reserve funding within annual budgets and firmly commit to doing the same in the
following years. Conversely, they must make efforts to identify other financial sources, including ways
to cooperate with funding institutions and the private sector, using appropriate financing mechanisms
and schemes.




                                                  53
Romania invests little in research and innovation. According to the Competiveness Operational
Program (COP) documentation, Romania has a target of 2% for research and development investment
(RDI) by 2020, split equally between public and private funds. However during 2011, the NIS found
that the total amount of RDI expenditures reached 0.48% of the GDP, of which 80% were public
investments. While some climate research has currently been performed while Romania was
preparing strategies to plan for its 2020 goals, investment in CC innovation has been essentially non-
existent.
Information on climate action funding opportunities has been extremely difficult for stakeholders
to find. For both private and public sector entities, information on funding opportunities available in
Romania is both limited and difficult to confirm. Minimal information on an investment program may
be presented on the ministerial website, but it is rarely updated and it can often be difficult and time-
consuming to receive clarifications or details from public authorities. The NCCC Financial Technical
Group will need to maintain an updated website with information for potential beneficiaries.

6.3. Options for climate finance capacity building
6.3.1.   Financing
While this report focuses only on capacity building aspects, Romania will need to identify the means
to create a supportive environment for CC investment. The notion of such an “enabling environment”
is well known and has been studied by the World Bank32, IFC33, and IPCC34 among others. While the
definitions can vary, this is generally understood as an ensemble of private sector regulations, backed
by credible administrative capacity, that incentivize investment in new technologies and climate
actions. The IPCC argues that it ideally has three components: 1) the core business environment, which
is relevant for all types of businesses, e. g., tax regime, labor market, and ease of starting and operating
a business; 2) the broader investment climate, including education, financial markets, and
infrastructure, which is partially low-carbon related, e. g., via climate change education or investments
in electricity grids; and 3) targeted policies that encourage the business sector to invest in low-carbon
technologies.” 35 In order for Romania to move towards a low carbon economy it will therefore need
to undergo a thorough study of its legislation as well as subsidies, and fiscal and taxation policies in
this light. The result of the study will then need to be used to guide legislative, regulatory and policy
changes. This type of debate will need to involve all of the main financial authorities in Romania as
well as the private sector, and could probably be negotiated at least in part within the NCCC.
Capacity building will primarily take the form of closing knowledge and skill gaps . Considerable
effort will need to go into education and training to increase the CC knowledge among the Romanian
public and private sector, including civil servants, consumers, lenders, developers, utility companies
and planners. This will increase the capacity of national and local public authorities to formulate CC
aware policies and strategies, and increase the performance of the projects themselves. It will also be
essential to involve financial institutions and insurers in order to prepare them to engage with the
initiatives discussed in the Strategy. In addition, the training of experts in climate finance and

32
  http://elibrary.worldbank.org/doi/book/10.1596/978-1-4648-0020-7, http://www-
esd.worldbank.org/citiesccadaptation/enablingenvironment.html
33
  http://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/topics_ext_content/ifc_external_corporate_site/cb_home/publicatio
ns/publication_enablingenvironmentadaptation_landing
34
   https://ipcc-wg2.gov/AR5/report/
35
   https://ipcc-wg2.gov/AR5/report/

                                                    54
monitoring and evaluation will, in time, decrease the start-up costs of green projects. The main goal
of these efforts is to increase the attractiveness of low carbon investments and mainstream CC not
only into strategic public planning, but also into the private sector’s operational planning.
Misconceptions about CC investment opportunities will need to be corrected. Some RE technologies,
for example, probably suffer from bad press due to reliability concerns of earlier technology
generations or inexperienced service providers.
Creating and maintaining the Climate Finance Toolkit will be key to diffusing updated, critical
financial knowledge and skills throughout the period 2014-2030. Building the EECI will be a longer-
term project, while some of the investment discussed in the Strategy will need to be initiated in the
short- and medium-term. Furthermore, the lengthy process of building the enabling environment, and
the historical tendency of Romanian legislative processes to shift, will mean that investors will need
to continuously update their knowledge of project design, operational procedures, and best practices.
Furthermore, several types of potentially unfamiliar financial instruments, as seen in the National
Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth Strategy and Action Plan, will be appropriate for
different CC programs and beneficiaries. Better investment targeting capacity could also be built so
ensure that vulnerable groups are reached. The MEWF and CPN could work with national authorities
to develop and eventually maintain the databases containing information on how to use any given
financial instrument and what type of projects they are most appropriate for. A financial toolkit could
be used by all governance levels, including in order to make it more achievable for LAUs to collaborate
with international financing institutions. Creating the tool kit would involve the use of ICT, but the kit
would also need to be maintained and updated based on best practices. ESIF funding could be used
for an in-depth study of which instruments are best suited and how they will need to be implemented
into national legislation. Energy services companies (ESCOs) could be helped to gain traction in
Romania, since they integrate impact assessment in their operational principles. The main authorities
involved would have to be the MEWF, EFA, MPF, MESMEsB, MRDPA and METT. The topic could be
developed in the spirit of PPP in the NCCC technical groups in collaboration with CP, including, for
example, ESCOROM, a Romanian NGO association for ESCOs.
The PPP approach to climate initiatives will be one of the more important, effective, and credible
tools for implementing the Strategy. Many of the projects proposed in the strategy involve larger
scale investments, like those in the transport or local development sectors, which are far more likely
to be effectively performed through collaboration between the private and public sectors. The revised
PPP legislation will now hopefully provide a stable and adequate regulatory framework, with a high
degree of transparency, drawing the interest of foreign and national private capital towards projects
that are beneficial to Romania’s low carbon development goals. Furthermore, as policies creating the
CCEEI are put in place investors’ interest of will grow, but the possibility of working with the public
sector will provide additional incentives. Also, while clean energy and mitigation might be the most
immediately apparent sectors for investment, adaptation also creates important avenues, particularly
for energy and communications companies, which will need to make their networks more resilient.

6.3.2.   Research and Development
Consistently support climate innovation and research in Romania. The Competitiveness Operational
Program contains several avenues for supporting RDI and extending the use of ICT in the public and
commercial spheres during the period 2014-2020. These opportunities need to be harnessed in order
to spur climate action. The Climate Partners could initiate programs to amplify the links between the

                                                   55
private, business and public sphere so as to ensure that research is needs focused and that ICT is used
to amplify climate action.
Table 7. CC Finance capacity building measures

                           Implementing       Timeline
    Activity Name                                                            Notes
                              Agency          (S, M, L)
                                                            The national budget can be a source of
                                                             funding.
 Study and ways to        MEWF, CP, MPF,                    If stakeholders could receive more
 create an Enabling       EFA, MESMEsB,                      support from Romanian institutions,
                                                   S
 Environment for CC         MRDPA and                        Horizon 2020 could be a source for
 investment (EECCI)            METT                          financing some activities’ research
                                                            Broader investment in research
                                                             institutions around CC is needed.
 Implement the
                                                            This will be a complex ongoing process
 necessary legal,
                                                             which will need to move in concert with
 regulatory and policy          GoR              S, M, L
                                                             the international efforts to mobilize
 changes necessary
                                                             climate finance.
 for a EECI
 Adjust multi-year                                          Measures would allow LAU to allocate
 budget planning for            GoR               S-M        resources for the action plans submitted
 local authorities                                           to the Covenant of Mayors (CoM).
                                                            The toolbox will need to be maintained,
                                                             and therefore carries some maintenance
                                                             costs.
                                                            Some ICT investment will initially be
 Develop a CC
                            MEWF & CP              M         needed.
 financial toolbox
                                                            Analyzing     available     funds     and
                                                             transparency of the funds (ESIF, bilateral
                                                             funds, national funds – public and
                                                             private etc).
 Revise PPP practices
                                                            PPPs will be an essential tool for climate
 to make them
                                GoR                S         action in Romania.
 attractive for CC
                                                            Use EBRD experience with ESCOs.
 initiatives
 Develop CC                                                 In order to empower private sector CC
 partnerships with                                           investment, the relationship will need to
 the private financing   MEWF, MPF, CPN           M, L       build over time.
 and insurance                                              There will be some associated costs for
 sectors                                                     conferences and incentive schemes.




                                                   56
7. Monitoring and Evaluation
Regardless of the implementing entity, Romania’s record on CC M&E is inconsistent. Another output,
Report A2.7 on monitoring and evaluation indicators related to the implementation of the climate
change strategy and action plan expands on the topic of M&E. However, the topic has implications for
capacity building. Romanian CC M&E mechanisms have been disaggregated, particularly with regards
to ESIF funds. During the previous MFF 2007-2013 there was nearly no effort to monitor the impact
of relevant projects on any CC indicators. Even in the case of projects where CC indicators were used,
none of the data was aggregated at the national level. With regards to Joint Implementation projects,
national regulation has assigned the EPA to perform M&E. However, it is not clear whether the
monitoring system is operational as such or if it needs upgrades/updates. In contrast, the ETS
framework has far clearer and more effective M&E mechanisms, which are used to illustrate the
efforts made in sectors covered by the specific regulation. Unfortunately Romanian legislation
provides no efficient monitoring system for adaptation projects, despite the fact that the country’s
first Adaptation Plan was established in 2008.

7.1.1.   Strengthening Monitoring and Evaluation
M&E can be reinforced by strengthening the CC aspects of SEA and EIA. The European legislation on
impact evaluation provides a solid basis for identifying relevant CC indicators. In fact the EIA Directive
2014/52/EU, which is to be transposed by 2017, clearly establishes climate change impact as one of
the factors to be monitored. SEA legislation has similar provisions. However, while the new legislation
is being transposed a provision will need to be added to the current impact assessment legislation
which would require the owner of the strategy/program/project to assess the GHG emissions
projections and climate change hazards while considering the development/investment alternatives
and the possibility of adopting a more CC friendly option. By adding this provision, the Government
can contribute to enhancing CC awareness at all levels (business, public authorities, civil society) and
ensure consistent financing and monitoring for CC projects. Since the majority of projects funded by
ESIF will go through EIA or SEA they will, for the period 2014-2020, need to monitor CC indicators
relevant for each individual project. Romanian ESIF managing authorities will need to ensure that
program guidelines include a reference to the need to monitor CC indicators identified through the
impact assessments as well as a channel for the data to be aggregated, possibly with the aid of the CP
Network.
Overall monitoring responsibility for the implementation of the national CC Strategy, along with the
necessary resources, should be given to the Public Policy Unit (PPU) of the MEWF. Governmental
Decision no. 775/2005 provides the general framework for public policies M&E, and institutes PPUs
responsible for preparing, monitoring and evaluating public policies in each ministry and state agency.
The MEWF PPU could interact with other units within the MEWF and the NCCC in order to aggregate
the information reported by the responsible institutions as per the monitoring requirements included
in a monitoring plan. This plan must define all responsible institutions, sources of information,
frequency for collecting the information and frequency of reporting, evaluation frequency and
procedure, as well as beneficiaries of the reports. The feedback of partners and recipients should be
collected both in writing and through workshops organized and led by the MEWF and CPN. In order
to perform the monitoring tasks, the PPU must make sure it has enough competence with respect to
climate change monitoring and reporting.


                                                   57
Training programs to help experts identify appropriate CC indicators are essential . So far, experts
performing environmental impact assessments have generally only touched on CC in minimal ways,
as issues of general context. Many have considerable knowledge of environmental concerns, but
fewer are aware of CC risk and impact assessments. Therefore specialized training, perhaps provided
with ESIF funding by CP NGOs, will need to be made available to ensure that relevant CC indicators
are selected for all projects and programs.
Managing authorities will need to publicize, inform and use clear principles for CC project M&E.
While the impact assessment procedures will identify project-specific CC indicators, a framework for
CC M&E will need to be created, publicized, and used as a template for all projects and programs. The
principles would need to be differentiated for mitigation and adaptation actions and be built on the
basis of principles integrated into EU funds structure as well as the framework developed by the MDBs,
as previously described. With regards to mitigation in particular, EU authorities favor the use of the
sectoral approach introduced through UNFCC’s Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions36 (NAMA)
which provide a relatively easy to use starting point for evaluating reductions in GHG emissions. In the
case of adaptation projects, a more case-by-case approach will be needed, with a focus on strong
scientific climate data and long-term risk assessments.
Table 8. CC M&E building measures

                            Implementing        Timeline
     Activity Name                                                            Notes
                               Agency           (S, M, L)
 Reinforce CC                                                The MEWF will need to revise SEA and
 importance in SEA              MEWF                  S       EIA procedures to ensure that CC
 and EIA legislation                                          indicators are selected and monitored.
 Assign M&E                                                  The capacity of the unit will need to be
 responsibilities, with                                       increased significantly, as it currently
                                MEWF                  S
 necessary resources,                                         contains one person with very minimal
 to the MEWF PPU                                              CC expertise
                                                             Project evaluators will need to be
 Prepare a body of                                            retrained in order to prepare them for
 independent               MEWF, MRDPA,                       changes to the EIA and Sea procedures.
                                                     S, M
 evaluators on CC             CPN                            Training will need to be extended to
 M&E                                                          those designing the programs who will
                                                              make use of ESIF.
                                                             The GoR will need to adopt more open
 Ensure that                                                  data policies that expand upon the
 aggregate M&E data                                           minimalistic notion of transparency
 is made available               GoR             S, M, L      currently in use.
 and used to inform                                          Using M&E aggregate results will
 policy decisions                                             provide a solid evidence base for future
                                                              policy-making decisions.




36
 http://unfccc.int/focus/mitigation/items/7172.php

                                                     58
8. Public Engagement
Since 2002 at the Conference of the Parties (COP) 8 under the New Delhi Work Program, the Parties
have been encouraged to engage all stakeholders (e.g. local governments, non-governmental
organizations, intergovernmental organizations, business and industry). Engagement is understood in
the spirit of Article 6 of the convention to mean more than passively disseminating information.
Instead it includes education, training, public awareness, public participation, public access to
information, and international cooperation. The New Delhi Work Program serves as a framework for
country-driven actions, giving the Parties flexibility in implementing and taking into account national
circumstances and priorities. The program was reviewed in 2007at COP 13, resulting in a request that
the Parties report on their further efforts in implementing the program.
Information on climate change should start in primary school, and continue to secondary school and
higher education as well. However, the study eSchool for Sustainability in the Danube region –
Romania country report37 reveals the fact that education about the environment (or regarding
sustainable development) is voluntary in Romania for secondary schools, and information is dispersed
into different curriculums. The situation is similar in primary schools, and only programs initiated
outside of the schools, mainly by NGOs, involve children in different forms of non-formal education
involving awareness of issues related to the environment or sustainability. At the higher education
level, over the last years a couple of new specializations in were set up Romanian Universities,
touching, at least in part, the issue of climate change. On the other hand the deficit of expertize is
pretty large, and the number of masters or doctoral studies focused on climate change remain quite
limited.
An important indicator that could measure the level of engagement in educational programs in the
field of climate change is the number of Romanian participants entering European climate change
programs like Long Life Learning or Intelligent Energy for Europe or Life (about education and public
awareness). Unfortunately, Romanian participation is pretty limited in those programs, and one of the
barriers is co-financing. With the exception of governmental organizations, no sources of co-financing
were found for those programs for other stakeholders.
Romania should also undertake improvements in the vocational education system in order to prepare
the new green economy’s labor force. To implement such reforms close cooperation between the
MEWF and Ministry of Education and Scientific Research should take place, and Education for
Sustainable Development should become a national priority.
In terms of building capacity, for authorities and NGOs, the new Operational Program on
Administrative Capacity (ACOP)38 2014 – 2020 could represent an important opportunity for
developing climate change training programs. EU legislation, including that on climate change,
requires extensive engagement and the consultation of stakeholders during the policy-making
process. As a member state, Romania has to demonstrate transparency, accountability, efficiency,
fairness, the rule of law, participation, ownership, and the flow of information between government
and citizens – all together, good governance.




37
     http://issuu.com/terramiii/docs/romania_country_report_en/1
38
     http://www.fonduriadministratie.ro/25-februarie-2015-poca-2014-2020-aprobat-de-comisia-europeana/

                                                    59
Climate change communication requires different communications tools, like: specialized web pages,
newsletters, seminars, press meetings, social media, videos etc. For the time being, those instruments
are missing for climate change. All of the reporting documents to the EU or UNFCCC should be found
on the webpages of those beneficiaries’ institutions, but not on any Romanian institutions responsible
for implementing or reporting. Nevertheless, developing such instruments alone is not enough
because they should be maintained, updated and improved. This requires both human resources and
financial resources. In exchange, it will offer the benefit of an informed population that could take
part in decision-making processes.
Awareness campaigns are needed for the general public. And for targeting a large number of the
population, mass media needs to play an important role. Mainly, the responsibility of initiating and
supporting public awareness campaigns and programs rests on the public authorities’ shoulders. Very
often, the NGOs are also playing an important role in implementing awareness campaigns. At the EU
level public awareness is measured annually with the Eurobarometer, which indicates the level of
concern for citizens in all of the member states. Apart from this, some countries have developed
national tools for assessing the public’s awareness. For example, the Swedish Environmental
Protection Agency regularly conducted surveys of Swedes’ attitudes towards, and understanding of,
the climate problem. Public awareness should be an attribute of the public authorities, whether
national, regional or local.
A number of instruments could be used for raising CC awareness:
     Information campaigns;
     Resource or information centers;
     Involvement of NGOs and IOs and Chambers of Commerce;
     Networking.
Many governments are supporting NGOs with grants for developing awareness campaigns and
educational programs. In Romania, the Environmental Fund could play this role as well, if it would be
restructured and become more transparent. For the time being, the Environmental Fund is quite
controversial and Romanian NGOs complain about its performance. The focus is more on how to
spend the money, and not on the results of the programs and their impacts. The Environmental Fund
could also be used as co-financing for European programs; the impact is much higher and the costs
could be reduced.
Networking is also an important instrument for raising awareness, sharing information, and improving
knowledge. In Romania a federation of NGOs called Romanian Climate Action Network was set up and
later nominated to UNFCCC to be responsible for article 6 of the convention. Since its nomination in
2008, this organization has not received any requests or incentives from the Romanian authorities,
who seem unaware of article 6’s focal point.
Involving Industrial Organizations or Chambers of Commerce could create specific campaigns
dedicated to companies. Public consultations are a necessary obligation based on the European, and
implicitly national, legislation. Public consultations are often done as a formal step due to the
accelerate process run by the authorities and the limited knowledge of civil society. Generally, the
public consultations consist of posting the information on the internet, and in very limited cases in
having public debates with stakeholders or using other forms of consultation like questionnaires or
interviews. The authorities could set up a so-called advisory expert group that could have a
consultative role in developing new policies and programs or connecting different sectoral policies.

                                                 60
Table 9. Public engagement measures

                          Implementing        Timeline
     Activity Name                                                  Notes
                             Agency            (S,M,L)
                                                          Some costs associated with
                                                           training    teachers    and
 Integrating CC in the                                     education experts.
                               MEN             S,M, L
 educational Curricula                                    Resistance      from    the
                                                           Ministry of Education and
                                                           Scientific Research.
 Awareness and IEC                                        National budget and/or
 campaigns to support                                      Environmental Fund.
 CC issues and to                                         ESIF funding can be
                           MEWF & CPN          S,M,L
 promote the principle                                     identified for this type of
 of sustainable                                            project.
 development                                              Minimal risk.
                                                          National funds or ESIF
 CC Best Practices
                                                           funding may be available.
 sharing conferences
                               CPN             S,M,L      May become at least in part
 for specific interest
                                                           self-sustainable      when
 groups
                                                           managed by CPs.




                                         61
9. Concluding Remarks
The reform of the NCCC and creation of the CPN will provide the formal framework for the
implementation of the LCGGP. Engaging all stakeholders, and catalyzing private sector action, is
integral to the capacity building effort. Reform of the NCCC ensures that authorities responsible for
all sectors impacted by CC will be more capable of implementing the climate actions proposed by the
LCGGP in an integrated manner. Furthermore, the NCCC’s connection with the CPN will ensure that
stakeholders have an open channel of communication with national authorities to make policies more
responsive and effective. The CPN itself can become a formidable tool for dispersing knowledge,
expertise, and best practices.
Along with other national authorities, the capacity of the MEWF to negotiate, formulate and
support the implementation of CC policy will need to be consolidated. All relevant Romanian
institutions will need to build a capacity to understand the impact of CC on their sector or area of
responsibility. The MEWF however will continue to play a central coordinating role and will therefore
need sufficient and well trained personnel to coordinate with all other sectors in order to make the
implementation of the Strategy feasible and effective.
Beyond the institutional changes, the capacity building effort focuses on closing knowledge and skill
gaps. Indeed, the CPN will act as a repository of knowledge in time. However, particularly in the initial
stages substantial effort will need to be extended on building the level of CC expertise available in
Romania in the public and private sectors. Certain companies, for example in the energy or
construction sectors, will need to integrate CC into their long term planning beyond individual risk
factor assessments. In the public sector CC expertise will need to be provided to national and local
civil servants, along with explanations of how it needs to be integrated into long-term planning or how
it applies to their individual sector. M&E in particular will need ample capacity building in order to
ensure that it is implemented in a way that is effective without adding undue burdens.
Though these proposals may sound daunting, Romania has already made strides, and it also benefits
from the support structure of an EU member state. The Europe 2020 goals have given Romania a
focus to their reform efforts and a good impetus to move towards a low carbon economy. It is
fortunate that the implementation of the LCGGP is taking place in this context. The capacity building
measures proposed in this report are in synergy with the overall administrative capacity strengthening
principles, and should therefore face less resistance than previous reform initiatives. Furthermore, the
EU has already agreed to 40% cuts in emissions by 2030, making the LCGGP’s implementation even
more important, and giving an additional impetus to CC capacity building. The Capacity Building
Roadmap, containing an extended list of measures and also the implementation time horizon, can be
seen in Annex 7, while the more compact form of the measures in the format of the National Action
Plan can be found in Annex 8.
This report recommends a complex package of measures that will make the implementation of the
LCGGP both achievable and sustainable. The gradual long-term approach of this document is meant
to create synergy between legal, institutional, financial and soft measures to create a solid support
structure for the implementation of the LCGGP. The interplay of measures will build the cross-sectoral
and multi-level capacity needed to help Romania move towards intelligently adapting to the effects
of CC and reducing its GHG emissions without negatively impacting its economy.



                                                   62
                                           Annexes
  Annex 1. Summary of implemented and planned European policies and measures

         Policies and measures
                                              Stage of implementation/timetable /comments
             ‘Cross-cutting’

EU Emission Trading Scheme                Implemented since 2007.

Monitoring Mechanism Regulation           Adopted and in force since 8 July 2013.
                                           Auctioning of 900 million allowances from the early
                                           years of phase 3 of the EU ETS postponed to the end of
                                           the trading period.
Back loading
                                           Regulation (EU) no.176/2014 amending Regulation (EU)
                                           no. 1031/2010 related to the volume of GHG allowances
                                           to be auctioned in 2013-2020.
                                           Proposal adopted on 22 January 2014; submitted to the
                                           Council and Parliament.
Creation of a market stability reserve for
                                           The current draft proposes automatic adjustments of
the ETS phase 4 (2019 onwards)
                                           the volume of allowances to be auctioned in relation to
                                           the number of allowances in circulation, under pre-
                                           defined circumstances.
                                           Communication adopted by the Commission on 22
2030 Climate and Energy package            January 2014; subject to discussions within the EU
                                           institutions.
                                           Communication adopted by the Commission on 28 May
European Energy Security Strategy
                                           2014; subject to discussions within the EU institutions.
Roadmap for moving to a competitive
                                           Communication adopted by the Commission.
low-carbon economy in 2050 (2011)
7th Environment Action Program (2013)     In force.
                                          Package proposed by the Commission, subject to
Clean Air Policy Package
                                          discussions within the EU institutions.


Energy Supply

         Policies and measures
                                              Stage of implementation /timetable /comments
            ‘Energy supply’
 Promotion of electricity from RES-E
                                       In force.
 (2001)
 Renewable Energy Directive (Directive
                                       In force.
 2009/28/EC)
 CCS Directive                            In force.
 NER 300 laying down criteria and         Under the first call for proposals, the Commission made
 measures for the financing of            funding awards in December 2012 for a total value of €
 commercial demonstration projects for    1.2 billion to 23 renewable energy projects. Second call
 CCS and innovative renewable energy      for proposals was awarded in July 2014, amounting to €
 technologies under the revised EU ETS    1 billion supporting 18 renewable and 1 CCS projects.

                                                63
                                             In force until mid-2014. Repealed by the new Energy
 Directive on promotion of cogeneration
                                             Efficiency Directive.
                                    Biomass Action Plan, Dec 2005, with over 20 further
 Further measures on renewable heat
                                    actions planned. Renewable heat included in proposed
 (including biomass action plan)
                                    new Directive on renewable energy.

 Intelligent Energy for Europe: Program
                                        Program for policy support in renewable energy
 for renewable energy

                                             Amendments to a number of directives to continue to
 Developing the internal energy market
                                             help complete the internal energy market.
                                             6 European Industrial Initiatives and 10 Integrated
                                             Research Programs that address the development and
                                             market roll-out of new generation of renewable energy,
 Strategic Energy Technology Plan
                                             carbon capture and storage, nuclear and smart grids
                                             technologies in force since 2010/11. At EU level these
                                             initiatives are supported by FP7.


Energy demand

         Policies and measures
                                                Stage of implementation / timetable /comments
           ‘Energy demand’
                                             The Directive entered into force on 4 December 2012.
 Energy Efficiency Directive                 Most of its provisions had to be implemented by the
                                             Member States by 5 June 2014.
 Directive on the energy performance of
                                             Replaced by the recast Directive below.
 buildings
 Directive on the energy performance of      Adopted in May 2010 with an implementation deadline
 buildings (recast)                          for most of its provisions by July 2012.
 Directive on ecodesign requirements         Product policy under implementation. 25 implementing
 for energy-related products                 measures adopted on ecodesign, including voluntary
 Directive on labelling of the               industry agreements, and 12 on energy labelling.
 consumption of energy and other             Numerous implementing measures are under the
 resources by energy-related products        preparation.
 Regulation on the labelling of tyres with
 respect to fuel efficiency and other        Product policy under implementation.
 essential parameters
 Regulation on energy efficiency
 labelling Program for office equipment      Product policy under implementation.
 (Energy Star)
                                        In force until 5 June 2014, except for Article 4 which will
                                        be repealed from 1 January 2017. Afterwards to be
 Directive on energy end use efficiency
                                        (almost fully) replaced by the new Energy Efficiency
 and energy services
                                        Directive; National Energy Efficiency Action Plans
                                        adopted in all EU-27.
                                        Launched Oct 2006. Identifies 10 priority actions to help
 Action Plan on Energy efficiency as a achieve the 20% energy efficiency target of 368 Mtoe
 follow-up to the Green Paper           primary energy savings in 2020 (or 740 MtCO2-eq).
                                        Reinforced in March 2011 (see below).

                                                  64
                                             Launched March 2011. Aims at closing the gap to the
 Energy Efficiency Plan 2011                 20% energy efficiency target in 2020. It was followed by
                                             the adoption of the new Energy Efficiency Directive.
 Action under the Industrial emission Reference document on Best Available Techniques
 directive                            regarding Energy Efficiency finalised.
 Intelligent Energy for Europe Program
 (incl. Covenant of Mayors, ELENA), Program for policy support in energy efficiency.
 followed by the Horizon 2020 Program
                                       Launched in July 2011. Estimated investment potential
 European Energy Efficiency Fund       of EUR 265 million for energy efficiency, renewables and
                                       sustainable urban transport projects.
                                             EU Handbook developed for guidance for increased
 Public procurement
                                             energy efficient public procurement.
                                             Launch in 2012 of the Smart Cities and Communities
                                             European Innovation Partnership addressing the
 Strategic Energy Technology Plan
                                             demand side of low-carbon technologies in energy,
                                             transport and ICT sectors.

Transport

           Policies and measures
                                               Stage of implementation / timetable / comments
                 ‘Transport’
 Strategy on CO2 from light duty vehicles;
                                             The two amending Regulations implementing
 regulation on CO2 emissions from
                                             2021/2020 targets for cars/vans became active.
 passenger cars, regulation on CO2
                                             Regulations request a review setting targets beyond
 emissions from light commercial
                                             2020 by the end of 2015.
 vehicles, car labelling directive
 Fuel quality Directive –setting a 6/%
                                             First implemented in 1998. Revised in 2009 and
 reduction target of the carbon intensity
                                             amended in 2011 - implementing act laying down
 of fuels and also regulates the
                                             calculation methods is under preparation
 sustainability of biofuels
 Directive on the promotion of transport     Repealed, Replaced by the Renewable Energy Directive
 bio-fuels                                   (Directive 2009/28/EC).
  Initiative on fair and efficient road
 pricing, revising Directive 1999/62/EC      Proposal under preparation by the Commission.
 and Directive 2004/52/EC
 Infrastructure charging for heavy goods
                                             Adopted (Directive 2011/76/EU).
 (revised Eurovignette)
 Proposal for a Directive revising
 Directive 96/53/EC       on     maximum     Proposal adopted by the Commission.
 weights and dimensions
 Shifting the balance of transport modes     Package of measures in implementation.
                                             In force
 Fuel taxation (Energy taxation directive
                                             Review of the Energy Tax Directive under special
 2003//96/EC)
                                             legislative procedure with unanimity.
 Directive on mobile air conditioning
                                             In force.
 systems: HFCs
 Inclusion of Aviation in EU ETS for flights
                                             Adopted.
 within the EEA

                                                  65
                                         Includes all intra-European flights since 1/01/2012. Since
                                         March 2014, the coverage of the EU ETS is limited to
                                         flights within the European Economic Area for the period
                                         from 2013 to 2016, pending the adoption of
                                         international rules under the aegis of the International
                                         Civil Aviation Organization.
                                         Adopted.
 Strategy on Integrating maritime        In June 2013 the Commission proposed a Regulation
 transport emissions in the EU's         which would establish an EU-wide system for the
 greenhouse gas reduction policies       monitoring, reporting, and verification of CO2 emissions
                                         from large ships beginning in 2018.
                                         In force.
 Public procurement of vehicles
                                         The Directive requires that energy and environmental
 (Directive on the Promotion of Clean
                                         impacts linked to the operation of vehicles over their
 and Energy Efficient Road Transport
                                         whole lifetime, including CO2 emissions, are taken into
 Vehicles 2009/33/EC)
                                         account in public procurement decisions.
                                         One Joint technology Initiative on Fuel cells and
                                         Hydrogen in force since 2009, and one European
 Strategic Energy Technology Plan        Industrial Initiative and Integrated Research Program on
                                         bioenergy in force since 2010/11. At EU level these
                                         initiatives are supported by FP7.
                                         Strategy to create a competitive and efficient internal EU
 White Paper: Roadmap to a Single
                                         transport system, cut transport emissions by 60% by
 European Transport Area
                                         2050, adopted in 2011.
 Regulation      EURO     5    and      6
                                          In force.
 (692/2008/EC)
 Euro VI standard for heavy duty vehicles
                                          In force.
 (2013)
 Clean Power for Transport package
 including the deployment of alternative Proposal adopted by the Commission.
 fuel infrastructure


Industry & non CO2 gases

     Policies and measures
                                        Stage of implementation / timetable / comments
      ‘Industrial Processes
 Fluorinated gases:             In force.
 F-gas Regulation               The newly adopted F-gas EU Regulation no. 517/2014 replaces
 MAC Directive (mobile air the previous Fgas EU Regulation no. 842/2006 and will apply
 conditioning systems)          from 1 January 2015.
                                In force
 Industrial Emissions Directive
                                In 2008 the IPPC Directive was codified and in 2010 amended by
 2010/75/EU
                                the Industrial Emissions Directive.




                                              66
Agriculture
     Policies and measures
                                        Stage of implementation /timetable /comments
          ‘Agriculture’
                               Possibility for support through Rural development programs,
 Reduction of CH4 and N2O from
                               through anaerobic digestion, and improved manure storage and
 animal manure
                               management.
                               Possibility for support through Rural development programs and
                               from an improved implementation of the nitrates Directive
 N2O from soils
                               (1991/676/EEC). Through promotion of more efficient usage of
                               nitrogen fertiliser.
                               The reformed CAP was agreed upon in late 2013, consisting of
                               two pillars
                               Pillar I: Direct payments (new changes will be ready for 2015).
 CAP reform post 2013          Contains a new greening component to help protect soil carbon.
                               Pillar II: Rural development program (changes will impact on
                               country RDPs submitted this year).
                               Includes a new 20% climate mainstreaming requirement.




                                              67
               Annex 2. Inventory of Effective Climate Change Legislation
International Climate Change legislation
  UN Framework Convention on Climate Change, signed in Rio de Janeiro on June 5, 1992 ratified
   on Law no. 24 of May 6, 1994;
 Kyoto Protocol to the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change adopted on Dec.11, 1997
   ratified on Law no. 3 of Feb.2, 2001.
European Climate Change Legislation

       Directive 2003/87/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing a scheme
        for greenhouse gas emission allowance trading within the Community and amending Council
        Directive 96/61/EC (IPPC Directive);
       Directive 2004/101/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Directive
        2003/87/EC establishing a scheme for greenhouse gas emission allowance trading within the
        Community, in respect of the Kyoto Protocol’s project mechanisms;
       Directive 2009/29/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of April 23, 2009
        amending Directive 2003/87/EC so as to improve and extend the greenhouse gas emission
        allowance trading scheme of the Community;
       Directive 2009/31/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 April 2009 on the
        geological storage of carbon dioxide and amending Council Directive 85/337/EEC, European
        Parliament and Council Directives 2000/60/EC, 2001/80/EC, 2004/35/EC, 2006/12/EC,
        2008/1/EC and Regulation (EC) no 1013/2006;
       Commission Regulation no 2216/2004 of 21 December 2004 for a standardized and secured
        system of registries pursuant to Directive 2003/87/EC of the European Parliament and of the
        Council and Decision no 280/2004/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council;
       Commission Regulation no 916/2007 of 31 July 2007 amending Regulation (EC) No 2216/2004
        for a standardized and secured system of registries pursuant to Directive 2003/87/EC of the
        European Parliament and of the Council and Decision No 280/2004/EC of the European
        Parliament and of the Council;
       Commission Decision no 2006/780/EC on avoiding double counting of greenhouse gas
        emission reductions under the Community emissions trading scheme for project activities
        under the Kyoto Protocol pursuant to Directive 2003/87/EC of the European Parliament and
        of the Council;
       Commission Decision no 2007/589/EC establishing guidelines for the monitoring and
        reporting of greenhouse gas emissions pursuant to Directive 2003/87/EC of the European
        Parliament and of the Council;
       Commission Decision no 2006/803/EC amending Decision 2005/381/EC establishing a
        questionnaire for reporting on the application of Directive 2003/87/EC of the European
        Parliament and of the Council establishing a scheme for greenhouse gas emission allowance
        trading within the Community and amending Council Directive 96/61/EC.
       Decision no 406/2009/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 April 2009 on
        the effort of Member States to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions to meet the
        Community’s greenhouse gas emission reduction commitments up to 2020;




                                                68
      Commission Regulation (EU) No 601/2012 of 21 June 2012 on the monitoring and reporting
       of greenhouse gas emissions pursuant to Directive 2003/87/EC of the European Parliament
       and of the Council
     2013/162/EU: Commission Decision of 26 March 2013 on determining Member States’ annual
       emission allocations for the period from 2013 to 2020 pursuant to Decision No 406/2009/EC
       of the European Parliament and of the Council
     Regulation (EU) No 525/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 May 2013
       on a mechanism for monitoring and reporting greenhouse gas emissions and for reporting
       other information at national and Union level relevant to climate change and repealing
       Decision No 280/2004/EC
     Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 749/2014 of 30 June 2014 on structure, format,
       submission processes and review of information reported by Member States pursuant to
       Regulation (EU) No 525/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council
National Climate Change Legislation

      Government Decision no.780/2006 on the establishment of certificate trading scheme of
       greenhouse gas emissions (published in the O.G. no.554/27.06.2006) – transposes the
       Directive of the Council no.2003/87/CE of 13 October 2003 establishing a scheme for
       greenhouse gas emission allowance trading within the Community and amending Council
       Directive 96/61/EC, amended and completed by G.D. no.133 of February 23, 2010 and G.D.
       no. 204 of April 30, 2013
      Government Emergency Ordinance no. 64/2011 on carbon dioxide storage
      Government Emergency Ordinance (GEO) 115/2011 regarding institutional framework and
       Governmental authorization, through Ministry of Public Finance, to auction greenhouse gas
       emissions certificates attributed to Romania at the level of EU, modified and completed by
       EGD 70/2013;
      Government Decision no.1570 of Dec.19, 2007 on the setting up of the national system for
       estimating the level of anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions resulting from sources or the
       sequestration of carbon dioxide, regulated by the Kyoto Protocol;
      Government Decision no. 668/2012 for amending and supplementing of Government
       Decision no.1570 on the setting up of the national system for estimating the level of
       anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions resulting from sources or the sequestration of
       carbon dioxide, regulated by the Kyoto Protocol;
      Government Decision no. 529/2013 for approving the Romanian National Climate Change
       Strategy 2013 – 2020;
      Government Decision no. 1026/2014 on re-organize of the National Commission of Climate
       Change;
      Minister’s Order no.1170 of 29.09.2008 for the approval of Guidelines on adaptation to
       climate change effects – GASC;
      Minister’s Order no.1474/2007 for the approval of the Regulations on the management and
       operation of the National Register for Greenhouse Gas Emissions;
      Minister’s Order no. 3420/2012 approving the procedure for issuing greenhouse gas
       emissions permit for the 2013-2020 period;




                                               69
      Minister’s Order no. 2970/2013 for amending and supplementing of the procedure for issuing
       greenhouse gas emissions permit for the 2013-2020 period, approved on the Minister’s Order
       no. 3420/2012;

Procedures for Joint Implementation (JI)
      Minister’s Order no.1122 of 17.10.2006 for the approval of the Guidelines on the use of the
       “joint implementation (JI) mechanism” based on track II (art.6 of the Kyoto Protocol);
    Minister’s Order no.297 of 21.03.2008 for the approval of the national procedure on the use
       of the JI mechanism based on track I;
Green Investment Scheme – GIS
      Emergency Ordinance no.29 of March 31, 2010 on the use of amount units surplus assigned
       to Romania under the Kyoto Protocol;
      Government Decision no.432 of Apr.28, 2010 on the inception and development of green
       investment schemes.




                                               70
Annex 3. List of relevant Romanian entities involved in Climate Change policy-making
   •     Foreign Investor Council (www.fic.ro)
   •     Ownership of cement and other mineral products for construction –CIROM
         (www.cirom.ro)
   •     Federation of metallurgy –CONPIROM (www.conpirom.ro)
   •     Union producers of steel – UniRomSider (www.uniromsider.ro)
   •     Romanian Railway Club – Clubul Feroviar Roman (www.clubferoviar.ro)
   •     Oil Patronage of Romania – PPR (www.ppr.ro)
   •     Eco-Rom Packages – Eco-Rom Ambalaje (www.ecoromambalaje.ro)
   •     Association of Municipalities from Romania –RMA (www.amr.ro)
   •     Foundation Terra Mileniul III – (www.terramileniultrei.ro)
   •     Federation Climate Action Network Romania (www.rac-ro.ngo.ro)
   •     Regional Environmental Centre Romania (www.recromania.ro)
   •     Greenpeace Romania (www.greenpeace.org/romania
   •     Association Reper21 (www.societal.ro)
   •     Association Greenitiative (www.greenitiative.ro/)
   •     Maimultverde –( www.maimultverde.ro)
   •     CNDDS – (www.cndds.ro)Viitorplus - (www.viitorplus.ro)
   •     Salvatidelta – (http://salvatidelta.ro/)
   •     Greenrevolution – (www.greenrevolution.ro)
   •     Activewatch – (www.activewatch.ro)




                                        71
                  Annex 4. Romania’s regional development arrangements
In administrative terms the development regions of Romania (Regiunile de Dezvoltare ale României)
refer to the eight regional divisions created in Romania in 1998 in order to better co-ordinate regional
development. The development regions correspond to NUTS II -level divisions in European Union
member states39. The regions do not have administrative status, nor do they have a legislative or
executive council or government.
NUTS III level corresponds to counties as well as Bucharest.
Beyond the NUTS levels, the two LAU levels are:

        LAU 1 – corresponding to NUTS III (counties and Bucharest)
        LAU 2 – municipalities, cities and communes




Source MRDPA40




39
 Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics
40
  http://www.mdrt.ro/en/comunicare/presa/comunicate/rolul-regiunilor-in-atingerea-obiectivelor-politicii-
de-coeziune-in-romania

                                                    72
                  Annex 5. Romania’s national capacity building context
Romania’s Country Specific Recommendations by the EU Commission41:

With a view towards reaching the Europe 2020 goals, the European Commission issues country
recommendations primarily analyzing economic policies. In May 2015, the Commission published the
latest recommendations built on (i) the country reports presented in February; (ii) a thorough
assessment of every Member State's plans for sound public finances (Stability or Convergence
Programs, or SCPs) and policy measures to boost jobs and growth (National Reform Programs, or
NRPs); and (iii) the outcome of the dialogue with Member States and other key stakeholders. The
section referring to administrative capacity is reproduced below:

      “Romania’s administrative capacity is low, fragmented, and characterized by an unclear
      delegation of responsibilities, as a result of which it acts as a drag on the competitiveness of
      the economy. The root causes of the structural weaknesses have been identified, and a strategy
      to tackle the challenges in public administration and in policy prioritization and coordination
      was adopted in October 2014, together with an action plan for its implementation over the
      period 2014-2020. Implementation has, however, been considerably delayed. Irregularities in
      public procurement procedures have resulted in significant delays in implementing EU fund
      programs. They have a negative impact on the business environment and hold back much
      needed investment in infrastructure”

National Reform Program42

The GoR responded to the comments in the National Reform Program laying out the steps it is taking
to remedy the issue. A segment is reproduced below:

      “Improving the efficiency in the administration continue to be a priority for Romania.
      Strengthening capacity of the public administration to develop and implement policies remains
      a key challenge, with an impact on the overall development of the country, business
      environment and the public investment capacity, as well as on providing public services of
      sufficient quality. Therefore, the OP Administrative Capacity 2014-2020 aims at creating a
      modern administration to facilitate socioeconomic development through public services,
      investment and regulations of quality. In this way, the OP contributes to meeting the Europe
      2020 objectives.

      In this context, the new commitments of Romania for the next 12 months are targeted to raise
      the efficiency of public administration, to improve the EU funds management, to ensure the IT
      systems and networks security, to continue the reform of public procurement system

      In Q3/2014, the draft of the Strategy on Strengthening Public Administration 2014-2020 was
      finalized under MDRAP and SGG/CPM coordination. The draft is based on the
      recommendations of the analysis on structural causes and on the suggestions made by the
      ministries and associative structures of the local public administration. In October 2014, the
      Government approved the Strategy and its action plan, including the short term schedule of
      activities for 2014-2016 (GD No 909/2014). A National Committee (CNCISCAP) ensures the

41
 http://ec.europa.eu/europe2020/pdf/csr2015/csr2015_romania_en.pdf
42
 http://ec.europa.eu/europe2020/pdf/csr2015/nrp2015_romania_en.pdf

                                                 73
         coordination of Strategy implementation, as well as its monitoring and assessment. The activity
         of this Committee is supported by thematic working groups on public policy and regulation,
         cutting red tape, human resources, quality management and public services, local public
         administration. The detailed methodology for monitoring and evaluation of the Strategy was
         approved within CNCISCAP meeting held on 13 March 2015.”

The Strategy on Strengthening Public Administration43
According to this document, Romania envisions that by 2020 its public administration will be:
     1. Focused on providing public services – this includes far better use of ICT and better integration
        and coordination between institutions, reducing bureaucracy and producing better quality
        services.
     2. Open and receptive to innovative solutions – which will manifest as public involvement and
        engagement, including through the increased use of pilot projects in order to identify best
        practices.
     3. Using simplified and consolidated institutions and mechanisms, which will be driven by three
        principles:
        a. A predictable and well documented decision process
        b. Professional human resources
        c. Financial management in the public interest




43
 http://www.fonduriadministratie.ro/strategia-pentru-consolidarea-administratiei-publice/

                                                    74
                                               Annex 6. NCCC Reform
NCCC - Proposed Structure Scheme
                                                                     National Climate Change Commission - the main CC coordination body
                              Technical                              at the national level meets once per trimester
                               Group:
                               Energy                                   Is chaired by representatives of the Prime Minister Cabinet but is also
                  TG:                                                    open to members of Parliament
                Research                      TG:                     Is managed and organized by the CC authority
                  and                      Transport
                                                                     Technical Groups (TG) - are technical bodies that have some decision
               Awareness
                                                                     making authority on technical points but primarily prepare materials to
                                                                     be approved by the NCCC
                                                                      Meet on an on-going basis, have relevant permanent members and
                                                                       invite experts or CPs as needed.
                             National
      TG:                     Climate                      TG:        The main tasks would be to review international developments and
   Financing                  Change                   Agriculture     construct negotiating positions, discuss policy proposals, M&E
                            Commission                                 mechanisms, funding, etc.
                                                                      Additional technical groups could be added if needed, within the limits
                                                                       of the CC authority
                                                                      The Research and Awareness working group would initially stand on
                                                                       its own, and become integrated within the other groups in time, when
               TG: SMEs                       TG:
                 and                         Local                     CC awareness has increased and the structure is more stable
               Industry                   Development                 The Local Development Group would work with local authorities or
                                                                       CPs representing regions
                                TG:
                             Adaptation                               The Financing TG would work with the other TGs and the CPN to
                                                                       identify funding for proposed actions and identify, highlight and
                                                                       publicize new opportunities; it would also co-ordinate with the CPN on
                                                                       the Financial Toolbox.


                                                               75
                                             Annex 7. Road Map for Institutional Capacity Building
The actions listed are not exhaustive, and interventions are to be coordinated with the National Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth Strategy and
Action Plan as well as relevant national planning documents.
   Capacity Building                                                                   Short term            Medium term               Long term
                                           Individual Actions
       Action                                                                            >2017                 >2020                     >2030
                        Reform the NCCC                                                    *                      *                        *
                        Institute Public – Private Climate Partners Network                *
                        Adopt and open data policy regarding CC information
         Legal                                                                             *
                        and the policy process
                        Review SEA and EIA national legislation to better
                                                                                           *
                        integrate CC concerns
                        Instituting and populating sectoral technical groups of
                                                                                           *
                        the NCCC
                        Relevant line ministries develop CC units                          *                       *                       *
                        Relevant line ministries co-chair the technical groups
                                                                                                                   *                       *
                        with MEWF
  Improve CC action
                        Prime Minister’s office chairs the NCCC                                                    *                       *
    coordination
                        CP clusters become more involved in the functioning of
                                                                                                                   *                       *
                        the technical groups
                        CPN collaborate with MEWF in administering the NCCC                                                                *
                        NCCC must prepare an annual synthetic report to the
                                                                                           *                       *                       *
                        public on climate change issues.
                        Review and clear assignation of national institutional
                                                                                           *
                        responsibility for energy efficiency policymaking
                        2030                                                               *
                        Identification of adaptation risks for energy systems and
       Sectoral                                                                            *
                        assigning institutional responsibilities for adaptation
     Coordination
                        Provide incentives programs for the industrial sector to
                                                                                                                   *                       *
                        reduce GHG emissions and assess CC risk
                        Updating, disseminating and implementing the
                                                                                           *                       *
                        monitoring system for CO2 removal for forestry

                                                                           76
               Development of institutional framework to support
                                                                             *   *
               efficient and effective supply chain in forestry
               Development of a transparent Natura 2000
                                                                             *
               compensating system within the protected areas
               Designate the responsible bodies to assess the
               vulnerability of natural habitats and protected species       *
               to climate change
               Integrating CC topics into the educational curricula at all
               levels
               Technical assistance for LAU low carbon transport
                                                                             *   *   *
               planning
               First CP are appointed based on previous activity             *
               CP Network is extended and standards are
                                                                                 *   *
               strengthened
               CP Clusters are encouraged and reflected in NCCC
 Building CC                                                                     *   *
               technical groups
partnerships
               Membership fee is introduced                                      *   *
               CP Network responsibilities are extended within NCCC
                                                                                     *
               and at the international level
                CP Network maintains the financial toolbox                           *
               Perform a study on ways to foster an EECCI                    *
               Gradually introduce the necessary legal, regulatory and
                                                                             *   *   *
               policy changes necessary for creating an EECI
               Reform EFA to deal more easily with ETS funds and CC
                                                                             *
               financing
 Financial     Formulate Financial toolbox using best practices and
                                                                             *
               international expertise
               Foster CC Insurance Schemes and CP relationships with
                                                                                 *
               companies providing them
               Develop CP relationships with banks in order to
                                                                                 *
               encourage CC financing



                                                                    77
                     Revise PPP practices to make them attractive for
                                                                                    *
                     climate initiatives
                     Update local budget legislation to allow for CC planning       *
                     Develop a support structure for LAUs signatories of
                                                                                    *
                     CoM
                     Develop support systems for private sector entities
                                                                                    *
                     wishing to become CPs
                     Incentive public and private CC research                       *
                     Assistance in scaling up CC pilot projects                     *   *
                     Information campaigns and support for stakeholders in
                                                                                *   *   *
                     accessing EU fund on CC (Life+, Horizont 2020 etc)
                     CP popularize, maintain and promote the financial
                                                                                        *
                     toolbox
                     Identify and partner with institutions capable of
                                                                                *
                     operating and maintaining sectoral models
                     Invest in the maintenance and update of CC models          *   *   *
                     Make use of the models when making decisions in NCCC
CC Macro-Modelling
                     technical groups
                     Ensure the active involvement of professionals in
                                                                                *   *   *
                     developing scientific argumentation for policy making
                     Give access to models for CP and LAUs                          *   *
                     Introduction of post-graduate educational programs
                                                                                *   *   *
                     with a focus on climate action aspects
                     Training for CC modeling teams by international experts    *
                     CC training for line ministries staff                      *   *   *
 CC Education and    CC training for LAU staff (on integrating adaptation in
     Training        long term urban planning, or how to appropriately
                                                                                *   *   *
                     reflect climate-related data in national and local
                     building codes and policies, etc.)
                     M&E training for LAUs                                      *   *   *
                     CC training for SEA and EIA evaluators                     *   *   *



                                                                        78
                    Provide CC finance information and training to local and
                                                                                       *   *
                    national banks
                    Training for utilities operators on climate-sensitive
                                                                                       *   *
                    design and operations
                    Training energy efficiency experts and evaluators                  *   *
                    CC finance and planning training for CPs members or
                                                                                       *   *
                    applicants
                    Awareness and IEC campaigns to support CC issues and
                                                                                   *   *   *
                    to promote the sustainable development principle
                    CC Best Practices sharing conferences for specific
                                                                                   *   *   *
                    interest groups
Awareness Actions   Provide information on the use of ICT to reduce GHG
                                                                                       *   *
                    emissions in the public and private sector
                    Provide CC Advisory services for farmers, young
                    farmers, micro-enterprises and small enterprises in            *   *   *
                    rural areas
                    Fund research downscaling global climate models                *   *   *
                    Restructure the research agenda according
                    international developments (focus on mitigation,
                                                                                   *
                    innovation of technologies and understanding
                    adaptation needs)
                    Promotion of cross-sectoral and inter-disciplinary CC
                                                                                   *   *   *
                    research
    Research        Publicize and operationalize CC research through the
                                                                                       *   *
                    CPN
                    Facilitate CC partnerships between research entities
                                                                                   *   *   *
                    and the private sector
                    Facilitate the identification or filing of patents that help
                                                                                       *   *
                    the private sector reduce GHG emissions
                    Research into the use of ICT to reduce GHG emissions in
                                                                                   *   *   *
                    the public and private sector
                    Reinforce CC importance in SEA and EIA legislation             *


                                                                          79
                    Prepare a body of independent evaluators on CC M&E         *
                    M&E CC indicators for all relevant programs and
                                                                               *   *   *
                    projects
CC Monitoring and
                    Assign M&E responsibilities, with necessary resources,
   Evaluation                                                                  *
                    to the MEWF PPU
                    Ensure that aggregate M&E data is made available and
                                                                               *   *   *
                    used to inform policy decisions
                    Adopt open data policies, and ensure that CC data and
                    information on the policymaking process is distributed
                                                                               *   *   *
                    effectively and efficiently, including by making
                    improved use of ICT
  Transparency
                    Consult civil society and the CP in order when reviewing
                                                                               *   *   *
                    secrecy and transparency legislation or policies
                    Maintain easily accessible archives of CC data and
                                                                               *   *   *
                    legislative changes




                                                                       80
                                          Annex 8. Compact tables of needed capacity building measures
The actions bellow will be essential to the successful implementation of the Strategy, though due to technical and timing issues they could not be included in
the Action Plan. Below are the compact tables of needed administrative capacity measures, in the format used by the Action Plan.
                  Objective 1:
                  Consolidate             Estimated
                                                                           Result                  Financing Source Estimated          Net      Feasibility
                  Romania’s               starting / and Responsible
 Type of action                                                            indicator/measure       (EU/State        Amount             benefits risks
                  integrated CC           completion     body
                                                                           unit                    budget/Other)    (mil. €)           (0 to 5) (0 to 5)
                  institutional           dates (year)
                  framework
 Legal /          Strengthen the legal
                  framework
 Institutional
                  regarding the status
 capacity
                  of NCCC in order to
                  increase          its
                                          2016 - 2017     MEWF             Legislation improved    National Budget       0.2           2.7        2.4
                  authority       and
                  effectiveness;
                  Populate and grow
                  the NCCC working
                  groups




                                                                             81
                                       Estimated
               Objective 2:                                                              Financing
                                       starting    /                Result                               Estimated   Net        Feasibility
Type        of Improve the overall                   Responsible                         Source
                                       and                          indicator/measure                    Amount      benefits   risks
action         CC capacity of                        body                                (EU/State
                                       completion                   unit                                 (mil. €)    (0 to 5)   (0 to 5)
               national authorities                                                      budget/Other)
                                       dates (year)
Institutional   Strengthen         the
Capacity        capacity of the
                MEWF CC unit:
                revise the structure
                and       size      of
                                                                    Salary scale revised
                departments          in
                                        2016 - 2020   Government    and implemented      State budget    1.4         2.3        1.8
                accordance with CC
                responsibilities; Pay
                scale revisions and
                improved retention
                policies for CC staff
                within the MEWF
Institutional   Develop             or
capacity        strengthen CC units
                                                                    No of persons in
                in line ministries, as
                                                                    charge with CC in
                per                the 2016 - 2020    Government                      State budget       1.5         2.0        2.6
                                                                    each ministry
                Environmental Law
                and      the     2009
                Memorandum
Institutional   Provide training in
capacity        order to raise the                    Local        and No of civil servants
                expertise levels of 2016 -2020        central public trained on CC and OPAC              0.2         2.3        2.6
                civil        servants                 administration   public policies
                working on CC




                                                                     82
                 Objective 3:             Estimated
                 Raise the level of CC,   starting    /               Result              Financing Source Estimated   Net        Feasibility
                                                        Responsible
Type of action   transparency,            and                         indicator/measure   (EU/State        Amount      benefits   risks
                                                        body
                 knowledge and            completion                  unit                budget/Other)    (mil. €)    (0 to 5)   (0 to 5)
                 awareness                dates (year)
Institutional    Support the Climate
capacity         Partnership Network
                 (CPN) to become a
                 knowledge platform                                 Online platform and
                                                                                        OPAC
                 capable of efficiently                MEWF     and surveys of CPN
                                          2016-2020                                     State budget       1           3.3        2.6
                 publicizing public CC                 CPN          members on its
                 data      and     best                             effectiveness
                 practices          and
                 encourage      private
                 participation
Institutional    Provide support for                                                   State budget
                                                                      No. of LAUs who
capacity         local authorities to                  Government                      Swiss
                                          2016-2020                   have joined and                      1.5         3.3        2.2
                 join the Covenant of                  and CPN                         Cooperation
                                                                      submitted a plan
                 Mayors                                                                Program




                                                                       83
