Project co-financed by the European Regional Development Fund through OPTA 2007 – 2013




Romania Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth Program


Output D 2.1
Monitoring, Reporting, and Verification




October 2015

 1.     [Type a quote from the document or the summary of an interesting point.   7. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6.
This report corresponds to the deliverable “Report on the Design of MRV system in Romania” (Output
D2.1) in the Advisory Services Agreement on Romania Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth
Program signed between the Ministry of Environment and Climate Change1 and the International Bank
for Reconstruction and Development on July 23, 2013.




The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this volume do not necessarily reflect the
views of the Executive Directors of The World Bank or the governments they represent. They are
entirely those of the author(s) and should not be attributed in any manner to the World Bank, or its
affiliated organizations, or to members of its board of executive directors for the countries they
represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this study and
accepts no responsibility whatsoever for any consequence of their use. The boundaries, colors,
denominations, other information shown on any map in this volume do not imply on the part of the
World Bank Group any judgment on the legal status or any territory or the endorsement of acceptance
of such boundaries.




1
    Now called Ministry of Environment, Waters and Forests
Table of Contents

Contents
Acknowledgements.................................................................................................................................. i
Abbreviations and Acronyms ................................................................................................................... i
Executive Summary.................................................................................................................................. i
1.     Introduction .................................................................................................................................... 1
     1.1      Terminology ............................................................................................................................. 2
     1.2      Organization of the report....................................................................................................... 2
2.     Overview of MRV Requirements .................................................................................................... 4
     2.1      The UNFCCC Requirements ..................................................................................................... 5
     2.2      The European Union MRV Requirements ............................................................................... 6
     2.3      Additional EU Evaluation Requirements linked to Funding .................................................. 15
     2.4      Summary of Emissions-related Reporting Requirements ..................................................... 16
     2.5      Sustainable Development Goals ............................................................................................ 17
3.     MRV of Emissions for Maritime .................................................................................................... 20
     3.1      Context and overview of the Maritime MRV Regulation ...................................................... 20
     3.2      Maritime MRV Regulation Requirements ............................................................................. 20
     3.3      The EU Maritime MRV Regulation in the context of other legislation .................................. 28
     3.4      The regulation in the Romanian context ............................................................................... 31
     3.5      Next steps regarding Maritime MRV ..................................................................................... 39
4.     MRV of Climate Change Actions by Local Governments .............................................................. 41
     4.1      Overview of the Covenant of Mayors Initiative .................................................................... 41
     4.2      Sustainable Energy Action Plans (SEAPs)............................................................................... 42
     4.3      Additional Methodologies for local GHG inventories ........................................................... 50
     4.4      Potential financing resources for SEAPs and Emissions Inventories ..................................... 53
     4.5      Options and considerations for supporting local government actions on climate change .. 55
5.     MRV: Research & Systematic Observation, and Education & Awareness .................................... 57
     5.1      Overview of the integration of climate change into public policy and institutions .............. 57
     5.2      Existing Institutional Approach.............................................................................................. 58
     5.3      Options and Recommendations for Research and Systematic Observation......................... 61
     5.4      Education and Citizen Awareness on Climate Change Issues ............................................... 66
     5.5      Options and Recommendations for education and awareness ............................................ 68
     5.6      Analyzing options for improved RDI & EA inputs in the National Communications ............. 70
6.     Concluding Remarks...................................................................................................................... 74
References ............................................................................................................................................ 75
   Section 1 References......................................................................................................................... 75
   Section 2 References......................................................................................................................... 76
   Section 3 References......................................................................................................................... 78
   Section 4 References......................................................................................................................... 78
Annexes ................................................................................................................................................. 79
   Annex 1. Giurgiu Emission Inventory – Energy Use and CO2 Tables ................................................. 79
   Annex 2. Institutional Contributors to Scientific Knowledge on CC&A ............................................ 81
Acknowledgements
This report is a product of the World Bank’s Romania Climate Change Reimbursable Advisory Service
(RAS) project, at the request of the Government of Romania, through its Ministry of Environment,
Waters and Forests (MEWF). It was drafted by Viorel Blujdea, Julia Larkin, Dumitra Mereuță, and
Cathrine Sachweh, under the supervision of Michael McCormick.
The team would like to express its gratitude to the Romanian Government, particularly Sorin Deaconu,
Narcis Jeler, Gabriela Popescu, Gherghiţa Nicodim, Mihaela Smarandache, and Mihaela Ștefănescu of
the Climate Change General Directorate of MEWF, for their review and discussion of findings and
recommendations, and excellent working relations throughout this assignment. The following
individuals were interviewed during the development of the Maritime section: Daniela Ionescu, Heiko
Kunst, Gherghiţa Nicodim, and Marian Popescu. Their input was instrumental.
The World Bank program is managed by Jian Xie and Erika Jorgensen, under the general guidance of
Paula Caballero, Kulsum Ahmed, and Elisabetta Capannelli from the World Bank.
Abbreviations and Acronyms
APCC         Action Plan on Climate Change
AVR          Accreditation and Verification Regulation
BEI          Baseline Emissions Inventory
BR           Biennial Reports
CC&A         Climate Change and Adaptation
CCS          Carbon Capture and Storage
CNPSTI       National Council for Science Policy, Technology and Innovation
CP2          Second Commitment Period (under the Kyoto Protocol)
CPLAU        Climate Partnerships for Local Authorities Units
ECA          Energy Cities Romania
EC           European Commission
EEA          European Environment Agency
EED          Energy Efficiency Directive
EFA          Environmental Fund Administration
EMSA         European Maritime Safety Agency
EPA          Environmental Protection Agency
ESD          Effort Sharing Decision
ESIF         European Structural and Investment Funds
ESSF         European Sustainable Shipping Forum
ETS          Emissions Trading Scheme
EU           European Union
GHG          Greenhouse gases
GWP          Global Warming Potentials
IIE          Intelligent Energy for Europe
INDC         Intended Nationally Determined Contributions
IPCC         Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
IPPU         Industrial processes and product use
IT           Information Technology
LAU          Local Administrative Unit
LCDS         Low Carbon Development Strategy
LCGGP        Low Carbon Green Growth Programme
LULUCF       Land Use, Land Use Change and Forestry
M&E          Monitoring and Evaluation
MADR         Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development



                                                                              i
MEI        Monitoring Emissions Inventory
MER        Ministry of Education and Research
MESMEsBE   Ministry of Energy, Small & Medium–Size Enterprises, and Business Environment
MEWF       Ministry of Environment, Waters and Forests
MTT        Ministry of Economy, Trade and Tourism
MMR        Monitoring Mechanism Regulation
MRDPA      Ministry of Regional Development and Public Administration
MRR        Monitoring and Reporting Regulation
MRV        Monitoring, Reporting and Verification
MP         Monitoring Plan
MS         Member State (of the European Union)
NAB        National Accreditation Body
NAP        National Adaptation Plan
NC         National communications
NCCC       National Commission for Climate Change
NCCS       National Climate Change Strategy
NEEAP      National Energy Efficiency Action Plan
NREAP      National Renewable Energy Action Plan
NIR        National Inventory Report
NGO        Non-Governmental Organization
NRP        National Reform Programme
ODA        Official Development Assistance
OECD       Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development
OP         Operational Programme
OPTA       Operational Programme Technical Assistance
P&M        Policies and Measures
RDI        Research, Development and Innovation
RMA        Romanian Municipalities Association
RENAR      Romanian Association for Accreditation
RES        Renewable Energy Sources
QAQC       Quality Assurance and Quality Control
QELRT      Quantified Emission Limitation or Reduction Commitment
QEWERT     Quantified Economy-Wide Emission Reduction Commitment
RAS        Climate Change Reimbursable Advisory Service
SDGs       Sustainable Development Goals



                                                                                           ii
SEA      Strategic Environmental Assessment
SEAP     Sustainable Energy Action Plan
SEE      Financing Mechanism for the European Space
SME      Small and medium enterprises
S&T      Science and Technology
UNFCCC   United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change




                                                                 iii
Executive Summary
The World Bank Group prepared this report, which is one in a series, to assist the Romanian
Government implement its National Climate Change Strategy (NCCS).
Effective climate change strategies require a complete and accurate understanding of greenhouse gas
(GHG) emissions sources, quantities, and trends over time – collected and reported through GHG
reporting programs, which also include information on adaptation and mitigation policies. Romania’s
GHG reporting program provides valuable tools for identifying and reporting emissions-related risks
as well as clean development opportunities.
Figure ES-1 illustrates several components involved in reporting national climate change data and
information; reporting on local actions should also inform progress on national initiatives.
Figure ES-1: GHG Reporting Components


                     Local                                Romania's
                  Government                             National GHG
                    Actions                            Reporting Program


                                         Mitigation                         Low Carbon   Biennial Reports
    Emissions        Emissions                               Adaptation
                                        Policies and                       Development     and National
   Inventories      Projections                              Strategies
                                         Measures                              Plans     Communications




Romania has deep experience monitoring, reporting, and verifying (MRV) GHG emissions, as well as
systems and processes that provide the foundation for monitoring and evaluating (M&E) public
policies to address climate change.
However, knowledge of overall MRV requirements is not uniform throughout affected institutions;
new regulations emerge; identifying options to encourage collaboration and support among national
authorities and local governments is key to realizing GHG reduction potential, but still untapped; and
while national organizations and institutions have the potential to inform policy development,
research and education on climate change and adaptation are at an early stage in Romania.
Therefore, to address gaps in knowledge and complement its analysis on national MRV obligations,
Romania’s Climate Change General Directorate, within its Ministry of Environment, Waters and
Forests (MEWF), specifically requested that this report provide targeted information on the following
four topics, which reflect its MRV needs and priorities.
  1. Current MRV requirements and activities and requirements stemming from existing European
     Union (EU) and United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)
     obligations;
  2. The EU maritime MRV regulation for reporting CO2 emissions and includes information on the
     regulation’s requirements for the Romanian government;
  3. MRV of Climate change actions by local governments, including emission inventory
     development, within the context of the Covenant of Mayors, examples of emissions mitigation
     activities by municipalities, and options and considerations to support local government actions
     from the national government; and




                                                                                                            i
    4. MRV Research and “systematic observation,” and education and awareness institutions and
       organizations.

Overview of MRV Requirements
The objective of MRV programs is to provide complete information on emissions inventories,
adaptation and mitigation actions, and capacity building. They should also, as appropriate, include
financial and technical support provided or received. The Romanian National Climate Change Strategy
(NCCS) and Low Carbon Green Growth and the Climate Change Action Plan (LCGGP), which are under
development, should aim for practical yet systematic improvements in monitoring, evaluation and
reporting activities, building upon and enhancing existing systems and current institutions. It should
also link with reporting on international Sustainable Development Goals.
Romania’s approach to MRV of strategic climate change objectives is expected to expand upon and
integrate the required MRV efforts for GHG mitigation and climate change adaptation at the
European Union (EU) and international treaty level, such as through the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and the Kyoto Protocol. It will also incorporate existing data
collection and observation already taking place to feed into emerging climate change monitoring
objectives.
New reporting requirements relating to the 17 new Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) will
emerge over the next few years, which are part of the universal agenda on sustainable
development, relating to all developed and developing countries. Romania is considering its
response to the main climate change goal, Goal 13: Take urgent action to combat climate change and
its impacts.

MRV of Emissions for Maritime
The European Commission has established new MRV regulations for maritime emissions. Romania
must prepare to implement the regulation, which requires maritime shipping companies using EU
ports to report their CO2 emissions and other relevant data beginning in 2019 for 2018 emissions.2
The EU Maritime MRV Regulation creates an EU-wide legal framework for collecting and publishing
verified annual data on CO2 emissions from all large ships (over 5000 gross tons) that use EU ports,
irrespective of where the ships are registered.
The regulation is primarily targeted at shipping companies, yet Romania has accreditation, compliance
and information exchange requirements as both a flag State and a port State that can be easily
integrated into existing institutional arrangements.

MRV of Climate Change Actions by Local Governments
Romania’s cities are increasingly taking action to combat climate change, and the national
government can help drive mitigation and adaptation initiatives at the community-level. For
example, by mid-September 2015, 63 municipalities and local administrative units (LAUs) in Romania
have signed the EU Covenant of Mayors (CoM), in which they voluntarily agree to account for
emissions and address climate change. Signatories commit to a target of at least a 20% reduction by

2
 On 28 April, the European Parliament approved the Regulation of the European Parliament and of the council
on the monitoring, reporting and verification (MRV) of carbon dioxide emissions from maritime transport, and
amending Directive 2009/16/EC


                                                                                                           ii
the year 2020 as compared to 1990 levels, through the implementation of strategies adopted at the
local level.
Key CoM activities include development of a Baseline Emissions Inventory and a Sustainable Energy
Action Plan (SEAP), and issuing periodic Implementation Reports and Monitoring Emissions
Inventories that assess the effectiveness at achieving CO2 reductions. Several approaches for
developing local inventories exist to help local governments.
Municipal sustainable development activities do impact national GHG inventories, for example, local
implementation of climate-related policies manifest positive changes in electricity and fuel use. Local
governments should be encouraged to boost their activities through national support and assisted
with integrating community initiatives with national-level policies. For instance, national-level
policies regarding renewable energy use and energy efficiency can create an enabling environment
that encourages the adoption of clean energy resources and efficient activities at the local level.
Increased collaboration and information sharing that enhances awareness of policy options and
opportunities can facilitate local government action. The national government can also provide tools
and resources to help overcome legislative, organizational and financial hurdles faced by local
authorities addressing climate change.

MRV: Research & Observation and Education & Awareness
Research, scientific observation (of natural processes), data collection and technical knowledge, as
well as new technological development and innovation, can better support informed and
responsible decision-making regarding climate change mitigation and adaptation. This is a key
building block to help the government align its economy with the priorities set forth in the national
climate change strategy and action plan.
“Systematic research” and education on climate change and adaptation to climate change are at an
early stage in Romania. At the same time, institutions involved in relevant research and observation
of natural processes do exist, and their efforts can be augmented. The EU does not require reporting
on research, development and innovation (RDI) or on scientific or technological activities relating to
climate action; however, Romanian institutions are fulfilling requirements to implement EU and
UNFCCC guidelines, such as for adaptation reporting or preparing National Communications, which
could be amplified to improve policy-making.
Increased coordination, information exchange and training will help ensure that a critical mass of
scientists and professionals have integrated CC&A topics into their activities and are effectively sharing
their results. This would stimulate knowledge production, such as through the development of
dedicated CC&A research initiatives and leveraging public-private partnerships. Research and
information should also be accessible by a wide community of researchers and policy makers,
particularly at the local level, as well as the general public.
Stakeholder engagement provides opportunities to facilitate support and buy-in of government
policies within the business community, civil society, and community groups, among others.
Engaging the public increases the awareness of research by promoting it directly to interested parties,
e.g. industry, farmers, population, etc. This could be institutionalized by involving appropriate regional
or national institutions.




                                                                                                        iii
Improving the general public’s awareness and understanding of climate change delivers dividends
when communicating public policy. The Romanian population generally appears to show little
concern with regard to climate change risks. School curricula could be enriched to address CC&A-
related topics. Central authorities could also explore methods to ensure appropriate training of
teachers, professors and public officials at all levels. Public officials at all levels would benefit from
their employees taking courses on CC&A themes. Romanian NGOs have experience of raising climate
change awareness through education campaigns.
There are several options to improve reporting on RDI and education and awareness in National
Communications, which would involve additional training for staff within MEWF, and potentially
deeper involvement of the National Commission on Climate Change.




                                                                                                        iv
1. Introduction
The World Bank Group prepared this report, which is one in a series, to assist the Romanian
Government implement its National Climate Change Strategy (NCCS).
Effective climate change strategies require a complete and accurate understanding of greenhouse gas
(GHG) emissions sources, quantities, and trends over time – collected and reported through GHG
reporting programs, which also include information on adaptation and mitigation policies. Romania’s
GHG reporting program provides valuable tools for identifying and reporting emissions-related risks
as well as clean development opportunities.
Figure 1 illustrates several components involved in reporting national climate change data and
information; reporting on local actions should also inform progress on national initiatives.
Figure 1: GHG Reporting Components


                     Local                             Romania's
                  Government                          National GHG
                    Actions                         Reporting Program


                                      Mitigation                         Low Carbon   Biennial Reports
    Emissions        Emissions                            Adaptation
                                     Policies and                       Development     and National
   Inventories      Projections                           Strategies
                                      Measures                              Plans     Communications




Romania has deep experience monitoring, reporting, and verifying (MRV) GHG emissions, as well as
systems and processes that provide the foundation for monitoring and evaluating (M&E) public
policies to address climate change.
However, knowledge of overall MRV requirements is not uniform throughout affected institutions;
new regulations emerge; identifying options to encourage collaboration and support among national
authorities and local governments is key to realizing GHG reduction potential, but still untapped; and
while national organizations and institutions have the potential to inform policy development,
research and education on climate change and adaptation are at an early stage in Romania.
Therefore, to address gaps in knowledge and complement its analysis on national MRV obligations,
Romania’s Climate Change General Directorate, within its Ministry of Environment, Waters and
Forests (MEWF), specifically requested that this report provide targeted information on the following
four topics, which reflect its MRV needs and priorities.
  1. Current MRV requirements and activities and requirements stemming from existing European
     Union (EU) and United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)
     obligations;
  2. The EU maritime MRV regulation for reporting CO2 emissions and includes information on the
     regulation’s requirements for the Romanian government;
  3. MRV of Climate change actions by local governments, including emission inventory
     development, within the context of the Covenant of Mayors, examples of emissions mitigation
     activities by municipalities, and options and considerations to support local government actions
     from the national government; and


                                                                                                         1
    4. MRV Research and “systematic observation,” and education and awareness institutions and
       organizations.


1.1       Terminology
A national climate change strategy typically consists of goals, which are further articulated through
specific objectives/broad policies and (quantifiable) targets. These objectives would then be met
through the implementation of actions (e.g. policy instruments and programmes, sectoral activities)
which could also then result in specific projects and activities. Indicators are typically used as part of
an evaluation strategy to help monitor or document progress. The indicator data can also facilitate
reporting to meet governmental and international requirements as well as to engage the public, such
as to address environmental problems, to inform public debates, or to gain support for and legitimize
policies.
Monitoring and evaluation is a broad field and the terminology used also varies depending on the
context and primary purpose. There are a variety of overlapping concepts and associated acronyms.
The following are the primary concepts used in this report:
          E = Evaluation
          M&E = Monitoring and Evaluation – relating to impacts from policies and measures
          MRV = Monitoring (or Measurement), Reporting, and Verification – associated with GHG
           emission inventories
This report uses MRV to refer to requirements or practices that primarily stem from national-level
requirements to meet international GHG reporting standards, such as from the UNFCCC and the EU.3
However, MRV also apples to local government climate mitigation and activities, among other things.
Broadly, MRV refers to the processes and procedures that support emission inventories, where
evaluation is defined as the systematic and objective measurement and assessment of progress and
performance of an intervention, such as to promote transparency, accountability, and continuous
improvement.


1.2       Organization of the report
This report is organized into the following sections:

          Section 1 is the introduction.
          Section 2 includes an overview of MRV requirements at the national level to address climate
           change.
          Section 3 summarizes the EU regulation addressing greenhouse gas emissions for Maritime
           Shipping recently adopted and includes suggestions on how Romania can comply.
          Section 4 provides insights to existing climate actions at the local level through the EU
           Covenant of Mayors initiative and provides suggestions on how the national government can
           further support these efforts.


3
 The UNFCCC uses specific terminology, see the following links for a glossary of UNFCCC terms used: UNFCCC
Glossary of climate change acronyms http://unfccc.int/essential_background/glossary/items/3666.php. IPCC
Glossary of terms http://www.ipcc.ch/publications_and_data/publications_and_data_glossary.shtml


                                                                                                             2
   Section 5 addresses how research, development innovation and education activities in
    Romania currently address climate change and provides options and considerations
    encouraging these activities in the future, as well as suggestions to improve capacity to report
    such measures in the National Communication to the UNFCCC.
   Section 6 contains closing remarks.




                                                                                                  3
2. Overview of MRV Requirements
This section provides an overview of monitoring, reporting and verification (MRV) for climate change
at the national level. Mature MRV systems for climate change provide complete information on
adaptation, emissions inventory, mitigation actions, adaptation actions, capacity building, and
financial and technical support provided or received.4
Romania’s approach to MRV of strategic climate change objectives is expected to expand upon and
integrate the required monitoring, reporting and verification (MRV) efforts for GHG mitigation and
climate change adaptation at the European Union (EU) and international treaty level, such as through
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and the Kyoto Protocol. It
will also incorporate existing data collection and observation already taking place to feed into
emerging climate change monitoring objectives.
Romania’s M&E and Reporting strategy for climate change issues would be expected to address the
following overlapping topics:

       Requirements at the UNFCCC level, such as for national inventories, national communications,
        biennial reports, and intended nationally determined contributions (INDCs)
       Requirements at the EU level, both those that role up to EU-level UNFCCC reporting as well as
        those that serve other needs. For example, the COM ‘Decent Life for All by 2030 decision
        proposes principles for an overarching framework for post-2015’ intended to provide a
        coherent and comprehensive response to the universal challenges of poverty eradication and
        sustainable development in its three dimensions, environmental, social and economic.5 Topics
        to be addressed include:
             o   GHG emissions for all relevant sectors and sources
             o   Related public funding in-country, EU-level, and international
             o   Related sustainable development and adaptation benefits or costs (e.g. economic,
                 social, health, other environmental)
             o   Financial and technology support provided to developing countries

       National policies and actions addressing mitigation, adaptation, or support, as prioritized.
        Examples: building code, appliance standards, renewable feed-in tariff, public transit policy
The most significant international obligations derive from the UNFCCC and the Kyoto Protocol. EU
Member State (MS) requirements relating to the EU-level climate and energy package and related
initiatives as well as the deepening evaluation culture at the EU level are also important drivers.




4
  This section adapts elements of Section 2 of Output A2.7 Developing Monitoring and Evaluation Systems for
the National Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth Strategy and Action Plan in Romania also in this
series.
5
 http://ec.europa.eu/europeaid/documents/2013-02-
    22_communication_a_decent_life_for_all_post_2015_en.pdf


                                                                                                              4
2.1 The UNFCCC Requirements
As a party to the Treaty creating the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change in the
1990s, Romania has experience with meeting its commitments to submit the following to the UNFCCC:
        Emissions inventories (GHG Inventory): cataloguing current and historical emissions trends.6
        National communications (NC)7: comprehensive reports including emission trends as well as
         information on a country’s mitigation and adaptation efforts, and
        Biennial reports (BR): outlining progress in achieving emission reductions and the provision of
         financial, technology and capacity-building support to other countries, submitted in between
         national communications.
Adaptation to climate change reporting requirements are included in the NC in a dedicated section
addressing three areas: expected impacts, vulnerability assessment, and adaptation measures.
Objectives and targets are designed and established at national level, as there is no specific
international requirement, so far.
The GHG Inventory, NC and BR are also submitted to the EU Commission who compiles information
from all MSs and reports at the EU-level to the UNFCCC. The specific requirements for MSs are
described in the EU Monitoring Mechanism Regulation, discussed in the next subsection.

The Kyoto Protocol
The Kyoto Protocol under the UNFCCC is a binding agreement, ratified by Romania in 2001. Under this
agreement, 37 countries and the European Union committed to:
        Binding national emissions targets and international monitoring and reporting requirements
         to verify the achievement of these targets8, and
        National inventory systems with more specific requirements9 than those required by UNFCCC
         and penalties for non-compliance.10

Commitments under the UNFCCC
For the second commitment period (CP2, 2013-2020), agreed through the Doha Amendment,
Romania has assumed a target of 20% GHG emissions reduction, compared to 1990 levels, as has the
EU. It is referred to as a quantified emission limitation or reduction commitment (QELRT) and it
incorporates the impact of the obligations set under various internal instruments on a strict linear

6
  Most parties, including Romania, use the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Guidelines that
describe methodologies for estimating emissions and Good Practice Guidance that details quality assurance
and control procedures for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories as a foundation for their reporting, located
here: http://www.ipcc-nggip.iges.or.jp. The EU Commission, through the European Environment Agency,
provides additional guidance for Member States, here: http://www.eea.europa.eu.
7
  Approximately every 4-5 years, depending on the reporting schedule agreed in decisions at Conferences of
Parties.
8
  Romania’s target under the Kyoto protocol was an 8 % reduction of GHG emissions between 2008 – 2012,
relative to 1989 levels.
9
  The additional requirements to comply with the Kyoto protocol are addressed in the EU Monitoring
Mechanism Regulation and are summariszed here:
http://unfccc.int/national_reports/reporting_and_review_for_annex_i_parties/items/5689.php
10
   In 2011, Romania was temporarily suspended from participation in the Kyoto market mechanisms.


                                                                                                              5
pathway from 2013 to 2020, but excludes international aviation. Furthermore, land use, land use
change and forestry (LULUCF) is excluded from target setting but included in CP2 target achievement
by accounting for Kyoto Protocol LULUCF commitments of individual MSs.
For subsequent commitment periods, the domestic emissions reduction or limitation pledge is defined
as quantified economy-wide emission reduction target (QEWERT) for 2013-2020 and as an intended
nationally determined contribution (INDC) for 2020-2030. The EU has set a QEWRT of 20% by 2020
compared to 2005, implemented through Climate Energy package. This is the same percentage (20%)
as for the second Kyoto Protocol’s CP2, but uses a different base year and structure with regard to
sources, such as by including international aviation and excluding LULUCF11.
For the third commitment period, 2020-2030, the EU has pledged an INDC of 40% compared to 1990
levels, which includes a 43% contribution from the EU Emission Trading Scheme (ETS) and 30% from
non-ETS sources of vs. 2005 (all sectors of economies have to contribute, including LULUCF)12.


2.2 The European Union MRV Requirements
The EU has established its implementing framework for its low carbon development strategy and
associated policies, called the EU climate and energy package, which evolves and expands over time.
Current versions of the related EU legislation focus on efforts to reach 2020 goals, yet the EU
Commission is currently discussing a package to reach 2030 goals. The four key components of the
2020 goals package, each with associated reporting requirements, include13:
        EU Emissions Trading System updates, covering around 45% of the EU's greenhouse gas
         emissions14

        Effort Sharing Decision addressing sectors not covered in the ETS, such as housing, agriculture,
         waste and transport
        National Renewable Targets, and the related Renewable Energy Directive and required
         National Renewable Energy Action Plans (NREAPs)

        Establishing a legal framework to facilitate carbon capture and storage.
While energy efficiency was not directly addressed in the formal 2020 climate and energy package,
there is related legislation, centering on the Energy Efficiency Directive and the related Energy
Performance of Buildings, Energy Labelling and Eco-design Directives. For example, the Energy
Efficiency Directive requires MS to develop National Energy Efficiency Action Plans (NEEAPs) that set
out estimated energy consumption, planned energy efficiency measures and the improvements
individual EU countries expect to achieve. NEEAPs are to be updated every three years.
In addition, there are complementary initiatives at the EU-level addressing, for example: reducing F-
gases, promoting innovative technologies and developing climate change adaptation strategies. Most,
if not all, of these topics would be expected to be incorporated into Romania’s Climate Change

11
   Commission Staff Working Document - Preparing the EU's Quantified Emission Limitation or Reduction
Objective (QELRO) based on the EU Climate and Energy Package at
http://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/international/negotiations/docs/swd_13022012_en.pdf
12
   European Council (23 and 24 October 2014) Conclusions on 2030 Climate and Energy Policy Framework, at:
http://www.consilium.europa.eu/uedocs/cms_data/docs/pressdata/en/ec/145356.pdf
13
   http://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/package/
14
   http://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/ets/


                                                                                                            6
Strategy, as relevant, in addition to locally-driven measures, and should be addressed, as feasible, in
the M&E system.
At the EU-level, climate and energy package achievements are being monitored following the
internationally-agreed compliance framework, the cornerstone of which is the EU Monitoring
Mechanism Regulation outlining requirements for Member States (MS), and is evaluated with
assessments through the European Semester as well as through in-depth evaluation of specific
elements.

EU Monitoring Mechanism Regulation
The current version of the Monitoring Mechanism Regulation (MMR)15 entered into force on 8 July
2013 and addresses EU and MSs’ joint obligations under the EU climate & energy framework and
UNFCCC and aims to bring together all EU climate change mitigations instruments in a consistent EU
MRV framework. It specifies the reporting rules on GHG emissions to meet requirements arising from
current and future international climate agreements discussed above for GHG Inventories, NCs and
BRs, as well as for key components of the EU climate and energy package that relate to the required
reporting for national policies and measures (P&Ms).16 17
It aims to improve the overall quality of data reported as compared to earlier versions, help the EU
and MS keep track of progress towards meeting their emission targets for 2013-2020 and facilitate
further development of the EU climate policy mix. The current MMR also introduced new elements,
such as reporting of:
        MS and EU low-carbon development strategies;
        Financial and technical support provided to developing countries, and commitments arising
         from the 2009 Copenhagen Accord and 2010 Cancún Agreements;
        MS use of revenues from the auctioning of allowances in the EU ETS. MS have committed to
         spend at least half of the revenue from such auctions on measures to fight climate change in
         the EU and developing countries.
        Emissions and removals from LULUCF;
        MS adaptation to climate change.18

Supporting regulations
There are also implementing and delegating acts to support the MRR, as described below.

        Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 749/2014 of 30 June 2014 on structure, format,
         submission processes and review of information reported by Member States pursuant to


15
   Regulation (EU) No 525/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council on a mechanism for monitoring
and reporting greenhouse gas emissions and for reporting other information at national and Union level
relevant to climate change.
16
   Information on the EU climate and energy package can be found here:
http://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/package
17
   Readers should note that much of the EU climate legislation was approved earlier than related international
agreements were concluded, and is updated periodically. Therefore, it is important to check whether there are
any updates on the EU Commission website or with another reliable source.
18
   http://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/g-gas/monitoring


                                                                                                             7
       Regulation (EU) No 525/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council provides details
       on the implementation of each relevant reporting requirement set under 525/2013/EU, and
       makes explicit the procedures for Union Expert Review of greenhouse gas emissions. This
       regulation facilitates the assessment of the actual progress towards meeting the Union's and
       the MSs' commitments under UNFCCC, Kyoto Protocol and “Energy and Climate Package,” by
       defining what, how and when the information is transmitted to EU and how it is reviewed.

      Commission Delegated Regulation C(2014) 1539 establishing substantive requirements for a
       Union inventory system and taking into account changes in the global warming potentials and
       internationally agreed inventory guidelines pursuant to Regulation (EU) No 525/2013 of the
       European Parliament and of the Council, transposes into EU legislation into obligations for the
       Union for the second commitment period of Kyoto Protocol, and includes the latest changes
       required of MSs and the EU for reporting GHG inventories. It defines provisions for the EU’s
       national system and annual GHG inventory submission, quality assurance and quality control
       programme (QAQC), the gap-filling procedures in cases of missing data in MSs’ submission,
       and the timescales for cooperation and coordination during the annual reporting process and
       the UNFCCC reviews.
There are two other decisions that relate to reporting requirements referred to in the MMR.
      Decision No 406/2009/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 April 2009 on
       the effort of Member States to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions to meet the
       Community’s greenhouse gas emission reduction commitments up to 2020, i.e. the so-called
       effort sharing decision (ESD). A policy commitment to develop a highly energy-efficient and
       low GHG economy for Europe is initiated through this decision. It is the key piece of EU’s
       “Climate and Energy package”. The ESD, together with EU ETS, cover some 95 % of the EU
       emissions. Flexibility in reaching emission limitation has an important role in achieving ESD
       targets. Reporting involves estimates from the GHG inventory for concerned sectors, which
       reduces the MS’s effort by benefiting from the EU and UNFCCCC reviews. Its mitigation
       component requires reporting on projected progress, including associated national policies &
       measures and projections, as well as information on additional national actions to limit GHG
       emissions beyond the limits set by decision.
      Decision 529/2013/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 May 2013 on
       accounting rules on greenhouse gas emissions and removals resulting from activities relating
       to land use, land-use change and forestry and on information concerning actions relating to
       those activities provides for the preparation of the accounting framework for LULUCF activities
       by MSs. This is part of preparedness and inclusiveness of mitigation actions across all economy
       sectors in post-2020 emission reduction regime.

Roles under the MMR
Overall responsibility of MMR implementation at the European Union is with the European
Commission (specifically DG CLIMA) which administers, maintains and continuously improves the EU
inventory system. Reports to the European Parliament are prepared by European Commission.
The European Environmental Agency (EEA) assists the European Commission on numerical tasks and
estimation issues, compilation of reports and disseminating the information. The EEA has a



                                                                                                    8
partnership with European Topic Centre for Air Pollution and Climate Change Mitigation (ETC/ACM),
which consists of a consortium of 14 European organizations, to provide technical support to MSs.
Additionally, the European Commission is assisted by the Climate Change Committee. This Committee
has working groups with representatives from the MSs and is chaired by the Commission. As part of
its role this Committee develops proposals for further improvement or simplification in order to avoid
duplication to UNFCCC legislation.
At the MS level, reporting is the responsibility of each State’s competent authority. In order to support
data aggregation and comparability among various EU climate change instruments and with the GHG
inventory, the MMR requires MSs to ensure competent authorities have access to data and methods
used.
The MMR also covers penalties and corrective actions in cases of non-compliance or deviation from
the reporting schedule, such as quantitative thresholds above which penalties apply (e.g. under the
ESD, a deduction of 1.08 % of excess emissions from the next year’s amount).
The various initiatives addressed in the MMR have different governance structures that provide
different degrees of flexibility for MS. For example, according to the relevant decisions, the EU ETS is
administered by the European Commission and implemented nationally, ESD targets are defined at
the EU level but MSs manage target achievement directly according to national policy broken out by
economic activity (i.e. transport, buildings, waste management, agriculture and certain industrial
installations). The EU is open to more ambitious targets, more comprehensive approaches to non-CO2
climate-relevant anthropogenic emissions, and changes in Global Warming Potentials (GWPs) of
GHGs, as well as other measures to support the enhanced environmental integrity of emission
reduction targets or obligations (e.g. Article 24 Procedures for unilateral inclusion of additional
activities and gases from Directive 2003/87/EC).

Details on specific reporting obligations under the MMR
This section outlines specific MRV reporting obligations under the MMR, and subsequent legislation.
The specific reporting format and structure are provided in annexes of the CIR 749/2014, which are
consistent with requirements under UNFCCC.

Low – carbon development strategy updates
Following the Cancun Agreement (1/CMP16) and subsequent UNFCCC decisions (e.g. 2/CMP17), MSs
and the EU have to prepare a low carbon development strategy (LCDS) outlining how to address the
long term vision of a low-carbon society built on opportunities, economic growth and sustainable
development. After preparation of the initial national LCDS, required by March 2015, MSs submit
updates every 2 years to the European Commission. MS and EU reports should highlight the
contribution of European and national policy to both national and European commitments.

Policies and Measures
The national system for Policies and Measures (P&M) and projections are key instruments in achieving
climate objectives, while aiming to minimize negative side effects on the economy or society.
Measures are the operative means of implementing policies or climate oriented actions; they are
typically measurable through indicators. National P&M should be undertaken under the umbrella of
LCDS, and included in updates in biennial reports and national communication.


                                                                                                       9
The MMR requires setting up a national and an EU-wide system for P&M and projections, which is
intended to ensure that all relevant institutional, legal and procedural arrangements are in place, so
adequate information on data available and is collected and used in a consistent way. It seeks to
ensure all GHG relevant policies are captured in projections, regardless of whether they result in larger
or smaller emissions. The system also aims to ensure P&M feedback is integrated into LCDS is
functioning, and both EU and national P&M are sufficiently captured.
The MMR’s P&M monitoring procedures facilitates transparent information disclosure on countries’
progress toward implementing existing national or EU’s P&M. Reporting includes quantitative GHG
projections over a period of four future years for each individual or group of P&M. For example,
countries distinguish between EU ETS and ESD-related P&M in their reports. Estimated and realized
costs and other benefits should also be reported for each individual or group of P&M. Reporting also
covers non-GHG indicators, to complement quantitative GHG indicators to express GHG impacts,
including both ex-ante and ex-post assessments of each individual or group of P&M. The MMR
requires MSs to communicate any substantial change of the reported information even before the
deadline for following update report submission.

Biennial Report and National Communications
Biennial report (BR) and national communications (NC) follow UNFCCC reporting guidelines. The
submissions to UNFCCC and reports on P&M and emissions projections under MMR have to be fully
consistent. Submissions to the European Commission are scheduled to facilitate having sufficient
time to perform reviews and improve reports prior to UNFCCC deadline for both the EU and MS.
The biennial update shall report aggregated national projections of anthropogenic GHG emissions by
sources and removals by sinks for a period of four future years. Reporting includes projections
organized by gases and IPCC sectors, or aggregated according to the two EU mitigation instruments
(ETS, ESD). The reports should show the contribution of P&M according to their implementation stage
in the following scenarios:
       WOM (without measures),
       WEM (with existing measures e.g. business-as-usual) and
       WAM (with additional measures).
Projection-based analysis provides support for certain mitigation actions under various P&M
scenarios; thus each country reports their most up to date national projections to European
Commission. Sensitivity analysis is also required, to assess possible changes due to policy
developments. Incomplete national estimates trigger gap filling efforts for the respective MS in order
to develop the EU projections.
Methodologies to model or simulate the impacts of P&M are defined by each country. Some EU-
supported projects provide guidelines. Projection reporting is still not addressed by comparable
methodologies within MMR or UNFCCC, thus transparency on assumptions and methods used are key
to consistent reporting.

Reporting on national GHG inventories
The national GHG inventory provides the reference points for emissions reductions targets. Parties
included in Annex I to the UNFCCC develop, update and publish national inventory of anthropogenic


                                                                                                      10
emissions by sources and removals by sinks of all anthropogenic greenhouse gases not controlled by
the Montreal Protocol. Parties to the Kyoto Protocol report anthropogenic emissions and removals in
order to demonstrate compliance with their respective emission reduction or limitation targets.
Under the MMR, MSs and the EU are required to establish inventory systems able to perform the
planning, preparation and management of data and information according to UNFCCC Guidelines for
national inventories. Timing of reporting is detailed in the secondary legislation, CIR 749/2014/EU and
CDR (2014) 1539, which ensures deadlines for submission to UNFCCC are respected by both MS and
the EU. CDR (2014) 1539 also addresses other issues for national GHG inventories, e.g. methodologies
and GWPs, to ensure accuracy.
MSs are responsible for the quality of activity data, emission factors and other parameters and for
application of methodologies consistent with Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)
Guidelines. MSs are required to report on consistency of data reported for other pollutants
(inventories under 2001/81/EC and United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE)
Convention on Long-range Trans-boundary Air Pollution, fluorinated gases) and energy data. The
purpose is to allow adequate and transparent preparation and verification of national GHG inventory.
 To improve the review effectiveness and ensure consistent implementation of the methodologies,
changes and recalculations have to be reported annually. Completeness checks of the MS inventories
within the MMR and UNFCCC review allow identification of sources not estimated, where methods
are available, unless explanation is given based on a threshold for significance (following section
reporting from 24/CP19 and art 31 of CIR 749/2014/UE). Uncertainty estimates are required for
emission levels and trends, as well as for activity data and emission factors or parameters used at the
most detailed level possible.
Annual national GHG inventory submissions include:

       Time series of emissions and removals inventory for period since 1990 to X-2 (x – current
        year);

       Inventory report or updates on data, information on macroeconomic indicators;

       Assumptions and methodologies used;
       Information on indicators and description of registry changes and its operations in the
        previous year (including credits from projects and transactions for the purpose of the Decision
        406/2009/EC).
       Information on changes to national systems: information on any improvement, especially
        steps considered to implement recommendations or adjustments from review teams. Under
        the annual reporting cycle, minimization of effort is reached by highlighting changes in
        information submitted previously.
Annual reporting by MS to the EU shall also contain information on the consistency of ETS-verified
emissions with corresponding source categories in the GHG inventory, in terms of total emissions and
the ratio of verified emissions to the total, as well as the results of checks performed on data used for
GHG inventory estimation as compared with inventories on other air pollutants.
Compilation of the EU GHG inventory is a multi-step task involving MSs and EU. The EU’s GHG
inventory (and supplementary LULUCF reporting to the Kyoto Protocol) is the sum of MSs’ national


                                                                                                      11
GHG inventories. Overall, the EU inventory is expected to be more accurate and precise than any
individual MS’s inventory. For accounting purposes under the Kyoto Protocol as well as for EU-wide
targets, the MMR establishes a procedure to estimate missing data or discrepancies in consultation
and close cooperation with the European Commission and MSs concerned, following CDR (2014)
1539.
Verification consists of activities and procedures that can support the reliability of reported
information by source category, sector or for the entire inventory (as section G. Reporting para 40 and
41 of 24/CP19 and Ch.6 of IPCC 2006). Typically and widely accepted by reporting parties under
UNFCCC, verification requirements are triggered by a reporting agency when methods external to the
inventory are being used, e.g. comparisons of input data or inventory estimates with values developed
in contexts and/or methods totally different to the national system. A meaningful verification process
requires transparent disclosure of assumptions and data. Verification techniques include individual
data checks (e.g. on parameters used), inventory inter-comparison, comparison of intensity indicators,
comparison with atmospheric concentrations and source measurements, and outputs from
modelling/simulation exercises.

Emission Registries
The EU emission registry system has specified operational and enforcement rules defined in the
Monitoring Mechanism Regulation. Accurate processing of emissions reduction transfers is ensured
by one central EU Registry for both the ESD and EU ETS, within which MS administer their own
accounts and the accounts of their installations/aircraft operators. MS’ national registries are to be
maintained until the Kyoto Protocol expires in order to ensure fulfillment of national obligations.
Registries are updated annually. Registry rules to comply with the Kyoto Protocol’s accounting and
reporting requirements address issuance, acquisition, holding, transfer, cancellation, retirement and
carry-over of assigned amount units, removal units, emission reduction units and certified emission
reductions.
Emission credits from projects that under flexible instruments, such as those from international
emissions trading, the Clean Development Mechanism and Joint Implementation, must follow
internationally negotiated and agreed MRV rules. As stated in EU legislation, “credits from project
activities used by Member States represent real, verifiable, additional and permanent emission
reductions and have clear sustainable development benefits and no significant negative
environmental or social impacts”.19

National adaptation actions to climate change
National adaptation planning to climate change is defined as a continuous, progressive and iterative
process. Monitoring and reporting of the progress and actions in national adaptation plans to address
residual climate change is required. Reports to the European Commission should contain adaptation
strategies as well as current and planned actions to facilitate adaptation to climate change. They
should facilitate an assessment of MS’ preparedness and exchanging information and help identify
best practices on each type of risk and the adaptation measures implemented.



19
  Directive 2009/29/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 April 2009 amending Directive
2003/87/EC so as to improve and extend the greenhouse gas emission allowance trading scheme of the
Community (Text with EEA relevance) source


                                                                                                           12
Climate finance and technology transfers to other countries
MSs and the EU, as developed country parties to UNFCCC, cooperate and provide MS as well as EU-
level information on funding or transfer of technology to developing countries. This includes financial
assistance – public and/or private flows – for any mitigation or adaptation activities, which provides
transparent information on funding or on capacity building and technology transfer. Complete
information requires noting if the support is new and additional to existing official development
assistance (ODA) already engaged.20

Reporting on the use of auction revenues and project credits
Explicit reporting of the use of revenue from allowances from the EU ETS, both for installations and
aircraft operators, is required for the previous calendar year. The purpose is to ensure achievement
of long term emission reductions, as well as correct the recording of any allowances not actually used
and to be carried-over to subsequent years. One reason MSs report on the use of EU ETS auctioning
revenue is so that at least 50% of these revenues are allocated toward further energy and climate
related activities, like renewable energy promotion, development of low carbon administration and
support or forestry, expected to lead to more GHG emission reductions.

Reporting for the purposes of decision no 529/2013/EU (“LULUCF accounting decision”)
As mentioned above, annual submissions under MMR require both inventory of anthropogenic GHG
emissions by sources and removals by sinks from Land Use, Land Use Change and Forestry sector
(LULUCF) and anthropogenic GHG emissions by sources and removals by sinks from LULUCF activities
elected under Decision 529/2013/EU. To avoid double reporting, if all information required in Decision
529/2013/EU is included in latest National Inventory Report (NIR) to the UNFCCC, no additional
reporting to the EU is necessary.
For 2013-2020, it is mandatory to account for all forest-related activities and for Cropland
Management and Grazing Land Management activities that were not necessarily voluntarily selected
by a MS under the Kyoto Protocol. To report GHG estimates for such activities, the development of a
national system was required to provide annual preliminary estimates immediately and binding
annual estimates by the year 2022.

Reporting on aviation and maritime shipping impact on climate change
According to the European Council, “all sectors of the economy should contribute to achieve emission
reductions, including international maritime shipping and aviation”.
For aviation, the CO2 emissions from intra-EU flights are included in EU ETS, but are not required to be
reported under UNFCCC and the Kyoto Protocol. Non-CO2 emissions and other climate impacts from
aviation will be assessed regularly and options for addressing these impacts in context of the MRR are
to be proposed by the European Commission.




20
     Romania’s most recent report on financial and technology support provided to developing countries pursuant
      to Art. 16 of Regulation (EU) no. 525/2013 (2014) is available here:
      http://cdr.eionet.europa.eu/ro/eu/mmr/art16_finance/envvguzvw/index_html


                                                                                                            13
Refer to Section 2 for more information on the new regulation that requires maritime shipping
companies using EU ports report their CO2 emissions and other relevant data.21 The EU Maritime MRV
Regulation creates an EU-wide legal framework for collecting and publishing verified annual data on
CO2 emissions from all large ships (over 5000 gross tons) that use EU ports, irrespective of where the
ships are registered.
The EU Maritime MRV Regulation is distinct from other prominent EU regulations on MRV, e.g. the
two regulations on monitoring and reporting (MRR) and for accreditation and verification (AVR) for
the EU ETS, due to the fact that MS authorities have no responsibility in approving shipping companies’
monitoring plans or reviewing their verified emission reports, not to report these emissions to the
European Commission. Control over the quality of reported data is in the hands of private sector
entities, namely third party verifiers, which will assess and verifier that companies are meeting the
requirements. MSs’ role is limited to enforcement procedures.

EU Review Processes

EU’s annual expert review of greenhouse gas inventories
One key component of the EU MRV system is the ‘union expert review’ whose purpose is to review
MS estimates of GHG emissions and monitor MSs’ achievement under the ESD, focusing on the specific
sectors and sources within the scope of that decision.22 The European Environment Agency (EEA) acts
as the secretariat, and it is independent of the parallel UNFCCC review. Although, some crosschecks
performed under MMR, i.e. completeness and QAQC, are similar.
Union expert review is performed annually. Comprehensive reviews also occur as needed, and focus
on consistent implementation of methodologies and implement technical corrections over a period of
time. Under the ESD, an initial comprehensive review in 2012 was also designed to assess the
limitation level for each MS, which is the maximum allowed GHG emissions as compared to the 2020
target.
A comprehensive review is planned in 2016 for the year 2014 reporting, to allow recalculations after
implementing 2006 IPCC Guidelines for national GHG inventories, and again in 2022 reviewing the
year 2020 reporting. Identification of significant issues in the annual review, e.g. unaddressed
recommendations from earlier Union or UNFCCC reviews or inaccurate estimates, also trigger a
comprehensive review for that MS. MSs coordinate with the European Commission and the EEA for
both types of reviews. After review and implementation of any technical corrections, the European
Commission issues a final GHG emissions value for that year. After issuance of final data, there is 4
month of ‘true up’ window when MS implement corrective actions in the registry.

Progress towards 2020 targets: Assessment through the European Semester
The progress of each MS towards meeting the "20-20-20" targets of the climate and energy package
is assessed every spring as part of the annual Europe 2020 policy coordination exercise, known as the


21
   On 29 April 2015, the European Parliament approved the Regulation of the European Parliament and of the
council on the monitoring, reporting and verification (MRV) of carbon dioxide emissions from maritime
transport, and amending Directive 2009/16/EC
22
   Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 749/2014 of 30 June 2014 on structure, format, submission
processes and review of information reported by Member States pursuant to Regulation (EU) No 525/2013 of
the European Parliament and of the Council


                                                                                                        14
European Semester. The assessment is based on MS' National Reform Programmes, plus the
projections of future greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions reported under the MMR.
MS progress towards meeting their national emission target for 2020 under the Effort Sharing Decision
and their national renewable energy target for 2020 under the Renewable Energy Directive are
assessed. On the basis of its analysis the EU Commission can propose specific recommendations to
MS to help strengthen the mainstreaming of climate action into broader economic policies.23

EU Emissions Trading System (ETS)
Under the EU ETS (Directive 2003/87/EC), operators of covered installations and aircraft must annually
report their greenhouse gas emissions, based on the monitoring plan specifying their emissions
monitoring methodology, to the national competent authority. The monitoring reports generated by
the operators must be verified by a third party, before being submitted. Data reported include activity
data, emission factors, oxidation factors, total emissions, and uncertainty.
MS have to report annually on arrangements for the allocation of allowances, the operation of
registries, the application of the monitoring and reporting guidelines, verification and issues relating
to compliance with the Directive and on the fiscal treatment of allowances. The directive also requires
MS to ensure covered installations and aircraft operators monitor and report emissions in accordance
to the EU ETS Monitoring and Reporting Regulation (Commission Regulation 601/2012) to the national
competent authority.
Specific monitoring and reporting provisions for companies related to emissions from installations
covered by the EU ETS are covered by separate implementing legislation and not addressed in this
document.24


2.3 Additional EU Evaluation Requirements linked to Funding
Climate action is a priority for the EU and the European Commission has agreed that at least 20% of
its budget for 2014-2020 period – as much as €180 billion − should be spent on climate change related
action25 within the EU. To achieve this, mitigation and adaptation actions will be integrated into all
major EU spending programmes, including Operational Programmes (OPs) for cohesion policy,
regional development, energy, transport, research and innovation and the Common Agricultural
Policy (European Structural and Investment Funds). These are expected to be linked to reporting
discussed above in the various Action Plans for each MS.
As mentioned above, all MS – including Romania - are obliged to report on climate spending under
the five European Structural and Investment Funds (ESIF) using a methodology defined in EU
Regulation No 215/201426. Progress will be monitored annually using a common tracking
methodology integrated into methodologies for measuring performance of all EU programmes. The
climate tracking methodology for climate related expenditure is adapted from an Organization for

23
   See for example the latest country reports under the European Semester:
http://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/g-gas/progress/studies_en.htm
24
   http://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/ets/monitoring/index_en.htm
25
   Communication ‘A Budget for Europe 2020’ COM(2011) 500, 29.6.2011
26
   Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 215/2014 of 7 March 2014, can be found at: http://eur-
lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=uriserv:OJ.L_.2014.069.01.0065.01.ENG. This implementing act also
provides coefficients for specific measure categories.


                                                                                                       15
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) methodology (the ‘Rio markers’) to provide
quantified financial data, reflect the specificities of each policy area. Expenditures are marked in one
of the three categories:

       Climate related only (100%);
       Significantly climate related (40%); and;
       Not climate related (0%).
In addition, each Operational Programme (OP) must incorporate an indicator framework that captures
the targets, outputs and results of climate action (mitigation and adaptation) for the priorities and
measures in the OPs.
The EU Regulation 215/2014 establishes two deadlines for reporting of climate spending and other
performance indicators under the ESI Funds for 2014-2020. MS must report on the achievement of
their “indicator milestones” by the end of 2018 and the achievement of their “indicator targets” by
the end of 2023.


2.4 Summary of Emissions-related Reporting Requirements
Table 1 summarizes the major current reporting requirements for MS for the EU climate and energy
package, illustrating the overlaps between UNFCCC and EU Commission reporting.




                                                                                                     16
Table 1: Current EU MS climate and energy reporting requirements

     Full title                                    Reporting output requirements
   (legislation)
 United                    National GHG Inventory Report (NIR) covering up to two years prior to reporting
 Framework                  year (annual)
 Convention on             Biennial reports (BRs) and National Communications (NCs) (regular intervals; 7th
 Climate Change             NC no later than 2018), incl. information on emissions, mitigation policies, etc.; MS
 (UNFCCC)                   submit copies to Commission (MMR)
                           Low-Carbon Development Strategies (LCDs) (once; still to be negotiated). Progress
 Note: several              reported to Commission will follow on a biennial basis from 2015 as part of report
 reports are to be          on policies and measures (P&Ms)/projections (MMR)
 submitted to the
                           National Adaptation Plans (NAPs). Progress reported to Commission every 4 years
 EU Commission,
                            from 2015 (MMR)
 per the MMR (see
 below)                    Information on financial support and technology transfer (S&TT) activities to
                            developing countries (annual; reported in 2014 as part of BR) (MMR)
 Monitoring                NIRs with GHG data (annual)
 Mechanism                 National P&Ms and GHG emission projections by sources and removals by sinks
 Regulation                 (biennial) - Technical table format (Excel) and separate narrative report
 (MMR)                     Information on use of auctioning revenue and project credits (AR/PC) (annual)
 Regulation (EU) No
                           No specific strategy required for covering a possible gap between projections and
 525/2013
                            targets
 Renewable                 Ex-ante planning laid down in National Renewable Energy Action Plans (once) with
 Energy Directive           a significant degree of technical analysis and projected developments
 (RED)                     MS monitoring through Progress Reports (biennial)
 Directive 2009/28/EC
 Energy Efficiency         National Energy Efficiency Action Plans (NEEAPs) describing implemented
 Directive (EED)            measures and respective achieved and/or expected energy savings (triennial)
 Directive 2012/27/EU      National long-term strategies for mobilizing investment in the renovation of the
                            national building stock to improve EE in residential and commercial buildings
                            (triennial, part of NEEAPs).
                           Monitoring of public building renovation activities (annual)
                           Monitoring of progress towards the national EE target as part of European
                            Semester (annual)
 Europe 2020               National Reform Programmes (NRPs) report on progress towards all objectives
 strategy/                  (annually, April)
 European               Adoption of Country Specific Recommendations (CSRs), adopted jointly by Council,
 Semester                as appropriate)
Source: Meyer-Ohlendorf, 2015.


2.5 Sustainable Development Goals
There will also be new reporting requirements relating to the 17 new Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs) which are part of the universal agenda on sustainable development (for all the developed and
developing countries).




                                                                                                                17
Romania is considering its response to the main climate change goal, Goal 13: Take urgent action to
combat climate change and its impacts27, which has the following indicators:
          13.1 strengthen resilience and adaptive capacity to climate related hazards and natural
           disasters in all countries.
          13.2 integrate climate change measures into national policies, strategies, and planning.
          13.3 improve education, awareness raising and human and institutional capacity on climate
           change mitigation, adaptation, impact reduction, and early warning.
          13.a implement the commitment undertaken by developed country Parties to the UNFCCC to
           a goal of mobilizing jointly USD100 billion annually by 2020 from all sources to address the
           needs of developing countries in the context of meaningful mitigation actions and
           transparency on implementation and fully operationalize the Green Climate Fund through its
           capitalization as soon as possible.
          13.b Promote mechanisms for raising capacities for effective climate change related planning
           and management, in LDCs, including focusing on women, youth, local and marginalized
           communities.
Yet, climate change mitigation and/or resiliency activities will link to all goals, for example, Goals 2, 6,
7, 9, 11, 14, 15, 16, 17:
      1. End poverty in all its forms everywhere;
      2. End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition and promote sustainable
          agriculture;
      3. Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages;
      4. Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities
          for all;
      5. Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls;
      6. Ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all;
      7. Ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all;
      8. Promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and productive
          employment and decent work for all;
      9. Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization and foster
          innovation;
      10. Reduce inequality within and among countries;
      11. Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable;
      12. Ensure sustainable consumption and production patterns;
      13. Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts* ;
      14. Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable
          development;
      15. Protect, restore and promote sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems, sustainably manage
          forests, combat desertification, and halt and reverse land degradation and halt biodiversity
          loss;


27
     Acknowledging that the UNFCCC is the primary international, intergovernmental forum for negotiating the
      global response to climate change.


                                                                                                         18
16. Promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development, provide access to
    justice for all and build effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels;
17. Strengthen the means of implementation and revitalize the global partnership for sustainable
    development.




                                                                                             19
3. MRV of Emissions for Maritime
This section provides a comprehensive overview of the new EU Maritime MRV Regulation and which
steps are to be taken in order to comply with the requirements. After summarizing the requirements
of the EU Maritime MRV Regulation, this section outlines the specific responsibilities of the Romanian
government and identifies steps to be taken to comply with the Regulation.


3.1 Context and overview of the Maritime MRV Regulation
Essentially, as of 2018, all shipping companies28 will have to monitor and report the verified amount
of CO2 emitted by their large ships on voyages to, from and between EU ports to a central database.
Shipping companies must also upload other information, such as data to determine the ships' energy
efficiency. A document of compliance issued by an independent verifier must be carried on board
ships and will be subject to inspection by Member State (MS) port authorities29. Verifiers must be
accredited by a recognized body, i.e. National Accreditation Bodies (NAB)30.

Further specifications are to be developed by the European Commission until December 2016 to clarify
additional technical implementation details, including the verification and accreditation procedures,
and to provide a reporting database and submission templates. The accreditation process for verifiers
has to be in place and the first year monitoring plans submitted to verifiers by 2017, as the first
monitoring period starts in 2018.

While the majority of compliance activities will be handled by ship owners and verifiers, MSs with
maritime ports and with ships flying under their flag, such as Romania, need to prepare for the new
requirements as well.

The main issues that need to be addressed at the MS level are:
     Define procedures for compliance checks
        Penalty scheme for non-compliance with requirements of the Regulation

        Clarify enforcement roles and responsibilities within the MS
        Establishing an effective information exchange
        Defining a process for receiving reported data
        Ensure the national accreditation body has the appropriate mandate.


3.2 Maritime MRV Regulation Requirements
This section summarizes the requirements, roles and responsibilities outlined in the new EU
Maritime MRV Regulation.




28
   This applies to all shipping companies with qualifying voyages (ships entering the EU/leaving the EU or intra-
     EU voyages on ships over 5,000t) regardless of where that ship is registered.
29
   In accordance to procedures established through the Directive 2009/16/EC on port State control
30
   In accordance with Regulation No. 765/2008/EC


                                                                                                              20
Terminology
 Shipping company           The ship-owner or any other organization or person, such as the manager or
                            the bareboat charterer, which has assumed the responsibility for the
                            operation of the ship from the ship-owner.
 Detention or               Formal prohibition for a ship to proceed to sea due to established deficiencies
 expulsion                  which, individually or together, make the ship unseaworthy.
 Document of                A document specific to a ship, issued to a company by an accredited verifier,
 compliance                 which confirms that that ship has complied with the requirements of this
                            Regulation for a specific reporting period;
 Flag state                 Member State with ships flying the MS’ flag, i.e. being entered in the MS’ ship
                            registry
 Other relevant             Information related to CO2 emissions from the consumption of fuels, to
 information                transport work and to the energy efficiency of ships, which enables the
                            analysis of emission trends and the assessment of ships’ performances;
 Port authority             Maritime authority responsible for port State control in accordance with
                            Directive 2009/16/EC.
 Port State control         Process of inspection of foreign ships when entering into ports of other states
                            by officers of the port State authority for verifying that requirements of
                            international conventions are being complied with


Key Maritime MRV Requirements by responsible party
This section describes the key requirements of the EU Maritime MRV Regulation for shipping
companies, MSs, and other stakeholders.
The EU Maritime MRV Regulation prescribes shipping companies’ obligations in regards to MRV of CO2
emissions and other ‘relevant information’. As of 1 January 2018, all shipping companies are obliged
to monitor CO2 emissions and other ‘relevant information’ for each of their vessels above 5,000t on a
per-voyage basis and on annual basis31 for each incoming voyage (into the EU), outgoing voyages and
intra-EU voyages. For example, ships traveling between Turkey and Romania (i.e. from outside the EU
arriving into an EU port) are subject to the requirements of this regulation. Monitoring information
for the entire voyage is necessary and they would need an appropriate document of compliance, as
discussed further below. Table 2 summarizes the MRV requirements, highlighting the responsible
parties.




31
  Shipping companies are exempt to report on a per-voyage basis if the ship only does intra-EU voyages or if it
performs more than 300 voyages per year, e.g. ferries


                                                                                                            21
Table 2: EU Maritime MRV requirements

                                                           MRV requirements

 Monitoring Plan      The basis for the yearly monitoring is the monitoring plan (MP). The MP describes what data
                      are monitored and reported, and which monitoring method is being used. Currently there
                      are four monitoring methods available for monitoring CO 2 emissions and two for monitoring
                      other relevant information. The European Commission is expected to develop a standard
                      template for MPs. Shipping companies will be obliged to use this template and prepare one
                      MP per ship.
 Conformity           Before implementing the MP, shipping companies need to submit it to an accredited third-
 assessment           party verifier for a conformity assessment. During this assessment, the verifier checks
                      whether it is in line with the requirements of the Regulation. Shipping companies are also
                      required to regularly review the MP of their ships (at least once a year) to confirm that it still
                      reflect the specific characteristics and functioning of the ship. Any modification to an MP
                      needs to be assessed by a verifier.
 Monitoring           As of 1 January 2018, shipping companies need to follow the monitoring method chosen in
                      the MP to gather data on the CO2 emissions and ‘other relevant information’ caused during
                      voyages from, to or within the EU. ‘Other relevant information’ is required for the purposes
                      of analysing emission trends and assessing ships’ performances and includes consumption
                      of fuels, to transport work and to the energy efficiency of ships.
 Verification         The data gathered during a reporting period needs to be compiled into an emissions report
                      and submitted to an accredited third-party entity for verification. If an emission report is
                      found to satisfy all the requirements, the emission report gets verified and a compliance
                      document is issued. The verifier also needs to inform the European Commission, flag States
                      and port States of the issuance of this document. This will be done through an electronic
                      tool, provided through the European Maritime Safety Agency (EMSA), to which these
                      entities have access to. Shipping companies need to prove compliance by carrying a valid
                      compliance document on-board of their ships at all times.

                      The verification statement can also contain recommendations for improving the MP for the
                      following reporting period. Shipping companies need to take into account these
                      recommendations in a review of their MPs.
 Reporting            By 30 April of each year, starting 30 April 2019, shipping companies need to submit verified
                      emission reports to the European Commission for reporting purposes and to the competent
                      authority of the flag state for informational purposes. Reporting will be done through
                      automated systems using electronic templates.


Figure 1 depicts the compliance cycle that shipping companies have to undergo each year from 2018
on in order to meet the obligations of the EU Maritime MRV Regulation.




                                                                                                                  22
Figure 1: MRV obligations for shipping companies




Beyond the MRV requirements that shipping companies are facing, the EU Maritime Regulation
defines the procedures and requirements around accreditation and enforcement, including inspection
and related communication, which are obligations for MSs or MSs’ NABs.
Next to the MRV requirements for ship-owners, the EU Maritime MRV Regulation provides a first set
of rules for accreditation of third-party verifiers and a framework for enforcement. From the
perspective of an EU MS, these aspects are the crucial ones as they require legal, institutional and
procedural arrangements. The requirements for accreditation, enforcement and information
exchange from an MS’ perspective are elaborated and the responsible entity identified in Table 3.
From a shipping company’s perspective, if they plan to operate ships over 5,000t for trips arriving,
leaving, or traveling in between EU ports, they would be subject to this regulation. However, shipping
companies are exempt to report on a per-voyage basis if the ship only does intra-EU voyages or if it
performs more than 300 voyages per year, e.g. ferries.
Effected shipping companies would develop a monitoring plan, and choose an appropriate accredited
verifier, which may have been accredited by Romanian Association for Accreditation (RENAR) or
another authorized accreditation body within the EU (such as a National Accreditation Body in another
MS).
Similar to the EU ETS system, the Romanian Government must ensure its National Accreditation Body
is authorized for the EU Maritime MRV scope, but the Government does not have a direct role in which
verifier is chosen to perform verifications for a specific ship.
If a ship owner is not from an EU country and the ship is registered also in non-EU country, but comes
at a Romanian (or other EU) seaport, they would be required to have secured the services of a verifier
accredited in the EU.
As discussed below, further details relating to shipping company and verifiers will be elaborated in
upcoming implementing and delegating acts from the European Commission.



                                                                                                   23
Table 3: Maritime MRV Obligations from a Member State Perspective

                                                    MS Obligations

 Accreditation        To assess monitoring plans and verify emission reports, third-party verifiers             NABs’
                      need to be accredited by a NAB in line with the EU accreditation framework            obligation
                      provided by Regulation No. 765/2008/EC. The methods for accreditation
                      relating to maritime shipping will be specified by the Commission in a
                      delegated act. Where no specific provisions will be defined in regards to
                      accreditation for the purpose of the EU Maritime MRV Regulation the
                      provisions of the Regulation No 765/2008/EC apply.
                      MSs therefore need to task their NABs, which they appointed in line with
                      Regulation No 765/2008/EC, with the accreditation activities defined by the                 MS’
                      EU Maritime MRV Regulation and relevant delegated acts. Furthermore, they             obligation
                      have to ensure that their NAB’s are equipped with appropriate resources, in
                      terms of staffing and financing, to fulfil this task. 32
                     NABs will have to develop the accreditation procedures and methods in line
                     with Regulation No 765/2008/EC and the relevant delegated acts to the EU
                     Maritime MRV Regulation.
 Enforcement         Enforcement of the monitoring and reporting requirements of the EU                           MS’
                     Maritime MRV Regulation lies in the hands of MSs that have maritime ports              obligation
                     and ships flying their flag. Yet, it makes use of existing systems for inspections
                     and enforcement procedures.
                      MSs will have to set up a penalty system that applies in case shipping
                      companies are found to not comply with the monitoring and reporting
 Penalty system
                      requirements. The penalties that are to be defined “shall be effective,
                      proportionate and dissuasive”. By 1 July 2017, MSs need to notify the
                      Commission about the penalty system and thereafter anytime it is going to
                      be amended. Such a penalty system should also include more stringent
                      penalties, such as expulsion for cases of either repetitive noncompliance (for
                      two or more consecutive reporting periods), or of enforcement procedures
                      implemented by MSs not leading to compliance, e.g. the shipping company
                      failing to pay the imposed penalties. 33
                      MSs face enforcement responsibilities from two angles, from its status as flag
                      States and that of a (maritime) port State.
                      In its position as a flag State, a MS is being tasked to ensure compliance with
                      monitoring and reporting obligations by each ship flying its flag. From the
 Enforcement
                      MS’s perspective the fact a valid compliance document has been issued a ship
 procedures
                      is sufficient proof of compliance. This means in practice that a MS authority
                      will need to check that each ship flying the MS’ flag has been issued a                       MS’
                      compliance document from April 2019 onwards, i.e. after the first verification      obligation in
                      took place. The information on whether a compliance document has been                its position
                      issued to a ship will be provided by verifiers to the MS authority and the               as a flag
                      Commission electronically through automated systems.                                        State



32
     Article 4(9) of EC No. 765/2008
33
     Preamble (32) of the Regulation


                                                                                                                  24
                                                 MS Obligations

                   For ships found to not comply with the requirement, i.e. no compliance
                   document for the relevant reporting period has been issued, the defined
                   penalties will have to be enforced.

                   As a port State, a MS is in charge of checking whether ships entering or leaving
                   a port under its jurisdiction meet the obligation of carrying on board a valid
                   compliance document. The means to fulfil this task is the inspection regime
                   established in accordance to Directive 2009/16/EC on port State control. 34
                   The MS is in charge of ensuring that the validity of the compliance document
                   is checked as part of ship inspections by its port authorities. The number of
                   inspections undertaken by a MS is determined in accordance to a formula
                   establishing a fair share of inspections undertaken by each MS. In accordance
                                                                                                                 MS’
                   to that maximum number of inspections for each MS and using a risk-based
                                                                                                        obligation in
                   approach, an EMSA IT tool provides the schedule of inspections to each MS’
                                                                                                      its position as
                   port authorities.
                                                                                                         a port State
                   If the issuance date and expiry date of the compliance document or the
                   identity of the relevant verifier is not available, the MS authority may want to
                   check that a valid compliance document is carried on board when entering or
                   leaving its port.
 Expulsion         In case the enforcement procedures of a MS result in expulsion, every MS is
                   obliged to refuse entry of the expulsed ship until the shipping company is able
                   to demonstrate it is compliant with MRV requirements by presenting valid
                   compliance document.35 Yet, MSs are also required to have effective
                   procedures in place for ship-owners to have remedy before a court or tribunal
                   against such an expulsion order.
 Information       MSs have obligations in regards to information exchange in order to enable                  MS’
 exchange36        effective enforcement procedures nationally and across the EU. The                    obligation
                   obligations require the following actions:
                   MSs have to ensure effective information exchange and cooperation between
 Nationally
                   the national authorities in charge of ensuring and checking compliance of
                   ships flying the MS’ flag and the authorities entrusted with implementing the
                   penalty system. This serves the purpose of enabling each authority to fulfil its
                   obligation in an effective and timely manner.
                   Also, a MS’ authority needs to inform ship-owners, operators of a ship or its
                   representative in the MS of the right to an effective remedy before a court or
                   tribunal against an expulsion order.
                   If a MS imposes a penalty in accordance to its national penalty system or
                   issues an expulsion order against a ship, it needs to inform the European
 Internationally   Commission, EMSA, other MSs and to the flag State concerned about the
                   measures.




34
   http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2009:131:0057:0100:EN:PDF
35
   This does not apply to ships in distress
36
   Article 20 of the Regulation


                                                                                                               25
Figure 2 depicts the different bodies involved in the implementation of the EU Maritime MRV
Regulation, their obligation and how they interact with each other.
Figure 2 Processes between entities involved in the implementation of the EU Maritime MRV Regulation




Forthcoming specifications for the regulation
In order to enable MSs to undertake the necessary steps to ensure compliance with, and
implementation of, the new EU Maritime MRV Regulation, particularly for the accreditation and
enforcement procedures, the delegated acts and implementation acts will have to be adopted in a
timely manner. For example, for the monitoring plans to be ready for submission by 2017 to allow for
first reporting of emissions in 2018, the accreditation procedures for verifiers and the enforcement
process have to be in place. Shipping companies will need to have the standardized monitoring plan
template available in due time and know the technical requirements, including potential other
monitoring methods. The European Commission is therefore tasked to further specify a number of
technical requirements and approaches under the EU Maritime MRV Regulation through so called
delegated acts37 and implementing acts38 by December 2016.
Table 4 provides an overview of the areas that will be addressed through delegated acts and
implementing acts:




37
 To be developed in accordance with Article 24 of the EU MRV Regulation.
38
 To be adopted by the Commission in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 25(2) of the EU
MRV Regulation.


                                                                                                           26
Table 4 Aspects of Maritime MRV to be specified through delegated acts or implementation acts

                                      Obligations to be further clarified

 Monitoring and       Review certain technical aspects of monitoring and reporting of CO2
                      emissions from ships                                                      Delegated acts
 reporting
 Standardized
                      Define technical rules establishing the templates for the monitoring
 Monitoring                                                                                     Implementing act
                      plans
 Plan
 Monitoring           Amend the methods and rules set out in Annex I and Annex II of the
                                                                                                Delegated acts
 methods              Regulation
 Format of the        Technical rules establishing the data exchange format including
                                                                                                Implementing act
 emission report      electronic templates
                      Specify the rules for the verification activities based on based on the
                      principles for verification provided in Art. 14 of the Regulation and
 Verification                                                                                   Delegated acts
                      taking into account the elements set out in Part A of Annex III of the
                      Regulation
                      Specify the methods of accreditation for verifiers, taking into
 Accreditation                                                                                  Delegated acts
                      account the elements set out in Part A of Annex III of the Regulation
                      Determine technical rules establishing the data exchange format
 Compliance           including electronic templates that are to be used by verifiers to
                                                                                                Implementing acts
 document             transmit compliance related information to the Commission and the
                      authority of the Flag State
The Commission envisages the following schedule for developing the delegated acts and
implementing acts, including multiple consultations rounds with stakeholders from both MS and
industry:
        Bringing the stakeholder process to the attention of the European Sustainable Shipping Forum
         (ESSF) 39 at its plenary in June 2015 to form working groups on the topics ’accreditation and
         verification’ and ‘monitoring’.
        Stakeholder process to start in July 2015 within the ESSF. A report on the outcomes of the
         stakeholder process is expected in spring 2016.

On some of the technical aspects, the European Commission will be supported by EMSA, which was
established by Regulation No. 1406/2002/EC to provide the necessary support to ensure effective and
harmonized implementation of the port State control system. EMSA already facilitates technical
cooperation between MS and the Commission for the exchange of EU vessel traffic information
supports EU operational reporting services, including the electronic transmission of reporting
formalities.40
EMSA has, therefore, been tasked to support the European Commission in the implementation of the
EU Maritime MRV Regulation, specifically in the development and implementation of a new IT module.
This module will be used to communicate on information relevant for this regulation, e.g. reported
data and information related to compliance, between MS authorities, the Commission, verifiers and


39
   The ESSF is tasked to support the Commission in its development of legislative proposals and policy design
for the shipping sector, bringing together national authorities, sector associations (industry stakeholders),
unions, non-EU states representatives and companies
40
   http://www.emsa.europa.eu/operations/vessel-reporting-services.html


                                                                                                                   27
ESMA. Its development is expected to start in 2016 and will become a part of the existing IT system,
THETIS, maintained by EMSA for the inspection regime defined by the Directive on port State control41.


3.3 The EU Maritime MRV Regulation in the context of other legislation
The EU Maritime MRV Regulation builds on four other legal acts on EU level:
        Directive 2009/16/EC of 23 April 2009 on port State control42 to which the EU Maritime MRV
         Regulation is an amendment

        Directive 2009/21/EC of 23 April 2009 on compliance with flag State requirements43
        Regulation No 765/2008/EC of 9 July 2008 setting out the requirements for accreditation and
         market surveillance relating to the marketing of products and repealing Regulation (EEC) No
         339/9344 (Regulation on accreditation)
        Regulation No 525/2013/EC of 21 May 2013 on a mechanism for monitoring and reporting
         greenhouse gas emissions and for reporting other information at the national and EU level
         relevant to climate change and repealing Decision No 280/2004/EC45 (Regulation on
         monitoring and reporting GHG emissions).
Figure 3 illustrates the interplay of existing Directives and Regulations with the EU Maritime MRV
Regulation and indicates the areas where existing instruments are being used. It facilitates identifying
relevant national legal, institutions and procedural arrangements that are already in place and should
to be considered when developing procedures to implement the EU Maritime MRV Regulation.
The strongest overlap is with the Directives on post State Control and compliance with flag State
requirements and the Regulation on accreditation and market surveillance as each of them prescribe
certain procedures. These will be discussed in more detail in Section 3.4.
The least overlap is found with the Regulation on monitoring and reporting GHG emissions at the
national and EU level (MMR). This is due to the fact that the MMR addresses MRV requirements for
MS to the Commission. Whilst the EU Maritime MRV Regulation is about requirements for ship-owners
about emissions, which are currently not subject to international reporting under the UNFCCC
Convention. Only the Climate Change Committee established by the MMR is being utilized in order to
consult with MSs on the implementing acts to be developed by the European Commission. However,
this is not a national procedure but a process on the EU level.




41
   THETIS is the information system that supports the new Port State Control inspection regime.
http://emsa.europa.eu/psc-main/thetis.html
42
   http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2009:131:0057:0100:EN:PDF
43
   http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2009:131:0132:0135:EN:PDF
44
   http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2008:218:0030:0047:en:PDF
45
   http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2013:165:0013:0040:en:PDF


                                                                                                     28
Figure 3 Maritime MRV interaction with other EU Directives or Regulations




                Directive on compliance
                     with flag State
                                                    Directive on Port State
                     requirements
                                                            control
                                            Enforcement


                                 EU Maritime MRV
                                    Regulation             Process of Climate
                                                           Change Committee
                         Accreditation
                                                                Regulation on monitoring
              Regulation on                                         and reporting GHG
         accreditation and market                               emissions at national and
               surveillance                                              Union level



The national laws, regulations and administrative provisions developed in MSs to comply with the
Directives on port State control and on compliance with flag State requirements constitute, as
discussed above, the instruments of the enforcement system for the EU Maritime MRV regulation.
The Regulation on accreditation builds the framework for general accreditation procedures and
requires each MS to appoint a NAB in charge of the implementing the accreditation process and to
assign an entity to supervise the accreditation body. The requirements of Regulation on accreditation
will be complemented by sector specific requirements for accrediting verifiers for the maritime
transport sector through delegated acts with further specifications.
The Regulation on monitoring and reporting GHG emissions plays only a limited role in the
implementation of the EU Maritime MRV Regulation since MSs do not have any obligation of
monitoring and reporting CO2 emissions from the maritime transport sector. Yet, it establishes the
Climate Change Committee, which needs to be consulted when further refining the verification and
accreditation procedures or modifying monitoring methods and rules through
delegated/implementing acts under the EU Maritime MRV Regulation.
Figure 4 provides the timeline for the implementation of the EU Maritime MRV Regulation, including
the development of the delegated acts and implementation acts discussed above. It depicts the
various steps that need to be taken in order to ensure compliance with the regulations. Each
stakeholders’ obligations and the respective deadlines are also illustrated.




                                                                                                  29
Figure 4 Timeline for the implementation of the EU Maritime MRV Regulation

     E uro pe a n               delegated acts on verification and accreditation
 C o m m is s io n
                                   implementing act on monitoring requirements                                                                    publish information on reported emissions
       na t io na l                                 notify Commission of penalty scheme                                                                                                compliance checks
  go v e rnm e nt
                                                                                                                                                                                       inspections & enforcement
        na t io na l
                                                                                   accreditation
a c c re dit a t io n
             bo dy
                                                                                   accreditation          MP conformity                                           verification of ER
       v e rif ie rs
                                                                                                           assessment                                              issuance of CD
                                                                                               submit MP for              continuous monitoring           submission of verified ER continuous monitoring
   c o m pa nie s
                                                                                      conformity assessment                                                                            carrying CD
                        July                                                                July     August               January                                          April       June
                               2015                        2016                                    2017                                   2018                                     2019

m ilestones             regulation entering into force                                                                    start of 1st reporting period




                        *ships falling into scope of the regulation after 31 August need to submit MP to verifier w ithin 2 month
                        MP        monitoring plan
                        ER        emissions report
                        CD        compliance document




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   30
3.4 The regulation in the Romanian context
This section examines the requirements for accreditation, enforcement and information exchange in
the Romanian context and discusses options and considerations on how Romania can comply with the
EU Maritime MRV Regulation. It addresses potential provision for institutional, procedural and legal
arrangements, taking into account the requirements of the regulation and the national circumstances
in Romania; to facilitate Romania’s ability to optimally fulfil its obligations.

Romania’s facilitative role in Accreditation
Romania already has institutional arrangements in place from which it can draw to meet requirements
on accreditation. According to the EU Maritime MRV Regulation, accreditation of verifiers needs to
be in the hands of the National Accreditation Body (NAB) appointed by Romanian in accordance to
Regulation No 765/2008/EC. Table 5 summarizes the relevant arrangements relating to compliance.
Since 2009, the Romanian Association for Accreditation (RENAR) is the NAB in accordance to
Regulation No 765/2008/EC. It is under the supervision of the Ministry of Economy. Since 2013, RENAR
is in charge of accrediting verification bodies for the EU ETS and has established relevant accreditation
procedures in accordance with ISO14065 and the Accreditation Verification Regulation (AVR).
For RENAR to be able to act as the NAB in line with Article 16 of the Regulation, i.e. to accredit verifiers
for the activities under the scope of the EU Maritime MRV regulation, the Romanian Government
needs to issue a decision to appoint RENAR as the relevant body to carry out the accreditation of
verifiers in that field. A comparable process took place for the accreditation of verification bodies for
the EU ETS, for which, in accordance to the Accreditation and Verification Regulation introduced in
2012, also the unique NAB had to be assigned. Through the government decision no. 66/2013, RENAR
was appointed as the relevant body to carry out the accreditation of verifiers in the field of EU ETS.
The EU Maritime MRV Regulation also stipulates that MSs must equip their NABs with appropriate
resources to fulfil this task. A relevant provision already exists in Romania, as the national law on
accreditation (Ordinance 23/200946) foresees that RENAR is provided with the relevant technical
expertise and financial support by the Romanian Government.
Table 5 Relevant arrangements for compliance with accreditation requirements


           Legal               Institutional                        Procedural                        Timeline

                                                      RENAR will be in charge of defining
 Requires a                National Accreditation                                                the NAB needs to be
                                                      procedures to accredit verifiers for the
 government decision       Body RENAR will be in                                                 enabled to provide
                                                      Scope the EU Maritime MRV
 appointing RENAR as       charge of accrediting                                                 accreditation
                                                      Regulation, its delegated acts and the
 the relevant body         verifiers                                                             services by 2017
                                                      Regulation No 765/2008/EC


Furthermore, the government could consider engaging with RENAR during the stakeholder
procedures organized by the European Commission to specify the rules for verification and methods
of accreditation to draw on RENAR’s expertise from other schemes, like the EU ETS.


46
     http://www.renar.ro/files/9513/1792/1973/Ordonanta_23_activitatea_de_acreditare.pdf


                                                                                                                 31
Also, coordinating closely with RENAR will help to identify which type(s) of financial or technical
support RENAR will be needed in order to fulfil its task and to monitor that steps are taken in line with
the required timeline.
Depending on further institutional arrangements, the Romanian government may wish to establish
some kind of “convention” describing the modalities and procedures for communication between
RENAR and the relevant government body in charge of compliance with the EU Maritime Regulation.
This is most easily done by expanding the scope of communication between the Ministry of Economy,
Trade and Tourism and RENAR, as a similar scope and relationship already exists for accreditation
activities for the EU ETS. In case the responsible ministry will not be the Ministry of Economy, the
other two viable candidates are the Ministry of Transport as having direct supervision over the
Romanian Naval Authority who will be involved in day-to-day Maritime MRV compliance activities in
Romania’s ports or Ministry of Environment, Waters and Forests (MEWF) as having the most direct
responsibility for issues relating to emissions generally, including the national inventory. This issue is
discussed further in the section on facilitating information exchange below. The relevant Ministry
should be enabled to monitor that RENAR is meeting the accreditation-related requirements. In the
end, ship-owners will only able to comply with their MRV obligations if they can find an accredited
verifier that can undertake verification or reported emissions in time for the reporting deadline.
Also, organizing and facilitating workshops with national entities involved, e.g. RENAR, verifiers
expressing interest to become accredited for the scope of activities defined by the EU Maritime MRV
Regulation and ship-owners can be considered as an effective means to inform them of relevant
requirements and timelines and facilitates compliance from all ends.

Romania’s obligations for enforcement
The enforcement of the MRV obligations set out in the EU Maritime MRV Regulation is in the hands
of MS’s authorities. It is based on four main pillars that are established or need to be established in
each MS:
       First, MSs need to define a penalty system.
       As second and third pillars, the Regulation utilizes two existing frameworks of enforcement;
        the enforcement regime in ports, defined by the Directive 2009/16/EC, and the enforcement
        regime by flag States as provided by Directive 2009/21/EC and transposed in each MS.
       The forth pillar is the document of compliance, which is the means by which MSs can assess
        whether ship-owners are in compliance with the Regulation.

Penalty system as a key element for enforcement
The first enforcement pillar, the penalty system, has to be developed by Romania by 1 July 2017,
addressing which penalties will be imposed on ship-owners and ships found in noncompliance with
the monitoring and reporting requirements. The penalties “shall be effective, proportionate and
dissuasive”. MSs need to notify the European Commission about the penalty system created, as well
as any time it is going to be amended thereafter. The penalty system should also include more
stringent penalties, such as detention and refusal of access to the port, for cases of either repetitive
noncompliance (for two or more consecutive reporting periods), or where enforcement procedures




                                                                                                       32
implemented by MSs are not leading to compliance, e.g. the shipping company failing to pay the
imposed penalties.
Table 6 summarizes the relevant arrangements for compliance with penalty requirements.
Table 6 Relevant arrangements for compliance with penalty requirements


           Legal                     Institutional                       Procedural            Timeline

 Government decision      Institutional arrangements will
 defining the penalty     be defined by the choices made        No additional procedure
 scheme                   around enforcement as a flag          required                  By 1 July 2017
                          State



There are two relevant penalty systems in Romania:

          Penalties defined in the context of Government Decision No. 811/2010 on port State control
           (transposing Directive 2009/16/EC into national legislation).

          Penalties defined in by the Government Decision no. 780/2006 establishing the EU ETS ranging
           from €4,500 up to the maximum €11,000.
The 4th EU ETS Compliance Review identified the relatively low effectiveness of the penalties imposed
for infringements within the EU ETS, with a low deterrent effect. In light of this, these penalties could
be reviewed to come up with more effective, proportionate and dissuasive penalties for infringements
related to the ship-owners and their obligations under the EU Maritime MRV Regulation.

Enforcement obligations as flag State
In its capacity as a flag State, Romania is responsible for ensuring that each ship flying its flag is
compliant with the MRV requirements of the EU Maritime MRV Regulation47. Romania has transposed
Directive 2009/21/EC on compliance with flag State requirements, which builds the second
enforcement pillar, through the Minister order no. 250/201148, appointing the Ministry of Transport
responsible ministry and designated the Romanian Naval Authority as specialized technical body for
ensuring compliance with the flag State requirements. Relevant enforcement and information
exchange procedures are therefore already in place to build on and to extend for the purpose of
ensuring compliance with the EU Maritime MRV Regulation.
The issuance of a compliance document by an accredited verifier, which is the fourth pillar of the
enforcement system, indicates to the relevant authority whether a ship is compliant for that reporting
year. Therefore, the Romanian government needs to take the following steps in order to be able to
comply with the requirements by 2019, when verifiers are expected to issue the compliance document
for the first reporting period and ship-owners are required to hold such document:
       a. Appoint a national authority responsible for checking compliance
       b. Enable the authority to impose the penalties provided in the EU Maritime MRV related penalty
          system


47
     Article 19 (1)
48
     www.rna.ro/servicii/riie/acte_normative/aprilie2011/Ordin%20nr.%20250%20din%2004.2011.html


                                                                                                           33
    c. Define a procedure for undertaking the compliance checks in the required intervals.
    d. Extend existing remedy procedures to allow for appeals by ship-owners against enforcement
       actions
    e. Define the process for ship-owners to submit emission reports by 30 April each year to the
       designated national authority.
The information on issuance of a compliance document will be communicated to MS authorities
through two channels. On the one hand, MSs will, by 30 June each year, receive information compiled
by the Commission on the reported CO2 emissions and the issuance of compliance documents of all
ships subject to the EU Maritime MRV Regulation. The comprehensive information on compliance and
reported emissions will be provided through the submitted emission reports and information entered
relating to the issuance of compliance documents entered by verifiers into an automated electronic
system maintained by EMSA. The compiled information serves as the basis for MS authorities to check
and ensure compliance by the ships flying their flag. Yet, verifiers are also required to communicate
to the designated authority of the MS flag State when they issue a compliance document to a ship
flying the flag of that state.
The process for compliance checks basically entails a cross check that all ships in the Romanian ship
register that are subject to the EU Maritime MRV Regulation have been issued a valid compliance
document for the preceding reporting year, based on the information given by verifiers and compiled
and provided to Romania by the European Commission. As distinct from the role of inspections as a
port State described in the next section, at no time in this cross checking process as a flag state is
required to verify the authenticity of the compliance document or that is being carried on board a
ship.
The process will need to be undertaken on a regular basis, e.g. in 12-month intervals, as compliance
documents are issued for one reporting year only and expire 18 months after issuance. The process
can start at its earliest after April 2019, once the first compliance documents are issued after
successful verifications; or the process can start at the latest by publication of the aggregated
information provided by the European Commission at the end of June 2019.
One consideration when nominating the authority responsible for checking compliance is that the
Romanian Naval Authority already has relevant procedures in place. These include but are not limited
to procedures of:
       Access to the Romanian ship register

       Detaining ships and refusing entry of the ships for which an expulsion order has been issued

       Informing other MSs of detentions
       Receiving information on detained ships that fly the flag of Romania

       Overseeing the process of a ship being brought into compliance with the relevant
        requirements
       Using THETIS, the IT system provided by EMSA to support the national inspection regimes
The Romanian Naval Authority has relevant technical expertise to decide when certain enforcement
procedures should not be implemented due to safety issues, e.g. when a ship is in distress. Therefore,



                                                                                                   34
they are the suggested authority to check that the appropriate compliance document is on file once a
year, such as in May or June.
Yet, the expertise on MRV requirements lies with the MEWF therefore the Romanian government may
want the MEWF to be involved in the process of ensuring compliance by ship-owners. The involvement
relates less to the experience of reviewing and checking appropriateness of Monitoring Plans and
quality of reported emission data, as this is entirely in the hands of accredited verifiers, but rather to
ensuring that ship-owners are informed about and understand the obligations, processes and
timelines.
When developing the institutional arrangements, for example, it could therefore be considered
whether to have the primary role with the Romanian Naval Authority and then have the MEWF play a
facilitating role in the process of getting ship-owners ready to submit Monitoring Plans for assessment
to verifiers in 2017, to implement monitoring methods in 2018 and to report relevant data in the
required format in the first quarter of 2019.
Table 7 summarizes the relevant arrangements for compliance as a flag State.
Table 7 Relevant arrangements for complying as flag State


           Legal                      Institutional                     Procedural                    Timeline

 Government decision          Appoint national authority      Procedure to define the work
 appointing          a        for ensuring compliance with    flows, information sources as well
 government body to           EU       Maritime       MRV     as the steps to be taken once any
                                                                                                   By June 2019
 implement compliance         requirements,     e.g.    the   non-compliance is identified.
 cross-checking               Ministry     of    Transport,
 procedures and a body        Romanian Naval Authority,
 to receive emission          National Company Maritime
 reports                      Ports          Administration
                              Constanta, or MEWF.

                              Appoint national authority
                              for receiving the emission
                                                              Define process for submitting
                              reports. This is suggested to
                                                              emission reports to the appointed
                              be the same authority as is                                          Well before 30
                                                              authority and communicate to
                              responsible for ensuring                                             April 2019
                                                              ship-owners with ships flying the
                              compliance       (e.g.    the
                                                              Romanian flag.
                              Romanian Naval Authority)
                              who would then share
                              information with the MEWF,
                              if requested.




                                                                                                              35
Enforcement from a port State perspective
The third enforcement pillar, the Directive 2009/16/EU on port State control, was transposed by the
Government Decision No. 811/201049, appointing the Romanian Naval Authority as the Romanian
State port authority, and tasking it, among other relevant port State related tasks, with the inspection,
control and supervision of shipping, and sanctioning offences. (See Table 8)
The EU Maritime MRV Regulation, which is an amendment to the Directive on port State control,
defines inspection in regards to compliance with the MRV obligations become an integrated part of
the existing inspection regime of ships. Inspection in this context means checking that a valid
compliance document is being carried on board of each ship subject to the Regulation, not limited to
those flying the flag of Romania. The compliance document therefore should then be added to the list
of certificates and documents referred to in Annex IV to Directive 2009/16/EC therefore to Annex 4 of
Romania’s Government Decision No. 811/201050.
The number of inspections to be undertaken by the Romanian Naval authority, the selection of ships
to be inspected and the inspections schedule remain, in principle, the same. Yet, if, at the time of entry
into a Romanian port, the information on the date of issue and the expiry date of the document of
compliance and the identity of the verifier that assessed the emissions report is not available, the
Romanian Naval Authority may want to verify that a valid document of compliance is carried on board.
Table 8 Relevant arrangements for complying as a port State


       Legal             Institutional                           Procedural                            Timeline

                                             Annex No. 4 of Government decision No. 811/2010
                                             needs to be amended as the compliance document
                                             needs to be added to the ‘List of certificates and
                                             documents’ to be checked when carrying out an initial
                                             inspection and more detailed inspection in accordance
                      Extend inspection
 Government                                  to Article 13 of the Government decision mentioned      In time for
                      authority of
 decision                                    before.                                                 inspections
                      Romanian Naval
 amending and         Authority to           Information dissemination process to inform relevant    after ships will
 supplementing        checking that a        staff of the Romanian Naval Authority about the new     have been
 Decision no.         valid compliance       responsibilities, penalty system and requirements.      issued a
 811/2010 on          document is                                                                    compliance
 Port State                                  The Government may also want to develop a process       document by
                      being carried on
 control                                     by which the port State authority checks the database   30 April 2019
                      board.
                                             for each ship entering a Romanian port to ensure
                                             information on the issuance and expiry dates and the
                                             verifier is available. If absent, the Romanian Naval
                                             authority may want to verify that a valid compliance
                                             document is being carried on board.




49
   http://www.rna.ro/servicii/riie/acte_normative/oct2010/Hotarare%20nr.%20811%20din%2008.2010.html,
and subsequently modified the Minister Decision - http://mt.ro/web14/documente/acte-
normative/2014/12_06/text_proiect.pdf to reflect an amendment to the Directive.
50
   Article 19 (3)


                                                                                                                36
Summary of flag State and port State obligations
This section provides a short summary of the obligations relating to ships flying Romanian flags versus
ships registered in any country that enter a Romanian maritime port from within or outside the EU, to
ensure the different roles are clear. The information in Table 9 presents the requirements discussed
in the previous two subsections; it does not include additional requirements.
Table 9 Summary of arrangements for complying as both a flag State and a port State

                                     Comparison of Enforcement Obligations

                                   Flag State                                         Port State
 Which           All ships over 5000t flying a Romanian flag         All ships over 5000t arriving at a Romanian
 ships:          operating in maritime waters                        maritime port for all voyages into the EU,
                                                                     outgoing voyages, and intra-EU voyages

 Who             Romanian Naval Authority suggested, not             Romanian Naval Authority, integrated with
 checks:         required                                            existing port compliance procedures
 What is         Check EMSA database to ensure all effected          (A) Check EMSA database to ensure the ship
 checked:        ships have a compliance document on file                 has a compliance document on file from
                 from an accredited verifier                              an accredited verifier
                                                                     (B) If needed, request to see document on
                                                                          board.
                                                                     (C) If selected, conduct ship inspections as
                                                                          per existing protocols
 How often:      “Regularly”; suggested this be interpreted as       Every time a ship over 5000t arrives at a
                 annually in July or August                          Romanian maritime port
 When does       Ongoing beginning 2019                              Ongoing beginning May 2019
 it start:
Preparation needed*

 Legal           Government      decision     appointing    a        Government decision amending and
                 government body to implement compliance             supplementing Decision no. 811/2010 on
                 cross-checking procedures and a body to             Port State control
                 receive emission reports
 Institutional   Appoint national authority for ensuring             Extend inspection authority of Romanian
                 compliance with EU Maritime MRV                     Naval Authority to checking that a valid
                 requirements, e.g. the Ministry of Transport,       compliance document is being carried on
                 Romanian Naval Authority, or MEWF.                  board.

                 Appoint national authority for receiving the
                 emission reports. This is suggested to be the
                 same authority as is responsible for ensuring
                 compliance (e.g. the Romanian Naval
                 Authority) who would then share information
                 with the MEWF, if requested.




                                                                                                                37
                                 Comparison of Enforcement Obligations

 Procedural    Procedure to define the work flows,              Annex No. 4 of Government decision No.
               information sources as well as the steps to be   811/2010 needs to be amended as the
               taken once any non-compliance is identified.     compliance document needs to be added to
                                                                the ‘List of certificates and documents’ to be
               Define process for submitting emission
                                                                checked when carrying out an initial
               reports to the appointed authority and
                                                                inspection and more detailed inspection in
               communicate to ship-owners with ships flying
                                                                accordance to Article 13 of the Government
               the Romanian flag.
                                                                decision.

                                                                Information dissemination process to inform
                                                                relevant staff of the Romanian Naval
                                                                Authority about the new responsibilities,
                                                                penalty system and requirements.

                                                                The Government may also want to develop a
                                                                process by which the port State authority
                                                                checks the database for each ship entering a
                                                                Romanian port to ensure information on the
                                                                issuance and expiry dates and the verifier is
                                                                available. If absent, the Romanian Naval
                                                                authority may want to verify that a valid
                                                                compliance document is being carried on
                                                                board.

*Repeats information from Tables 8 & 7


Information exchange
MS have obligations in regards to information exchange in order to enable effective enforcement
procedures nationally and across the EU. (See Table 10). The obligations require Romania to:
       Romania must ensure effective information exchange and cooperation between the national
        authorities in charge of ensuring and checking compliance of ships flying the MS’ flag and the
        authorities entrusted with implementing the penalty system. This serves the purpose of
        enabling each authority to fulfil its obligation in an effective and timely manner.

       Whenever Romania imposes a penalty in accordance to its national penalty system or issues
        an expulsion order against a ship it needs to inform the European Commission, the EMSA,
        other MSs and the flag State concerned for that ship.

       The appointed national authority in charge of implementing the penalty system needs to
        inform ship-owners, operators of a ship or its representative in the MS of the right to an
        effective remedy before a court or tribunal against an expulsion order.
Defining relevant modes and procedures could be in the form of an agreement between the different
authorities as is currently being worked on between the NAB and MEWF.




                                                                                                            38
Table 10 Relevant arrangements for complying with information exchange requirements


             Legal                    Institutional                    Procedural                  Timeline

 Information         exchange     All entities that hold    The procedure needs to consider    No          binding
 procedures      could      be    relevant information,     at a minimum:                      timeline required
 enshrined in the two             incl. Ministry       of                                      by the Regulation,
                                                            a)  which entities hold relevant
 government          decisions    Transport, Romanian                                          yet needs to be
                                                                responsibilities
 discussed     above,       on    Naval        Authority,                                      operational      by
                                                            b) what does each entity need
 appointing a government          MEWF,          RENAR,                                        May 2019
                                                                fulfil this responsibility
 body to implement checking       verifiers    will   be
                                                            c) which entity holds relevant
 procedures and receiving         involved in ongoing
                                                                information
 emission reports amending        information
                                                            d) time by when information
 and supplementing Decision       exchange.      It    is
                                                                becomes available
 no. 811/2010 on Port State       suggested that MEWF
                                                            time by when information needs
 control,    defining    each     lead in facilitating
                                                            to be made available to the
 entities’ requirement to         setting up these
                                                            respective entity
 provide information to whom      procedures as it
 and when.                        builds upon existing
                                  activities.
 Or

 No legal arrangement but a
 convention to apply to
 relevant authorities defining
 the      modalities      and
 procedures                for
 communicating


3.5 Next steps regarding Maritime MRV
As of 1 July 2015, the EU Maritime MRV Regulation enters into force and Romania will have to start
introducing implementing measures in order to comply with its obligations. Yet, this Regulation is
quite different to other EU Regulations that define MRV requirements – as at no point in the process
is the Romanian government obliged to monitor, report or verify GHG–emissions, which is the case
for the MMR, nor to review any reported data, such as is the case for the EU ETS. Romania’s obligations
for this new regulation are primarily about ensuring that ship-owners that face the actual MRV
obligations are compliant.
Due to the process of further specifying technical details through delegated acts51 and
implementation acts52, which only starts in June this year, some open issues remain. These relate to,
on the one hand, technical aspects of monitoring methods and, on the other hand, to procedural
issues related to verification and accreditation procedures, submission of reported data and
verification information. Romania as a member of the ESSF, represented through a transport attaché,
and of the EU Climate Change Committee, is able to actively participate in the stakeholder consultation
processes though which these open issues will be addressed. Yet, these do not relate to the


51
 to be developed in accordance with Articles 23 of the EU MRV Regulation,
52
 to be adopted by the Commission in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 24(2) of the EU
MRV Regulation, involving the Climate Change Committee


                                                                                                             39
obligations of Romania in its responsibility as flag State and port State. Therefore, further refinement
of technical and procedural aspects are unlikely to impact the procedural arrangement and
institutional set-up that is described in this report and the related options and considerations.
The Government of Romania can therefore start defining the legislative, institutional and procedural
arrangements at any time. The three areas which require actions in order for Romania to meet its
obligations under the EU Maritime MRV Regulation are:

       Accreditation,
       Enforcement and
       Information exchange.
Each of the areas requires a government decision to be issued, appointing a national authority for the
different tasks as well as defining the procedures.
The EU Maritime MRV Regulation makes use of existing national frameworks, i.e. institutions and
procedures, which have been introduced in Romania already to comply with other regulations.
Therefore, the number of options, in terms of which institutions to assign to which task, is limited. For
two areas, the institutional set up is already defined. Accreditation needs to be covered by the unique
NAB, which Romania appointed to comply with Regulation (EC) No 765/2008. The inspection regime,
in which the check for compliance with the requirement to carry a valid compliance document on
board has to be embedded, has been assigned to the Romanian port authority when transposing
Directive 2009/16/EC.
Developing an effective, proportionate and dissuasive penalty regime can draw on two existing
schemes, the one for port State control and the other one for EU ETS related enforcement procedures.
Yet, findings on how effective these existing penalty systems are should be taken into account.
For the appointment of a national authority for undertaking compliance checks, i.e. fulfilling
obligations from a flag State perspective, a number of considerations should be taken into account.
The Ministry of Transport and the Romanian Naval Authority have relevant experience with related
procedures of checking ships’ compliance with maritime conventions. The MEWF holds the expertise
in regards to obligation relating to MRV of CO2 emissions. To leverage these different sets of expertise,
the Romanian government should consider, when appointing one of the entities, also defining specific
supporting roles for the other entity. Such a reporting role could, for example, entail the organization
of workshops with stakeholders, including ship-owners and verifiers, to inform of the upcoming
requirements, processes and timelines under the EU Maritime MRV Regulation.
Lastly, defining procedures for effective information exchange between the different national
authorities, as well as with other MSs, EMSA and the Commission will need to be developed in
accordance to the institutional setup for compliance checks. While existing communication channels
should be made use of, their effectiveness in terms of timeliness and comprehensiveness should be
assessed to ensure that every stakeholder is enabled to meet their obligations.
Defining relevant modes and procedures could be in the form of a convention between the different
authorities as is currently being worked on between the NAB and the MEWF.




                                                                                                      40
4. MRV of Climate Change Actions by Local Governments
Local mitigation activities affect national emissions inventories and emissions reduction policies in
measures, as emissions impacts become aggregated at the national level. These local activities should
be encouraged as well as inform, be integrated with and supported by national-level policy to the
fullest extent feasible.
An initiative for local governments gaining momentum in Romania is the EU Covenant of Mayors
(CoM), through which municipalities voluntarily agree to account for, report, and reduce GHG
emissions. By September 2015, 63 municipalities and local administrative units (LAUs) in Romania
have signed the CoM.53
This section provides information on emission inventory development at the local level, within the
context of the CoM and its requirements. It includes examples of emissions mitigation activities by
Romanian municipalities as well as other EU member States, and provides information on GHG
inventory methodologies. Lastly, it provides options and considerations to encourage participation in
the CoM and supporting local government actions from the national government.


4.1 Overview of the Covenant of Mayors Initiative
The Covenant of Mayors initiative was started in 2008 by the European Commission, following the
launch of the Energy Climate Change package. It is based on the belief that municipalities and their
citizens can play an important role in combating climate change, citing that around 80% of worldwide
GHG emissions are produced by cities, which are responsible for two thirds of the total energy
consumption.54 The CoM is an open platform and the agreement can be signed by any municipality,
regardless of size, whether small or large, metropolitan area or county council anywhere in the world.
The objective of CoM is to reduce GHG emissions within the municipality, and signatories commit to
a target of at least a 20% reduction by the year 2020 as compared to 1990 levels, through the
implementation of strategies adopted at the local level.55 The recommended strategies focus heavily
on energy efficiency measures and the use of renewable energy sources for reducing local emissions
levels.
By signing the CoM, a municipality commits that within a year of signing it will submit a Baseline
Emissions Inventory (BEI) and Sustainable Energy Action Plan (SEAP) from which to monitor progress,
after which signatories agree to issue SEAP Implementation Reports every two years, accompanied by
a Monitoring Emissions Inventory report (MEI) every four years, assessing the effectiveness of the
implemented measures at achieving CO2 reductions as compared to the baseline inventory. The SEAP
and MEI both need to be approved by the Local Council or other appropriate unit with local decision-
making power. If these responsibilities are left unfulfilled, the municipality loses its membership in the
CoM.
The BEI is carried out by the municipality and compiled at the local level, using different sectoral
categories and methods than the national GHG inventory described in Section 2.2. Table 11 highlights



53
   For the current list of CoM signatories, go to: http://www.covenantofmayors.eu/about/signatories_en.html
54
   http://www.covenantof mayors.eu/about/covenant-of-mayors_en.html
55
   http://www.eumayors.eu/IMG/pdf/covenantofmayors_text_en_pdf


                                                                                                         41
the differences between the legally-required national inventories and as compared to activities for a
municipality voluntarily producing its emissions inventory.
Table 11 Differences between national GHG inventories and local inventories for the CoM


  Requirement                     National GHG Inventory                         Municipality Emissions Inventory

                         Binding, as part of the UNFCCC, Kyoto              Voluntary, due to signing the CoM
  Legal aspects
                         Protocol and EU membership

  Geography              National Borders                                   Municipality/Town Borders

                             Energy                                             Municipal buildings,
                             Industrial processes and product use                equipment/facilities
                              (IPPU)                                             Tertiary (non- municipal) buildings,
  Sectors                    Land Use, Land Use Change and                       equipment/facilities
                              Forestry (LULUCF)                                  Municipal public lighting
                             Waste                                              Residential buildings
                             Other                                              Transport
                         All GHGs (e.g. CO2, NH4, N2O, SF6, PCFs,           CO2, CO2e (also including N2O, CH4 when
  GHG
                         HFCs)                                              SEAP addresses waste and water treatment)

                         Mainly statistical data from the National          Data from final consumers who are active in
  Data Sources           Statistics Institute (NSI), energy balance,        the town
                         industrial production and line ministries

  Emission Factors       National and continuously improved                 A choice between the default 2006 IPCC
  Assessment             approach                                           approach, national or life cycle evaluation

                         Performed annually with data for the year          BEI, the base inventory delivered with the
                         n-2 and re-evaluation of the entire series         SEAP and bi-annually or every four years at
  Frequency
                         starting from the base year under the Kyoto        most along with MEI
                         Protocol

Source: 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National GHG Inventories and SEAP Guidebook


4.2 Sustainable Energy Action Plans (SEAPs)
For municipalities that join the CoM, the SEAP is a long term planning document on energy efficiency,
the use of renewable energy supply (RES), and efficient transport at the local level, which supports
local authorities’ efforts to fulfill targets set by signing the CoM.
Preparing the SEAP is a complex process, and a guide has been developed that offers
recommendations for each stage, beginning with establishing a vision, followed by planning,
implementation, monitoring and evaluation. For example, the SEAP guide highlights key elements for
successful design and implementation of the SEAP, including:
        Obtaining the support of local actors

        Establishing long-term political commitment so that implementation is independent of the
         electoral cycle
        Providing funding sources where multi-annual budgets are not available


                                                                                                                   42
       Producing an accurate BEI

       Ensuring that project management is fair and professional
       Having competent personnel and appropriate special training programmes

       Mobilizing civil society, and
       Communicating with other CoM signatories in order to identify and share best practices.

SEAP mitigation policies
The SEAP describes the policies to be implemented for each of the key sectors selected. As shown in
Table 11 above, local activities under the CoM are organized into the following sectors:

       Municipal buildings, equipment/facilities
       Tertiary (non- municipal) buildings, equipment/facilities

       Residential buildings
       Municipal public lighting
       Transport
For example, as the use of renewable energy does not reduce energy use in buildings itself (instead
it affects the emissions intensity of energy use, thus less of an impact on the environment)
municipalities may wish to develop policies to address the energy efficiency of the building sector
by:
       Standards for energy performance of new and/or renovated buildings and/or broader urban
        planning regulations;
       Promoting high quality energy audits;
       Energy efficiency and conservation awareness and training;
       Credits and financial incentives, such as for energy audits or implementation of measures;
       Popularizing best efficiency practices.
To increase the sustainability of transport policies, for example, the existing transport modes and
possible connections or any synergies between multiple transport modes can be adapted to local
geographical and demographic characteristics of the town. Transport policies and measures require a
long term vision and allocation of financial resources for infrastructure development and vehicles.
Sustainable transport policies may target:

       Increasing the attractiveness of alternative transport modes through improved public
        transport;
       Promoting efficient public transport;
       Investing in walking or bicycling infrastructure;
       Decreasing the attractiveness of using individual auto vehicles, such as by adding fees for
        transport in the center of towns or increasing parking fees;



                                                                                                     43
       Cutting emissions from the vehicle stock owned by municipalities and encouraging the
        purchase of low emissions vehicles for the general public.

Monitoring requirements for SEAPs
As discussed above, the Baseline Emissions Inventory report contains the evaluation of GHG emissions
at the municipal level, starting from the base year. They are the foundation on which the targets for
emission reduction targets for 2020 or 2030 are established in the SEAP.
Municipalities issue SEAP Implementation Reports every two years, accompanied by a Monitoring
Emissions Inventory report (MEI) every four years, assessing the effectiveness of the implemented
measures at achieving CO2 reductions as compared to the BEI.
The updated inventories must adhere to the same methodology as the BEI and act as a monitoring
instrument for the SEAP. In order to ensure the consistency and comparability with the BEI, activity
data is to be collected on energy consumption from the same sources using the same emission factors
used when compiling the BEI. By comparing the inventory results with the results of the BEI,
municipality can evaluate the pathway of CO2 emissions and whether they are on track to fulfill their
CoM CO2 emissions reduction target by 2020. Depending on the results of these periodic evaluations,
the SEAP may need to undergo modifications, so as to ensure that the target is reached.
The most general performance indicators regarding GHG emissions are:

       “The emissions reductions” indicator expressed as absolute value (tCO2) as the difference
        between the emissions in the BEI and those in the reporting year and/or:
       “The emissions reductions per capita” indicator, which is determined by first calculating the
        absolute emissions reductions and afterwards dividing it by the size of the population.

Project-level monitoring
In addition to monitoring GHG emissions at the municipal level, municipalities also should evaluate
baseline data, including CO2 emissions, prior to implementation of a specific project and establish the
environmental impact indicators for the project. In many cases, baseline information can be calculated
simply multiplying the energy consumption prior to implementation with the emission factor in order
to assess the initial CO2 emissions levels and the approach to establishing a baseline should not be a
constraint for project development.
Once energy usage before and after implementation of the project is known, the difference of the
two, multiplied by the emission factor, will be the CO2 emissions reduction associated with the project.
It is important to remember that the same specific fuel emission factor must be used as when
compiling the BEI.
The project management system should include a form with clear data regarding energy consumption
prior to project implementation, average energy consumption post project implementation and CO2
emissions levels before and after implementation. A database of these values should be maintained
under the overall SEAP. It can be used in a benchmarking analysis on key projects from the same sector
and for choosing the most effective projects in the future implementation of SEAP.




                                                                                                     44
Examples of mitigation activities and GHG inventories in Romania
As mentioned above, 63 municipalities in Romania have signed the CoM, among which 49 have sent
SEAPs and are undergoing various stages of evaluation. Table 12 provides a synthesis of the results
from the three Romanian municipalities who have begun implementing their SEAPs and have
transmitted monitoring reports by mid-2015.
For towns in Romania that have signed the CoM, 2015 is the first reporting year. The experience
gathered through implementing projects and particularly the quantification of results in terms of
energy savings and GHG emissions reductions provides support for analyzing and revising the SEAP.
Table 12 SEAP monitoring results from three Romanian municipalities


  Municipality           Project Title         Time period                      Indicators/ key values

 Key sector: renewable energy production
                                                                     Reduction: 35 tCO2e/year
                                                                     Energy savings (ES): 40 MWh/year
                     Solar panels for the
  Alba Iulia                                   2011-2013             Renewable Energy Production (REP): 60
                     Olympic pool
                                                                      MWh/year
                                                                     Costs: €170,000 (European funds and own funds)
                                                                     Reduction: 215 tCO2e/year
                     Renewable energy
                                                                     REP: 350MWh/year
  Alba Iulia         sources for 4 public      2009-2011
                                                                     Costs: €2.1 million (European funds and own
                     buildings
                                                                      funds)
                                                                     Reduction: 1192 tCO2e/year
                     Local renewable
                                                                     ES: 2260 MWh/year
                     energy production
  Mizil                                        2012-2014             REP: 2660 MWh/year
                     through photovoltaic
                     plants
                                                                     Costs: €7.74 million (European funds and own
                                                                      funds)
 Key sector: buildings
                                                                     Reduction: 20,100 tCO2e/year
                                               2011-2020
                     Apartment blocks                                ES: 100,000 MWh/year
  Bistriţa                                     2011-2013
                     rehabilitation                                  Costs: €96.8 million (European funds and own
                                               (24 buildings)
                                                                      funds)
                                                                     Reduction: 71tCO2e/year
                     Energy efficiency in
  Bistriţa                                     2011-2012             ES: 352 MWh/year
                     old buildings
                                                                     Costs: €629,500 (European funds and own funds)
 Key sector: transport
                     Urban mobility for                              Reduction: 210 tCO2e/year
  Alba Iulia         bicycles in the           2011-2013             ES: 800 MWh/year
                     historical areas                                Costs: €170,000
                     Low pollution public
                                                                     Reduction: 111.09 tCO2e/year
  Bistriţa           transport (purchase       2012
                                                                     Costs: €1.85 million
                     of 11 Euro 6 buses)




                                                                                                               45
 Other sectors
                       City Hall website
                                                                 Reduction: 1t Co2e/year
     Mizil             containing the SEAP   2011
                                                                 Costs: own funds
                       data



Programmatic mitigation support: Energy Cities Romania
Energy Cities Romania (ECR) is an NGO established in 1995 through a Programme of Community aid
to the countries of Central and Eastern Europe (PHARE) project, with the support of the European
Energy Cities network. Energy Cities was started to support local energy efficiency initiatives for urban
public services (e.g. heating, public lighting, water supply and the collection, storage and
transportation of household waste). Established in 2009, ECR is the national support structure for
cities in Romania that have become signatories of the CoM and ECR has participated in European
projects as the national coordinator. Examples of ECR’s projects include:
            NET-COM (NETworking the Covenant of Mayors) co-financed by the European Programme
             Intelligent Energy (IEE). This project aims to create synergies between national initiatives in
             energy and CoM, including the creation of a platform for dialog between members of ECR on
             implementation of energy sustainable concept;

            MODEL (Management of Local Energy) also financed by IEE – developed under the logo “My
             city is my model” – support municipalities implementing energy efficiency measures;

            ROBUST – Build up Skills in Romania, is a project which sought to create a platform for dialogue
             amongst all stakeholders interested developing skilled labor for energy efficiency and
             renewable energy, and established roadmap for workforce qualification in the two areas. One
             example is “The Green Path towards Sustainable Development,” initiated by Environmental
             Protection Agency (EPA) Sibiu in 2014, with support from the Financing Mechanism for the
             European Space (SEE). The project develops strategies and action plans regarding climate
             change adaptation for three towns: Sibiu, Braşov and Târgu Mureş.

Good Practice Examples of local Romanian GHG inventories56
Developing GHG inventories can help local entities understand ongoing activities and major sources
of emissions; identify areas to focus policies and measures to reduce energy consumption; establish
and track progress toward goals; refine or improve existing projects; build and maintain support for
programs; compare results with other programs; or facilitate decision-making about future policies or
goals.
The examples below used the approach to establish an emissions inventory according to the following
methodology: “How to Develop a Sustainable Energy Action Plan (SEAP) – Guidebook. Part II: Baseline
Emissions Inventory.”
Giurgiu: The baseline year for the inventory is 2010, as activity data (i.e., fuel use and electricity
consumption) to calculate emissions is not comprehensively available for selected key sectors in
prior years.



56
     http://www.eumayors.eu/about/signatories_ro.html?city_id=306&overview


                                                                                                          46
Key sectors included in the inventory:

       Municipal buildings and equipment/facilities
       Non-municipal commercial buildings and equipment/facilities

       Residential buildings
       Municipal public lighting

       Municipal transport fleet
       Public transport
       Private and commercial transport

       District heating, CHP.
Giurgiu used IPCC default emission factors to calculate emissions. Important factors that led to the
successful development of the inventory include the commitment of staff time from the local
authority as well as an organizational structure that supported comprehensive data collection by
involving all relevant stakeholders, including the school inspectorate, the Local Environmental
Agency and local agency for energy efficiency, electricity supplier companies, commercial societies,
and housing associations.
Annex 1 provides snapshots of the energy consumption for selected key sectors and CO2 emissions;
Giurgiu also separately calculates urban heating and combined heat and power energy use and CO2
emissions.
Moinești signed onto the CoM in 2011, and in 2012 submitted its SEAP with a emissions inventory
using 2010 as the baseline year. As Moinesti also followed the inventory methodology in the SEAP
Guidebook, it used same IPCC default emission factors and included the same key sectors as Giurgiu.
Important factors that led to the successful development of Moinesti’s inventory include the use o f
an Energy Management System (EMS), which was developed through Intelligent Energy Europe and
ADEME- France. The system monitored energy consumption in buildings which are under
administration of Local Council, thus leading to the rapid creation of its inventory baseline, as well as
SEAP development within a year of signing the CoM. Ultimately, Moinseti found that EMS
implementation leads to improved procedures to collect and organize quality data.

SEAP Examples from other Member States
This section highlights examples of successful initiatives from two other cities in the EU who have
signed onto the CoM, Vienna and Milan.

Vienna, Austria
As a signatory to the CoM the city of Vienna commits to reducing its CO2 emissions by 21% by 2020.
Key facts for Vienna:

       1,757,000 inhabitants, about 20% of the country’s population

       In 2010, 20% - 30% of all new houses in Vienna were built to passive house standards




                                                                                                      47
        Almost 60% of the Viennese households live in subsidized homes. 220,000 of these are rented
         public housing.

When it comes to quality of life, Vienna, the capital of Austria, always appears at the top of
international rankings. The city’s innovative housing policy certainly contributes to achieving these
impressive results. Creating affordable high quality living spaces that meet architectural and
environmental standards and offer high levels of comfort to its residents is a top priority for the local
administration.
Green social housing for all. In Vienna, almost 60% of the households live in subsidized homes. Every
year, the city supports the completion of 5,000 to 7,000 social apartments, which corresponds to
around 85% of the volume of the new homes constructed annually. All new housing projects that
receive subsidies are subjected to a competition launched by the city, which aims at ensuring that
tailored housing solutions are found, encouraging innovative architectural techniques and the
preservation of the environment.57
Since 2007, the environmental standards and legal regulations for constructing new social housing
have been raised as well as the level of grants and subsidies for environmentally-friendly buildings. As
a result, low-energy consumption (max. 30 kWh/ m2/year for heating) has become the norm in new
houses, with more and more reaching “passive house standards” (less than 15 kWh/m 2/year for
heating) – which actually allows new houses to be built in Vienna without any heating systems at all.
In 2010, 20 to 30% of the new homes were built to passive house standards.
SMART-flats is a programme for those who have limited savings and are unable to take on a mortgage.
The city is stepping up the construction of the so-called SMART flats: low-cost homes of compact size
that are ideal for young people at the start of their career, but also for single parents or senior citizens.
Because of the reduced living space, the consumption of energy is also decreased. Until 2011, a total
of 900 flats, apartments and shared flats were built in the area of the former railway stations. The
architects and developers built eight different buildings with attractive open spaces and social
infrastructure. An important strategy to keep the rents low is to provide compact flats and offer
community spaces instead.
Bike City – Built as part of Vienna´s efforts to encourage the use of bicycles, this social housing project
aims at reducing car-parking space by 50% (the usual requirement being one plot per apartment) to
make room for bike facilities such as bike storage rooms, bike repair centers and large elevators for
those who want to take their bicycles up their flats. Bike City is situated right on a large inner-city park,
next to a subway station and connected to the city´s cycling network, allowing to reach both the city
center and the Danube embankments within just a few minutes. Experiments with car-free or bike-
friendly dwellings have been very successful in Vienna. Thus the city is looking into new solutions
within the “Smart Cities” concept together with private companies.58
Wood in the city – Vienna is also home to Austria’s largest and tallest wooden housing complex. The
seven-story building is made of 2400m3 of wood, a construction material known for the warmth and
comfort it brings to residents, but also for its sustainability. Even though wood is not the most
economical construction material (it typically costs 10 to 15% more than alternatives), according to

57
   KliP II-Climate Protection Programme – http://www.wien.gv.at/english/environment/klip/case-study-
housing.htm
58
   http://www.eltis.org/discover/case-studies-bike-city-vienna-austria; ELTIS-The urban mobility observatory


                                                                                                           48
developers and architects, savings can be achieved during the construction process, which is much
faster for wood than with other building materials. A major advantage of this kind of construction is
the livability it brings to the residents while meeting high environmental standards.59

Milan, Italy
As a signatory to the Covenant of Mayors, the city of Milan voluntarily commits itself to reducing its
CO2 emissions by at least 20% by 2020. Key facts for Milan:

          City population – 1,308,981

          Signed up to the Covenant of Mayors on 18 December 2008

          Baseline year against which commitments are measured is 2005

          CO2 emission reduction target by 2020 is at least 20% compared to 2005 levels.

          The business as usual scenario for the period 2005-2020 shows an increase of population (9%).
           This implies an increase of CO2 emissions by 8.3% according to the same scenario.

          The city of Milan will reduce its direct CO2 emissions from 4795 ktCO2 in 2005, to 3,836 ktCO2
           in 2020. A reduction effort of 959 ktCO2, despite a projected population increase of 9% during
           the same period.

Congestion charge for a clean city - Drivers entering the ‘Cerchia dei Bastioni’ (city center also referred
to as ‘Area C’) of Milan with certain categories of vehicles will be required to pay a fee from mid-
January 2012 onwards. The revenue collected will finance the city’s sustainable transport facilities.
The objective of this new scheme is to reduce road traffic in the city center by 20 to 30%, reduce CO 2
emissions by 20 to 25% and to use the revenue for improving the public transport network, expanding
cycle lanes, pedestrian zones and 30kph zones.
Overall, quality of life will improve with fewer vehicles on the road and controlled parking, less noise
and reduced local air pollution.
The congestion charge is part of Milan’s Sustainable Energy Action Plan, an ambitious roadmap
charting the city’s progress towards CO2 emission reductions and adopted as part of its commitment
to the Covenant of Mayors. With 76.6% of the vote in favor of the scheme at a local referendum, public
acceptance is already secured and will allow inhabitants and visitors to directly benefit from a safer
and cleaner city center.
Surveillance cameras have been installed at access points around the city center to detect entering
vehicles and transmit the collected data to a computer system which recognizes the vehicles, their
classification (residents, duty vehicles, free access vehicles) and the corresponding charge. Residents
and duty vehicles are charged reduced fees.
Vehicles exempt from charges include bicycles, scooters, electric cars, vehicles for disabled people,
and until 31 December 2012, also hybrid, methane powered, and liquid petroleum gas and biofuel
cars.



59
     http://info/en/sightseeing/excursions/vienna/woods; Wood in the city


                                                                                                        49
4.3 Additional Methodologies for local GHG inventories
The following section provides information on the GHG inventory methodologies for local
governments, in addition to the SEAP Guidebook. The tools provide two basic approaches for
developing a local inventories, which can be used as part of a SEAP process or separately.
       1. The local government operations approach is for entities that want to understand the GHG
          emissions of only government facilities and operations (e.g., government buildings and other
          facilities, streetlights and traffic signals, vehicle fleet). This may be appropriate for
          government entities interested in promoting green government operations and reducing
          emissions under their operational control. The Local Government Operations Protocol (below)
          follows this approach.
       2. The community-wide approach is for entities that want to understand the GHG emissions of
          their community as a whole, which can include local government operations. This approach
          may be more appropriate for entities who want to implement projects to engage the
          community or adopt a policy to affect change in the community.
Under either approach, local governments may consider partnering with other communities in their
region. For local government operations inventories, entities can partner to provide mutual technical
assistance and share resources, lessons learned, or best practices. For community inventories, entities
can partner to estimate regional GHG emissions. This option can be valuable for small communities
that may not have the capacity or resources to conduct inventories independently or that may want
to collaborate with other communities on the resulting emissions reduction activities.
The exact process for developing a greenhouse gas GHG inventory for a local government will vary by
entity. The following methodologies provide key steps that are likely to be part of any inventory
process. However, they are not necessarily intended to be pursued in linear order, and may require
multiple iterations, as shown in Figure 5. For example, data collection will occur over time and can
influence decisions about other components of the inventory.

The Local Government Operations Protocol
The industry standard for local government GHG inventories in the United States is the Local
Government Operations Protocol (LGOP), developed in partnership by the California Air Resources
Board, the California Climate Action Registry, ICLEI-Local Governments for Sustainability, and The
Climate Registry.
The LGOP is a program-neutral GHG inventory protocol that is designed to allow local governments to
quantify and report GHG emissions resulting from their operations. It provides guidance on
calculation methodologies, emission factors, and other aspects of inventory development.60




60
     The Local Government Operations Protocol: http://www.theclimateregistry.org/tools-resources/reporting-
      protocols/local-goverment-operations-protocol/


                                                                                                          50
The Global Protocol for Community-Scale Emissions
The Global Protocol for Community-Scale Greenhouse Gas Emission Inventories (GPC) is a joint project
by ICLEI-Local Governments for Sustainability (ICLEI), the World Resources Institute (WRI) and C40
Cities Climate Leadership Group (C40), with additional collaboration by the World Bank, UNEP, and
UN-Habitat. As a global reporting standard, the GPC enables cities and communities to consistently
measure and report GHG emissions and develop climate action plans and low-emission urban
development strategies.61
The GPC also underpins the global Compact of Mayors, a leading cooperative effort among cities to
reduce GHG emissions, track progress and prepare for the impacts of climate change.62 The Compact
has adopted the GPC as part of its core       Figure 5 GHG Inventory Steps
activities to raise the level of ambition and
quality of city GHG inventory reporting.
Using GPC, cities can report emissions
through the Carbonn Climate Registry, the
Compact’s designated central repository.

Ex-Ante and Ex-Post Evaluation Tools

ECORegion63
The internet-based tool, ECORegion,
enables the calculation of municipal energy
and CO2 inventories. It provides series of
energy and CO2 inventories, for example
per energy carrier and per sector. It is
suitable both for monitoring the overall CO2
reduction in a municipality during a certain
period and for monitoring progress within
a specific sector. The tool provides an
inventory that can be used retroactively
back to 1990. The following sectors are
considered: public facilities, households,
private sector and transport. Due to
country specific data provided by the tool a     Source: U.S EPA
first starting inventory can be calculated by
entering a limited amount of data.
As the tool is internet based, no software installations are needed. The country specific and
comprehensive database for energy, emissions and further environmental factors are updated each
year, making the tool easy to handle without oneself having to care about current energy data. The
standardized methodology to prepare the energy and CO2 inventory supports a long-term process



61
   The Global Protocol for Community-Scale Emissions: http://www.iclei.org/our-activities/our-agendas/low-
    carbon-city/gpc.html
62
   The Compact of Mayors is a similar, but separate initiative as the EU Covenant of Mayors.
63
   http://www.climatealliance.org/co2-monitoring0.0.html


                                                                                                       51
with regular inventory updates, realized by different departments within the municipality and for
comparison with other municipalities.
CO2 reduction targets set in the framework of a CoM target or other individual reduction targets can
be inserted as reduction paths against which the current data of the local authority can be compared.
The European Commission has officially recognized ECORegion as an efficient tool for the preparation
of SEAPs under the CoM.

Clear Path64
ClearPath is an advanced web application for energy and emissions management, available only to
ICLEI members. The tool contains several modules:
          Inventory Module. There are two types of accounts within Inventory Module of ClearPath:
           community-scale and government operations.

          Forecasting Module. Users can develop new energy and emissions forecasts scratch or
           connect directly to the outputs of a completed inventory, and apply custom growth rates, and
           can account for the impact of actions taken by higher levels of government such as renewable
           portfolio standards or fuel economy standards.
          Planning Module. This module enables analysis of emissions reductions potential from Climate
           Action Plan measures. Users still have access to a wide range of reduction measures, but can
           interactively apply them in a scenario planner to visualize their impact on the emissions
           forecast in real time.
          Monitoring Module. Local governments monitor and track government operations and
           community scale implementation measures created in the Planning Module. Users can
           interpret their data and support a process of continuous improvement in climate
           performance.

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Local Greenhouse Gas Inventory Tool65
A free, interactive spreadsheet, the tool calculates GHG emissions for many sectors, including
residential, commercial, transportation, and waste and water management. It is comprised of two
separate modules: one for community-wide inventories, the other for inventories of local government
operations only. Users may choose to apply one or both modules.
The tool is pre-programmed with default emission factors and system assumptions needed to
calculate emissions or local governments may enter municipality-specific information. The tool is
scalable to accommodate different levels of activity data (ranging from city-wide to individual meters)
to meet the needs and constraints of different local governments.
Designed to facilitate data collection and compilation, and generating summary reports, the tool is for
local governments interested in compiling a relatively quick and simple GHG inventory, and:

          Create an emissions baseline,
          Track emissions trends,


64
     http://icleiusa.org/clearpath/clearpath-modules/
65
     http://www3.epa.gov/statelocalclimate/resources/local-GHG-inventory-tool.html


                                                                                                    52
        Assess the relative contributions of emissions sources,

        Communicate with stakeholders,
        Partner with other municipalities to create a regional inventory,

        Develop mitigation strategies and policies, and
        Measure progress toward meeting GHG reduction goals.

Romanian nationwide buildings’ GHG emissions reporting platform66
The Romanian nationwide buildings GHG emission reporting platform is online, accessible via a regular
browser and will be operated by the Romanian Ministry of Regional Development, and opened to all
building administrators (public and private), municipalities, state agencies. It is scalable both in terms
of number of entries and further reporting functionalities.
Focusing on energy use in buildings, including all types of residential and commercial structures, the
tool provides data for major macroeconomic decision-making, such as:
        Monitoring and evaluation of the energy performance in buildings throughout Romania and
         across all buildings’ categories, ownership structures, etc.
        Prioritization of public spending (or other sort of incentives) for increasing energy efficiency
         in buildings, GHG savings, social aid dependency;
        Real-time assessment of the living and working conditions (e.g. heating) for all
         dwellers/employees in Romania;
        Utilities’ consumption in buildings and, as such, the carbon footprint of each building;

        Energy efficiency measures deployed (with cost and impact on utilities and GHG emissions);
        Various real-time statistics across counties, type of buildings (hospitals, schools, admin
         buildings, production facilities, etc.).


4.4 Potential financing resources for SEAPs and Emissions Inventories
This section provides examples of possible funding sources for Romanian municipalities who sign
onto the CoM.

Support for the development of local GHG inventories and SEAPs
Financing for developing SEAPs and emissions inventories has been delivered through local or
international funds, such as the Intelligent Energy for Europe (IIE) and the Financing Mechanism for
the European Space (SEE), among others.
The Romanian Municipalities Association (RMA), an implementing organization for CoM, has
participated in a successful project (called SEAP-PLUS) that supported the development of two BEIs --
for Ploiesti and Pitesti – as well as a SEAP for Zalau. The RMA also disseminated good practices through
an SEAP Guide and the CoM E-learning platform.


66
  www.RegistruCladiri.ro. At this time, the platform is in the beta-testing stage and is expected to be open for
public use, via a dedicated website at the end of 2015.


                                                                                                             53
The ELENA (European Local Energy Assistance) facility serves Local Authorities (LAUs), including
municipalities, and helps them develop SEAPs. It has several components: consolidating
administrative capacity, hiring experts and preparing bankable projects and investments. LAUs in
Romania       have     not      taken     advantage     of     this    opportunity    so     far
(http://www.welcomeurope.com/european-funds-energy-assistance-758+658.htmltab-onglet-
details)
The LIFE Programme for the Environment and Climate Change 2014-2020 is divided into two sub-
programmes: environment and climate action. It will finance pilot projects, good practices and
community awareness and information dissemination (http://ec.europa.eu/environment/life/).
The Romanian Environmental Fund Administration (EFA) provides funds to support LAUs. It extends
technical assistance for the development of the BEIs and SEAPs. Furthermore, the legislation
governing the use of funds by EFA allows for the use of funds for climate change and RES projects
(www.afm.ro).

Support for the implementation of SEAP mitigation actions and measures
As noted above, the SEAP is a plan that aims to combat climate change and establish a well-defined
target for reducing GHG emissions by 2020. The EU financial framework for the period of 2014-2020
requires that 20% of European Structural and Investment Funds (ESIF) be used for climate change
related projects, which can be a good, if not the primary, funding source for mitigation actions
established in local SEAPs.
Table 13 provides a summary of the priorities and project categories for relevant Operational
Programmes (OPs).
Table 13 Operational Programmes that could support SEAPs

 Operational
                        Priority Axis                                 Project categories
 Programme (OP)
                                                                         energy efficiency in public
                        3 – Supporting energy efficiency in public
                                                                          buildings;
                        buildings
                                                                         using RES;
                                                                         energy efficiency in residential
 Regional OP
                                                                          buildings;
                        4 – Supporting sustainable Urban
                                                                         energy efficiency in public
                        Development
                                                                          lighting;
                                                                         sustainable urban mobility plans;
                        6 – Promoting clean energy and energy            the creation or rehabilitation of
 Large
                        efficiency in order to support a low carbon       biomass and geothermal energy
 Infrastructure OP
                        economy                                           productions capacity;
                        1 – Strengthening the capacity of
 Technical              beneficiaries to prepare and implement
 Assistance OP          ESIF funded projects and the dissemination
                        of information regarding the funds
Sources: www.fonduri-ue.ro, www.mdrap.ro




                                                                                                              54
Also, the Quick Reference Guide of Financing Opportunities for Local Sustainable Energy 2014-202067
suggests funding programmes for implementing SEAP's projects including:
        LIFE-Environment and Climate Action subprogrammes,

        ELENA (Energy Local Energy Assistance),
        CIVITAS-Activity Fund Sustainable Mobility,

        HORIZON 2020 (Call EE 20).
The Quick Reference Guide includes information on types of projects, focus areas, recommended
project size, co-funding size, etc.


4.5 Options and considerations for supporting local government actions on climate change
This section provides considerations for the Romanian national government to support Romanian
municipalities on the development of emissions inventories and SEAPs (including institutional
arrangements). It also addresses a structure for improving information dissemination (e.g. partnership
between the Association of municipalities of Romania and MEWF) and the implications for
administrative capacity.

National support for local government climate actions
To support action at all levels, local authorities that have signed the CoM can be recognized as partners
with the national government in the fight against climate change and the Romanian goal of becoming
a low carbon economy and reducing its GHG emissions. The municipalities also can be supported in
developing the planning documents and in the implementation of the local policies and measures,
which can also help increase consistency across municipalities, while still allowing enough flexibility
for local initiatives. National-level policies regarding energy efficiency and the use of RES can create
an enabling environment that encourages the adoption of the most efficient policies at the municipal
level, depending on local conditions and characteristics.
Legislative actions at the national level could help remove barriers faced at the local level, such as by
eliminating restrictions on the use of local budgets for long term planning for the SEAP, supporting
programmes for increasing climate change knowledge and capacity for using ESIF funds, and
improving financing opportunities through European Programmes, such as ELENA and LIFE.
Increased communication, information sharing and collaboration would benefit all parties. One way
to facilitate this would be to create an organized discussion and collaboration forum between
municipalities, local government associations (e.g., RMA and Energy Cities Romania68), and line
ministries and national agencies with responsibilities regarding climate change, utilities and energy.
For example, a collaboration structure could be facilitated through the leveraging the existing National
Commission for Climate Change (NCCC), which acts as a consulting body for the MEWF. In its current

67
   Quick Reference Guide Financing Opportunities for Local Sustainable Energy 2014-2020, published in
December 2014, http://www.covenantofmayors.eu
68
   The Romanian Municipalities Association (RMA) and Energy Cities Energy Romania (ECRCER) are two NGOs
which act as supporting bodies for CoM by informing and providing technical assistance for awareness raising
and increasing the public CC knowledge levels as well as for identifying best energy efficiency and RES
practices.


                                                                                                           55
form, the NCCC has a technical group containing representatives from over 30 institutions with fairly
broad responsibilities.
A distinct technical group, or subcommittee within the NCCC, may also be helpful, which would be
focused on the issues encountered by municipalities specifically in implementing energy efficiency and
renewable energy measures. It would make sense if representatives of the other line ministries with
direct links to local activities, such as Ministry of Energy, Small and Medium Enterprises and Business
Environment (MESMMEsBE) and the public affairs department of the Ministry of Regional
Development and Public Administration (MRDPA), also participate within this subcommittee.
An additional option (instead of or in addition to the above) would be to support establishment of
Climate Partnerships for Local Authorities Units (CPLAU). The CPLAU could raise awareness of SEAP
options and opportunities and help overcome legislative, organizational and financial hurdles faced
by local authorities while implementing the SEAPs.
The CPLAU could also provide climate change adaptation support, which is the second pillar of the
European climate change policy. The EU Cities Adapt initiative was in fact developed as a platform for
dialogue following the adoption of the European Adaptation Strategy. It could be further employed
by Romanian LAUs to exchange adaptation knowledge and practices.
To coordinate efforts internally, MEWF could consider establishing a team (a nr. of people) with
responsibilities written in the job description regarding climate change policies at the local level. This
team could communicate directly with and likely increase the number of localities joining the CoM
and/or implementing measures to reduce GHG, address climate change adaptation and to use RES.
The team could, for example, hold capacity building workshops for municipalities.
Joining several cities, the CoM, and the support of central authorities, into a team coordinated by
MEWF, addressing policies for climate change locally, also can contribute substantially to achieving
Romania's commitments on climate and energy 2020, thus preparing the path for 2030.




                                                                                                       56
5. MRV: Research & Systematic Observation, and Education & Awareness
This section examines the current level of integration of climate change knowledge and awareness
into public authorities and research institutions supporting the development of scientific and technical
knowledge, as well as the level of overall education and general public awareness on climate change
issues. It also assesses the current level of education regarding the necessary of scientific and
technical disciplines and awareness of climate change and provides recommendations for improving
Romania’s awareness and preparedness for tacking climate change.
While EU regulations do not require explicit reporting on research, development and innovation (RDI)
activities to support to climate actions, there are implicit requirements in order to effectively
implement EU and UNFCCC guidelines, such as for adaptation evaluation or preparing National
Communications. Effectively, the reporting requirements are to provide updated information on
research and systematic observation (RSO) as well as on education and public awareness (EA). As
precedent, other EU processes require Member States (MS) to ensure that metadata are created for
the spatial data sets documenting community environmental policies or activities that may have an
impact on the environment (INSPIRE Directive (2007/2/EC)), access to background information used
for compliance under community legislation (e.g. GHG inventories under 525/2013/UE, GHG trading
scheme under 2003/87/EC) and technical expert background for EU internal negotiation of emerging
policies.
The information in this section relies on a review of online documentation made available by the
central authorities, i.e. line ministries, and research and higher education institutions. Further
information was also collected from direct discussions with researchers, collected in various working
groups and workshops organized throughout the project.


5.1 Overview of the integration of climate change into public policy and institutions
Currently, climate change is partially, but inconsistently, integrated into public policy and institutions.
Regarding security, climate change does not appear to be explicitly recognized as a national threat.
For example, the environment is not represented in the National Council of National Security and
‘climate change’ is not mentioned in any of its reports (http://csat.presidency.ro/). Existing academic
studies focused on national security do not yet mention climate change as a threat explicitly, although
associated climate change phenomena, such as extreme weather events and flooding, are recognized
as becoming more extreme than historical patterns (e.g. Dolghin N, Sarcinschi A and Dinu MS, 2004).
Systematic and coordinated research and education on climate change and adaptation (CC&A) seem
to be still at an early stage in Romania. Currently, CC&A does not appear to be consistently prioritized
on research agendas of research institutions or universities nor for relevant RDI at the national
ministry level. Although, there is an existing foundation, as there are relevant activities relating to
systematic nature observations and research as well as a good participation of Romanian institutions
in international projects on such matters.
So far, there has been insufficient connection between research entities and implementing
organizations (authorities, national or local public, private) on climate change issues, which limits the
contribution of the research that is already happening to public policies increasing the preparedness
of Romania to address anticipated climate change challenges.




                                                                                                        57
5.2 Existing Institutional Approach
Romania has a public policy on research, development and innovation which is implemented in cycles
mirroring European policy cycles. The current cycle covers 2014-2020, matching the European Union’s
(EU) Jobs and Growth Strategy for 2020, which is operationalized through EU instruments. The
Strategy for Research, Development and Innovation 2014-2020 (SNCDI 2020) is implemented mainly
through two specific type of instruments:

       National Plan for Research, Development and Innovation 2014-2020 (PNCDI3), and

       Priority Axis on Research, Technological Development and Innovation to support business and
        competitiveness, included under other public policies related to other sectors (e.g. fiscal
        incentives, educational programmes):
            o   POR (Regional Operational Programme),
            o   POS-CU (Operational Programme on Human Capital),
            o   POD-CA (Development of Administrative Capacity),
            o   PNDR (National Programme of Rural Development).
The National research and innovation policy is coordinated by the National Council for Science Policy,
Technology and Innovation (CNPSTI). The council is directly subordinate to the Prime Minister and
includes representatives of ministries (e.g. Education, Environment, Energy, etc.). Its main task is to
facilitate and ensure mainstreaming of RDI within country’s development strategies, to coordinate RDI
strategic planning, and to ensure coordination of innovation policy by the relevant sectoral policy
entities. CNPSTI prepares for launching the future policy cycles, including the facilitation of approval
of the strategic planning. CNPSTI is supported by the Center for Public Policies for RDI, which provides
expert input and analysis through various consultative bodies and committees.
Funding to support RDI usually comes from public rather than private sources. Total public
expenditure on research and innovation reached 0.48% of the GDP of which 80% were public
investments according to the National Institute of Statistics, although there is an official target of 2%
in 2020 to be equally shared between public and private funding. Currently, Romania allocates the
smallest percentage of GDP across EU for RDI activities.
Regarding climate change and adaptation specifically, the Romanian Strategy for Research,
Development and Innovation for 2014-2020 establishes a direction of action including specialization
in several priority areas relevant for CC&A: bio-economy, energy efficiency, environment and climate
change, health, space and security. Yet, “climate change” research as such is not highlighted as a
priority. Operationalization of the RDI strategy may bring more focus on this issue over time.
The National Climate Change Strategy (NCCS) and its associated National Action Plan for Climate
Change, which are in an advanced finalizing phase, highlight research and technological needs for
mitigation and enhanced resilience through adaptation for all economy sectors (e.g. transport,
agriculture, land use) and communities, which will need to be integrated with and leverage existing
institutions.




                                                                                                      58
Government institutions with responsibilities relevant for CC&A issues
This section lists several Romanian ministries with direct responsibilities for, or with topics relevant to
RDI and/or climate change and adaptation issues.
Ministry of Education and Research (MER) coordinates and organizes the national education,
research and technological development and innovation activities, and is in charge of implementation
of the national strategy for RDI. MER is entitled to implement strategic activities by delegation of
activities to specific agencies. Research activity is achieved through coordinated networks (e.g.
Romanian Academy, sectoral academies); units of public or private research (as branches of public or
private organizations) and research dedicated organizations. Institutional responsibility for monitoring
and evaluation of the latest RDI strategy for 2014-2020 is with MER.
Ministry of Environment, Waters and Forest (MEWF), itself or through the Environmental Fund
coordinates and financially supports policy implementation-related research, applied research on
environmental risks management, as well as climate-related and sustainable adaptation planning.
MEWF coordinates the activity of national, regional and local agencies for environmental protection,
which are in charge of implementation of environment policy within their respective jurisdictions.
Minister of Energy, Small and Medium–Size Enterprises, and the Business Environment (MEIMM)
and Ministry of Economy, Trade and Tourism (MININD) are in charge of sustainable industrial
development, promotion of measures to increase energy efficiency, use of renewable sources and
energy supply security. The Environment Protection Department has specific functions related to
emissions transactions and GHG reduction (i.e. Carbon Capture and Storage) and sectoral research
agenda.
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MADR) is in charge of policies related to the
agriculture and food industry, rural development and land reclamation/improvement. Scientific
activities related to such objectives is well defined, linking directly central authority departments to
subordinated research institutions (e.g. Academy of Agricultural and Forestry Sciences - ASAS) and to
other research institutions. Innovation and research is key in the functioning of this Ministry. It also
has a unit in charge of mainstreaming climate change issues in all development processes and
proposes assessments or research on specific topics. Climate change concerns are taken into account
in all programmes and approaches of this ministry.
Ministry of Transport (MT) is the state authority addressing roads, railroads, aviation, naval and
maritime transport and related infrastructure policy and regulation, as well as implementation (by
dedicated technical bodies). It may order studies related to its policy making and is involved in
monitoring of traffic parameters (e.g. on Danube and river navigability or road transport, airport
traffic) and regulation of standards for safe and environmentally-friendly transport.
State-owned national companies or national-level administration of important natural resources or
infrastructures (e.g. National Forest Administration-Romsilva, Administration of Maritime Ports
Administration Constanta, and Administration of Navigable Channels) may implement their own
research programmes in order to fulfill their mandate. Most are represented directly in the National
Commission for Climate Change.
Regional and local, decentralized administrations do not have obligations to implement or develop
research programmes, but can utilize and/or participate in research partnerships. In Romania, regional
or local administrations (as well as public companies and the private sector) do not perform research


                                                                                                        59
or observation on climate change issues regularly, unless they are involved in specific projects. There
is no specific assessment of the actual economic effect of their participation as partners in research
programmes. Lately, there has been an increasing trend for innovation and technology development
toward increased competitiveness at the regional level implemented through the Agencies for
Regional Development, e.g. innovation clusters supported by EU regional funding.
Few Romanian NGOs (e.g. Federation Climate Action Network Romania) focus on CC&A related
research, instead they usually focus on community awareness activities and helping local authorities
develop and implement programmes to reduce GHG emissions.

Scientific Research Institutions relevant for climate change issues
The research agenda pursued by Romanian RDI institutions is focused on historical themes and
dominated by observational sectoral studies; clear CC&A components and related socio-economic
studies are rarely identifiable in the online information. Yet, relevant information for CC&A seems to
be available through existing research (e.g. observation of nature and data processing,
experimentation, modeling) and systematic observation.
Based on international literature and UNFCCC requirements, research related to climate change issues
can be split in three domains:

          Understanding natural processes (e.g. atmospheric processes and trends of climate at global
           and regional scale),

          Emission reductions, mitigation actions and transformation to a low-carbon society, bio-
           economy and green growth, and
          Adaptation to residual climate change.
Systematic observations are usually implemented by monitoring programmes of publicly- financed
research institutions. Monitoring includes long term assessments of natural parameters collected in
national coverage networks (see table of 36 institutions or umbrella organizations and their RSO
activities in Annex 2).
There are few reports from these research institutions available online (e.g. from the National
Meteorological Administration, http://www.meteoromania.ro/anm/). Yet, in a good example of
promoting sustainability and information exchange, the National Center for Monitoring Risk in the
Community Environment, which is subordinated to National Institute of Public Health, prepares an
annual report entitled, "Impacts of climate change on human health.” It also maintains a database of
annual information sheets for each county. These outputs are part of a larger report called the "Report
on health and environment”69 . As discussed below, increased sharing scientific reports on related
topics can help improve public understanding and perceptions of climate change impacts.

Assessment of climate change objectives in government and research institutions
Most of the central authorities, e.g. ministries, have departments explicitly dealing with climate
change, while research institutions (i.e. research institutes, universities) typically do not. Also, there is
limited infrastructure in Romania specifically addressing climate change research; there is no
integrated regional or European institute or facility recognized at international level. For national

69
     For example, one is available at: http://www.insp.gov.ro/cnmrmc/images/rapoarte/Raport-SM-2013.pdf.


                                                                                                           60
strategies that address scientific activity, there is limited information if and how research objectives
were reached and how results are to be utilized.
Increasing public funding mechanisms and/or stimulating private co-funding for science explicitly
addressing CC&A would increase related outputs, and would be particularly valuable when combined
with increased information sharing.
For example, increasing the transparency of online information on CC&A topics in annual reports of
the research institutions will make it easier to assess actual capacity available. Currently, it is not
possible to obtain the number or percentage of researchers involved, or the number or scope of
projects annually contracted on related fields.
Climate change in the national research programmes. Research agendas addressing climate change
or adaptation specifically have been limited to date; relevant subjects represent a small part of the
observation and research effort. Increased research activities addressing climate change impacts and
adaptation of social, public health and urban and rural community sustainable development pathways
will be particularly valuable going forward.
Climate change in the EU research cooperation. The main driver for climate change research in
Romania so far has been through cooperation in EU programmes. As good practice examples,
Romanian institutions are partners in numerous research projects under the EU 7th Framework
Programme, and actively participated in European Cooperation in Science and Technology program
(COST) actions as well as in other European Programmes addressing climate issues (e.g. the South
Eastern European Transnational Cooperation).
Romanian participation in international research on climate change. Also representing good
practices, Romania is involved through various research institutions and projects in international
scientific cooperation within the framework of Earth Science Systems Partnership (ESSP); the
International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme (IGBP), the World Climate Research Programme
(WCRP); the International Human Dimensions Project (IHDP) and the International Biodiversity
Programme (DIVERSITAS). Romanian scientists are also contributing to the work of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), as authors or reviewers in both assessments and
methodological reports.


5.3 Options and Recommendations for Research and Systematic Observation
The current picture is defined by numerous RDI institutions engaged in potentially relevant activities,
but only inconsistently addressing CC&A-related research specifically at an institutional level. This
section highlights several suggestions on how the relevant research outputs can be further targeted
in order to reach a broader audience (e.g. relevant policy makers, economic actors or the general
public) in the future.

Communication within and among research institutions improvements
           Central authorities can consider taking a proactive role in regards to CC&A research
            needs and help update the research agenda of RDI institutions according to
            international developments and national needs on CC&A: for example, the government
            could call for a focus on GHG mitigation research for all economic sectors, developing
            regional projections on climate impacts, and innovation on adaptation technologies as


                                                                                                     61
           well as a deeper understanding of the adaptation needs by requesting risk and
           vulnerability assessments, and solutions to improve or maintain living standards of
           concerned communities.

          Evolve away from a traditional sectoral focus by stimulating cross-sectoral and
           interdisciplinary research in inter-institutional settings. Such interdisciplinary
           approaches would facilitate win-win solutions by minimizing trade-offs among relevant
           economy sectors and activities. Multi-institutional and multi-stakeholder approaches to
           CC&A research would also minimize duplication of efforts amongst RDI institutions
           resulting in a more efficient use of funds. This can be pared with strategies to provide
           more open access to data, such as through development and maintenance of databases
           by the relevant research institutions in order to stimulate inter-sectoral use of data. More
           in-depth analysis of data is also needed to better understand its implications.

          Through outreach programmes, RDI institutions can help ensure that a critical mass of
           scientists and professionals are aware of and involved in how CC&A issues relate to their
           own research subject, and are informed about global controversies (e.g. IPCC report vs.
           climate skeptics), as well as the technical implications of global negotiations on climate
           change and commitments.
          Efforts would be further supported by broader and more proactive information sharing,
           such as where researchers and scientists transparently share results as well as the
           uncertainty of estimates/ approaches/ conclusions/ solutions to relevant stakeholders,
           so they can contribute to CC&A processes and decisions. A fair amount of climate change
           related data involves quantitative estimates for which uncertainty can be derived by
           statistical means, e.g. estimates of emissions or emission reductions of various GHGs over
           time. Data that is more qualitative in nature will require different approaches on e.g.
           adaptation.

          RDI institutions could publish more of their outputs online with short summaries for
           potential user groups, and also to organize or participate in regular public outreach
           activities. It would be particularly valuable to increase RDI institution engagement with
           the National Commission for Climate Change (NCCC).

Coordination of RDI activity with CC&A policy making
          Having central authorities and RDI institutions explicitly recognize climate change and
           climate adaptation as national security risk would increase the profile, leading to
           increased integration into research agendas. Extreme weather-related events appear to
           be communicated as isolated events, rather than as a part of anthropogenic global climate
           change. CC&A research on the impact to Romania’s economy or on social and human
           community aspects would then increase. The national government could also stimulate
           such knowledge by developing dedicated CC&A research programmes.
          Professionals and technical can be encouraged to become more involved in developing
           independent scientific and technical evidence in support of policy making. These efforts
           could be coordinated through bodies like the NCCC.




                                                                                                    62
          In addition to government efforts, researchers could be further encouraged to facilitate
           use of scientific data in policy making. If research institutions would develop sharable
           databases and integrated frameworks for modeling to support projections for the
           understanding of medium and longer terms CC&A challenges this would better support
           CC&A-related policy making needs. Formal protocols for research and scientific
           contribution could be operationalized through specialized technical groups subordinated
           to NCCC.

Communication with business community for implementation of CC&A research in
economy
          To stimulate increased CC&A awareness, related research activities, and incorporation
           into policy making, the Romanian Government, could consider an annual consultation
           process with relevant stakeholders, for example via MEWF and NCCC, targeting the
           business community and or community organizations. The relevant central authorities
           could also be encouraged to establish mechanisms to stimulate direct utilization of CC&A
           research by each of the economic sectors, including by small and medium enterprises
           (SMEs) and start-ups, as relevant. To optimize efficiency, central authorities could also
           consider regularly assessing the impacts of joint participation in CC&A research projects.

          For topics not sufficiently covered in public institutions, central authorities may wish to
           consider implementing strategies to stimulate RDI through public-private partnerships
           on CC&A issues, such as by providing funding or other incentives for knowledge and
           technology transfer, demonstration projects and testing of new and innovative
           technologies.

          The more the relevant research outputs including results, conclusions,
           recommendations and good practice guidelines resulting from public research projects
           can be made publically available, particularly at the regional level, the more likely it will
           be integrated into decision making. To facilitate this, central authorities can encourage
           decentralized initiatives, promote increased cooperation at regional or local, e.g. urban
           level, among the research community and civil society, and other economic actors. This
           would potentially include increasing the awareness of the research by promoting it
           directly to interested parties, e.g. industry, farmers, population, etc. The Regional
           Environmental Protection Agencies (REAPs) or other appropriate regional or national
           institution would be well-positioned to facilitate local outreach, and could be also in
           charge of information exchange, such by operating a web page clearing house, organizing
           stakeholder meetings, product demonstrations, etc.

Communication of RDI results to citizens
          To increase public awareness, RDI institutions could be enlisted to help communicate
           environmental principles and risks from global climate change for Romania, such as by
           publicizing quantitative and qualitative information on emissions and other
           environmental costs and timetables for impacts, ‘what if’ scenarios and strategies for
           action. RDI institutions can directly increase public awareness by ensuring highlights from
           their research outputs are regularly shared with the general public, such as through


                                                                                                     63
            broadcast and print media, websites, trainings, public visit days to scientific institutions,
            and public conferences. To optimize effectiveness, messages should be informative,
            address any uncertainties and be appropriately tailored to the targeted groups, taking into
            account the anticipated education level and general familiarity with the topics presented.
           MEWF, via NCCC, could also consider regularly, e.g. annually, preparing a public report
            synthesizing the latest information, highlighting contributions from Romanian
            institutions on climate change issues as part of a broader information dissemination
            strategy.

Development of climate change RDI actions
MEWF is the main entity responsible for the design and implementation of climate change policy
nationally, including mitigation and adaptation, although other public and private entities have
important roles. Thus MEWF is best positioned to identify ways to help ensure CC&A issues are
included on agenda of all central and research institutions or educational curricula, and to facilitate
incorporating research results into CC&A decision making. Similarly positioned agencies have found it
helpful to draft a CC&A vision with clear steps, which is then implemented in a sustained way. To
achieve this, MEWF could involve NCCC more significantly, while using GHG inventory information
(e.g. highlighting the most important GHG sources within Romania), as the foundation for identifying
national needs on CC&A RDI activity. Options for MEWF to further stimulate RDI actions relating to
CC&A include:
       Option 1 – MEWF acts independently, taking leadership to identify issues and directly obtains
        expertise from other entities as needed, for example MEWF could organize scoping
        discussions through meetings or workshops with the technical expert groups of NCCC. This
        path assumes that NCCC is fully functional, such as through fluid information sharing at regular
        meetings with rich participation. MEWF could also issue tenders to obtain more information
        on points of concern, assuming there is sufficient time and financial resources for a tendering
        procedure.
        It is important to ensure information circulates both ways, from scientists to policy makers
        and vice versa. This appears to be a good solution to obtain the appropriate expertise on any
        particular issue. MEWF would need sufficient technical capacity to identify the relevant issues
        (supported by NCCC) and to manage input from consultants, e.g. to assess its quality or to
        understand cost-effectiveness as well as mitigation and adaptation potential of the RDI
        proposals. As analytical outputs become available, MEWF could proactively share such
        knowledge and/or establish mechanisms to reach the most interested parties, as discussed
        above.

       Option 2 – MEWF relies on institutional arrangements, as defined in national legislation, to
        identify issues and obtain needed scientific and technical input for reporting obligations
        implementation or to stimulate research. Central or public institutions, e.g. ministries and
        research institutions, may or may not be mandatorily involved, increasing the risk that a
        particular expertise may not be easily reached (e.g. if expertise is within the private sector).
        The relevant public institutions would need to ensure and maintain adequate capacity and
        knowledge on sectoral climate change issues within their institutional mandate. Individual



                                                                                                      64
        institutions would be responsible for publicizing and sharing information, whereas MEWF
        would only monitor the transfer of results to interested parties.
A combination of above options is also possible: for example, Option 1 may be a better fit for academic
subjects, including projections and economic analysis, while Option 2 may work better for
technological development.
Specifically, in developing such a system it is helpful to consider the following issues:

           The MEWF Public Policy Unit could facilitate the process of ensuring that CC&A RDI
            questions are addressed by all national and sectoral policies, strategies and action plans,
            as appropriate. The development of objectives for the different components would be
            most effective when coordinated and also integrated with the national and sectoral RDI
            priorities defined by NCCC technical expert groups. A good way to operationalized this is
            through NCCC technical groups, such as by using multi-year themes to be addressed in
            meeting agendas and regularly scheduled outputs that are reviewed by the MEWF and
            other central authorities, and include mechanisms for NCCC to provide feedback on the
            implementation of actions plan and strategies. Also, NCCC technical groups could review
            regularly CC&A-related reports produced under public tenders. Also, the MEWF can also
            leverage the NCCC to facilitate increased awareness of senior ministry and agency officials
            regarding CC&A RDI needs, as this will also help minimize duplication of public spending
            by different central authorities.
           MEWF may consider increasing the use scientific and technical analysis as the
            foundation for national policy making on CC&A, this could include disaggregating GHG
            emissions projections, major emission sources, or adaptation needs to the sub-
            national/regional level, impact assessments using ex-ante and ex-post estimates of GHG
            emission reductions from new policies and measures, optimization of national as well as
            decentralized institutional efforts for GHG mitigation and adaptation activities, etc. This
            would facilitate a more proactive strategy with long-term planning for CC&A. This, in turn,
            can promote paradigm shifts away from isolated studies of environmental change to more
            holistic approaches that more deeply address economic and societal dimensions,
            facilitating development of a low carbon economy and adaptation to climate change. In
            addition, this would further facilitate RDI efforts in the public and private sectors as well
            as national economic development toward low carbon pathways. RDI coordination, such
            as through NCCC technical groups, can also facilitate multidisciplinary analysis and more
            holistic perspectives.
           MEWF may find it useful to regularly assess the existing technical expertise and capacity
            needs to support Romania’s international negotiations as a Party to the UNFCCC as well
            as within the EU as a Member state. This expertise could be coordinated via technical
            groups of NCCC, ensuring coverage of the major GHG-emitting sectors. Techniques for the
            MEWF and/or NCCC to enhance capacity include improved communication, focused
            meetings or workshops, open participation meetings (that include expert non-members
            e.g. with peer-reviewed published papers on relevant topics) and MEWF staff and NCCC
            technical group members’ active participation in international scientific and technical
            meetings.



                                                                                                      65
           MEWF coordination with other relevant central authorities will help ensure availability
            of robust and accurate information on climate risks and vulnerability for each of the
            geographic zones, communities and economic activities at the national and regional scale
            in Romania. These assessments require substantial scientific capacities and technical
            skills. Re-assessment, approximately every 5 years, is recommended as the conditions as
            well as the scientific measurement techniques evolve.
           MEWF could consider, in coordination with other central authorities, initiating a national
            RDI programme to support climate change and adaptation research. Such a work
            programme could be developed by NCCC technical groups and subject to inter-ministerial
            approval and implementation (for example, through an annual research plan for each
            ministry). This programme could, for example, include targeted research on highest
            priority needs identified for Romania, such as major CC&A themes already being
            discussed: smart cities, low carbon footprint for food supply, water supply management,
            emigration and immigration, adaptation and resilient energy supply. The research needs
            could be further prioritized based on sector-specific objectives, e.g. each sectors’ most
            significant sources and sinks contribution to national GHG inventory, GHG emissions
            reduction potential, anticipated sectoral trends, benefit-cost analysis, adaptation
            potential, as well as addressing environmental and social risks. Relevant central
            authorities could have open tendering procedures for the necessary technical studies and
            applied research. As discussed above, MEWF may also wish to consider organizing high
            level information exchange to ensure the national CC&A research agenda is sufficiently
            captured by the subordinated research institutions.

           MEWF may wish to perform regular independent assessments of the level of
            institutional CC&A-related RDI support in Romania. The current approach consists of a
            large number of research institutions and other groups engaged in independent RDI
            activities that inadequately address CC&A policy making needs. Increasing coordination
            will reduce the risk of overlaps or redundant public spending. Several other countries have
            established dedicated public institutions to address this issue (e.g. CzechGlobe in Czech
            Republic at www.czechglobe.cz, PIK in Germany - https://www.pik-potsdam.de). MEWF
            could consider the most appropriate mechanism, such as whether enhancing the current
            approach (resembling a virtual national research network) leveraging the NCCC is more
            appropriate for Romania than, for example, a new dedicated national CC&A RDI center.
            Yet, such a national center could offer integrated interdisciplinary solutions for sectoral
            challenges and continuous input to policy making.


5.4 Education and Citizen Awareness on Climate Change Issues
This section provides an assessment of the overall awareness of Romanian citizens on CC&A topics, as
well as the prevalence of CC&A topics in formal education at all levels. It also includes
recommendations on how to further increase this awareness.

CC&A topics in formal education
In the Romanian society, there generally is a favorable attitude toward education at any age, as well
as substantial support for advanced and multilateral education for the younger generations. In


                                                                                                    66
Romania, education is highly institutionalized, structured and regulated. Formal education includes
mandated education which covers the period before adulthood as well as optional continuous long-
life education and training to enhance skills for career advancement and professional development.
In recent decades, there have been increasing requests from citizens as well as increasing services
from private institutions or NGOs offering more informal education options for those looking for
complementary personal development.
Education plays a crucial role in the sustainable development of any country. The education system
can be considered successful facilitating sustainable development if sustainability principles are
shared by its citizens as well as its professionals in any field.

In Romania, environmental issues are addressed in the curricula from kindergarten, to secondary
school to university as summarized below.

Primary and secondary school
Education regarding the natural environment already starts in primary school through regular learning
activities, such as by observing different natural phenomena. The core of environmental education is
incorporated into the secondary school curricula, when the progressive levels seek to ensure a gradual
deepening in understanding of the environment and sustainability principles through dedicated
lessons and activities.

University
At the university level, general ecology, environment or development subjects are offered, yet they
are often optional. A university curricula occasionally contains CC&A topics as its own discipline either
for undergraduate or graduate students. Instead, CC&A themes are captured within related
disciplines. However, it is not clear which messages or at what level of detail CC&A themes are
transmitted.

Doctoral and Post-doctoral level
Scientific subjects for doctoral and post-doc programmes in Romania mostly address research on the
physical basis for climate change (e.g. physics) as well as addressing various risks and climate
vulnerability. Yet, some specific GHG mitigation and adaptation topics, including solutions are only
addressed in a limited way, if at all. Doctoral theses addressing technological innovation focus on
specific technical aspects (such as for energy efficient equipment). Over time, more focus on GHG
mitigation benefits and quantitative and quantitative analysis addressing CC&A issues is needed.

Overall assessment of CC&A-related education
In summary, although inconsistent across universities, current CC&A subjects include:
            Legal: international, such as from the EU and UNFCCC, processes and the necessity of
             understanding the legal implications and national transpositions required;
            Technology development and engineering: energy efficiency, alternative energy,
             renewable energy supply technologies;

            Economics: shifts in supply of and demand for resources, costs, opportunities, economic
             losses;



                                                                                                      67
              Social sciences: behavioral change, emigration and immigration, rural versus urban
               development trends;
              Sustainable development and use of natural resources: sustainable agriculture,
               environmental risk and mitigation, emission reductions from waste recovery and reuse,
               impacts of energy use from different supply sources and new technologies to address
               environmental and atmospheric GHG balance, eco-development, agro-ecology, water
               availability;

              GHG methodological development: techniques of measurement of emissions.
Universities appear to focus on offering one-time, short-term, and ad-hoc or project related, training
courses on climate change (especially within the framework of EU programmes). Such trainings may
be effective for working professionals seeking to update their knowledge, however more structural
adjustments with a coherent climate change track will further help ensuring students’ overall
preparedness for this need in the workforce.

CC&A topics in informal education and citizen awareness
According to EU Eurobarometer 37270 the Romanian population generally appears to show little
concern with regard to climate change risks relative to other MS. For example, less than 17% of
Romanians reported having the perception that climate change is a serious global threat. The same
EU Eurobarometer study indicates that Romanians are the least likely of any EU MS’ citizens to report
having taken any recent personal action on climate change. It is also shown as an uneven knowledge
within society: much less known in rural than in urban areas and, more known by youth than older
generations.
To increase citizen awareness, authorities can hold public events focusing on climate change
knowledge dissemination with clear messages and promoting significant citizen participation, as
discussed below.
It appears that NGOs can usually be quite effective in delivering awareness and education to citizens
on climate change mitigation issues and promoting climate actions, such as energy efficiency,
afforestation, recycling and waste management (e.g. leaflet Fenomenul schimbarilor climatice- ghid
introductiv of ‘Terra Mileniul III’ Foundation, at “Fenomenul schimbarilor climatice- ghid introductiv’
of ‘Terra Mileniul III’ Foundation, at www.terramileniultrei.ro; recycling actions of Viitor Plus at
www.viitorplus.ro; and Coalitia pentru Mediu at www.coalitiapentrumediu.ro). They can be a good
resource for public institutions to leverage in any awareness campaign.


5.5 Options and Recommendations for education and awareness
Central authorities may wish to consider methods to ensure appropriate training of teachers,
professors and public clerks at all levels, and to inform the general public as well as to enrich CC&A-
related topics in school curricula at all levels.




70
     http://ec.europa.eu/public_opinion/archives/ebs/ebs_372_en.pdf


                                                                                                    68
Recommendations on ways to improve formal and non-formal education and awareness
The following parallel steps would help to facilitate more deeply integrating climate change issues into
formal education at all levels:

           MER in cooperation with MEWF, could consider organizing and supporting systematic
            learning programmes for teachers and educators. This would help ensure that teachers
            fully understand the topics and can effectively integrate them into curricula for their
            students (see below). Training programmes would be most helpful when focused on
            providing teachers with sufficient details regarding the relevant background information,
            such as addressing atmospheric changes, warming trends, extreme events frequency, and
            not only rely on transmitting simple messages. Public educational institutions can also
            encourage development of educational programmes facilitating mobility or e-learning for
            students and teachers.71

           MER may wish to initiate efforts to more deeply integrate CC&A topics into school
            curricula according to the level of education. The relevant topics can be offered as
            separate courses or more explicitly included in regular curricula of existing courses.
            Coursework should be progressive in complexity, and linked with economic and societal
            issues, to provide more comprehensive understanding of sustainable development
            concepts over time. An expert assessment could be conducted to determine the most
            appropriate organization and staging of CC&A-related curricula, so it is tailored to the
            grade-level as well as individual school characteristics. Standardized content and
            messaging for various grade-levels could even be subject to debate coordinated by the
            MER or their delegate, and national standards could be also developed, leveraging
            international good practices regarding climate change learning.
Training programmes can engage working professionals and other adults, as part of the continuous
lifelong learning concept already present in formal and informal education. This programme could
potentially primarily target public employees from national, regional and local administrations, as they
already are involved in CC&A-related decision making now, as this would facilitate more informed
decision making that more deeply incorporates CC&A challenges and opportunities. Such programmes
can be supported by EU funds.
MEWF could consider developing public programmes targeted at educating the general population
on what is needed to manage and adapt to the effects of climate change and accept changes in living
standards or usual practices. The most useful programmes would be culturally-relevant and tailored
according to content needs as well as the anticipated education levels of the audience. Public
authorities could seek the most appropriate channels for continuous communication to the citizens,
this may include linking to religious activities and local leaders, and taking advantage of any
opportunity to promote awareness of climate change (e.g. local fairs or public conferences with
sessions on climate change organized by schools, associations and/or civil organizations).
To improve the visibility of its existing CC&A activities amongst other central and regional authorities,
research and education institutions and the general population, MEWF could further facilitate sharing
more information on GHG inventories and trends, outcomes of international UNFCCC and EU

71
  See for example, the US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s (NOAA) literacy and
professional opportunity for teachers: http://oceanservice.noaa.gov/education/literacy.html)


                                                                                                      69
negotiations, as well as future projections and changes expected due to anticipated local temperature
increases and shifts in precipitation patterns.
At the local level, teachers could be tapped for a more significant role in communication of
information to the general population. They can help stakeholders engage with and better
understand the information communicated, such as by providing additional context and examples of
what other people and communities are doing to address CC&A. Local authorities may wish to conduct
assessments within their jurisdiction to determine the education needs of the most vulnerable, where
the most significant local impacts are anticipated as well as those in the best position to act, these
groups would be expected to include the private sector and farmers, socially marginal groups The local
awareness programmes could then be tailored as necessary to address the assessments’ findings.
MEWF can coordinate with the other central authorities and institutions represented in NCCC to
ensure that all reports/documentation prepared from public funding are publicly available, e.g.
online, and contain a summary geared toward the general public. MEWF, through NCCC and possibly
with public consultation, may wish to explore the usefulness of a separate CC&A knowledge
management website open to the public.
Central and local authorities can also support their employees in taking courses on CC&A themes, and
these authorities can be encouraged to take advantage of local NGOs with more advanced experience
of awareness raising in the general population.


5.6 Analyzing options for improved RDI & EA inputs in the National Communications
As discussed in Section 2, Romania, as a Party to UNFCCC, has to develop, regularly update, publish
and submit a National Communication (NC) to UNFCCC every four years, and as a MS of the EU has to
provide a copy to European Commission (according to 525/2013/UE). The two submissions have to be
fully consistent (i.e. EU reports only EU coordinated actions, strictly MS national information may not
be included under EU submission). Above all, MEWF is responsible to provide transparent reporting,
and ensure consistency checks of information included in such reporting is conducted with other
published data (by line ministries, EU institutions) as well as the EU submission to UNFCCC.
In preparing previous submissions, the MEWF has encountered difficulties in collecting adequate and
timely data and information for a complete submission of Romania’s efforts regarding research,
development and innovation (RDI) as well as education and awareness (EA).
As discussed in other Section 5 subsections, collection of data on RDI and EA can be hampered by the
fact that research institutes do not necessarily provide updated information online on their CC&A
related projects and that CC&A is not necessarily separately delineated in national research priorities.
Another structural challenge results from the fact that data collection addressing RDI and EA is not
currently included in national systems supporting climate change policy (e.g. national system under
Kyoto Protocol, or national system for policies and measures, and projections), thus it needs an
individualized approach.
It is not clear how other Annex I Parties to UNFCCC collect RDI and EA information, i.e. if they have in
place systematic approaches or act on an ad-hoc basis as well. What can be noted in other NC
submissions is a harmonized format for reporting information (e.g. structured on international,
national and sectorial initiatives, and on economic sectors).



                                                                                                     70
Within this context, we have analyzed three options MEWF could consider for possible improvements
in data collection and reporting for RDI and EA in the NC (see Table 14). The key differences between
the three options are defined in terms of MEWF effort needed (e.g. lowest effort with Option 1), as
well as the advantages and disadvantages for CC national processes (e.g. costs, risk of incomplete
information, providing CC fora for Romanian scientific community). The main feature of all of these
options is the suggestion for more staff with higher levels of expertise within MEWF on these topics.
The second feature may be that none of these options is prescriptive as such and combinations can
be explored, and may even be more appropriate (e.g. for a difficult sector, Option 1 may work better,
i.e. where information is more within private sector). For optimal results, the approach for RDI and EA
should be adapted to existing circumstances at the moment of data collection as needed, e.g. using
the best solution for available funds and institutional arrangements.
Table 14 Options of MEWF for data collection and compilation on research and systematic observations, education and
awareness for preparation of the National Communication

                                              Option 2: organize an            Option 3 – support an active
   Analysis     Option 1: employ a
                                             “information collection         National Commission for Climate
   criteria         consultant
                                                   workshop”                          Change (NCCC)
 MEWF           MEWF prepares
 effort         terms of reference
                                         MEWF must have adequate
                according to                                                MEWF ensures an active NCCC
                                         personnel to prepare for the
                requirements                                                whose members are all informed
                                         workshop(s), including
                (including the latest                                       of NC requirements;
                                         preparing the agendas, finding
                guidelines,                                                 Technical expertise resides with
                                         appropriate moderators and
                methodologies and                                           NCCC members, who then need to
                                         the lists of participants. MEWF
                formats agreed upon                                         provide direct input into a
                                         also secures funding for
                by the COP or EU)                                           template prepared by the MEWF;
                                         workshop. It also requires
                and hires a                                                 MEWF still needs adequate and
                                         MEWF to have appropriately
                consultant;                                                 experienced MEWF staff to collect
                                         experienced and sufficient staff
                MEWF needs                                                  relevant information and to
                                         to collect relevant information
                appropriate expertise                                       process data collected and to
                                         and to process data collected
                and professionally                                          develop the final report;
                                         and then develop the final
                adequate staff to
                                         report;                            Template developed and activity to
                check the final draft
                report;                  Questionnaire developed and        be organized every four years.
                                         activity to be organized every
                Activity to be
                                         four years.
                organized every four
                years.
 Advantages                              MEWF may collect information       Debate within NCCC would help
                                         by a precise questionnaire         ensure a trans-sectorial
                Respect the              required of all participants;      background of decisions, especially
                deadlines for EU and     MEWF and scientific                if more in-depth actions is needed
                UNFCCC submissions;      community get adequate             for data collection;
                MEWF personnel can       understanding of each other
                focus on other policy    needs and status;                  NCCC could advise on more in-
                or reporting matters;    Participants may be present in     depth actions in order to collect
                                         either individual capacity as      needed data and information (e.g.
                                         independent experts or             questionnaires, set –up a web-



                                                                                                                71
                                          Option 2: organize an            Option 3 – support an active
 Analysis    Option 1: employ a
                                         “information collection         National Commission for Climate
 criteria        consultant
                                               workshop”                          Change (NCCC)
                                      institutional representative;     based tool for data collection, or
                                      Workshop would act as a           hold workshops);
                                      forum for capacity building and
                                                                        Agenda of NCCC may regularly
                                      awareness on CC&A issues,
                                                                        include issues related to research &
                                      foster partnerships, frame
                                                                        systematic observation and
                                      signals to policy makers;
                                                                        education & awareness
                                      Very inclusive range of
                                      stakeholders, if workshop(s)      Final draft may be reviewed by
                                      has/have adequate publicity       NCCC;
                                      including private sector          Due to the institutional
                                                                        representation in the NCCC, it may
                                                                        result in a better integration of RDI
                                                                        in overall implementation of
                                                                        institutions agenda and national
                                                                        implementation of CC policy and
                                                                        obligations;

                                                                        NCCC is a forum for its members to
                                                                        provide and increase their own
                                                                        knowledge and understand issues
                                                                        faced in other sectors;

                                                                        MEWF has very good
                                                                        understanding of how CC&A-
                                                                        related research and observation
                                                                        evolve;

                                                                        Option provides complete and non-
                                                                        biased information covering all
                                                                        economy sectors.

Dis-         MEWF may not have        Significant effort for MEWF       This approach may have biased
advantages   full understanding of    staff for the workshop(s)         output related to weak
             the research and         preparation;                      participation of
             systematic               Possibly high costs (unless       institutions/institution
             observation or           participant costs are             representatives in NCCC activity or
             education and            encouraged to be covered from     missing non-represented
             awareness issues,        own sources, especially for       institutions (e.g. universities,
             since the final report   publically financed projects);    private sector research);
             is prepared by the       Possible need for parallel
                                                                        Individual effort required to NCCC
             consultant;              workshops on sectoral issues
                                                                        members;
             Potential lack of        whose organization may
             continuous               require support from NCCC or      MEWF personnel still has to
             assessment at            deeper advance consultations      process data collected from
             national level if data   among experts;                    template and produce final report;
             collection is sporadic   Need for strong moderators
             (between successive      and specialized personnel in
             NCs);                    collecting information;


                                                                                                             72
                                         Option 2: organize an           Option 3 – support an active
Analysis   Option 1: employ a
                                        “information collection        National Commission for Climate
criteria       consultant
                                              workshop”                         Change (NCCC)
           May be difficult for     Risk of collecting qualitatively
           MEWF to confirm          inadequate and biased
           information provided     information (e.g. because of
           by the consultant;       missing participants from some
           It may be difficult to   sectors);
           keep the consultant      MEWF personnel still has to
           available in the         process data collected and
           process of UNFCCC        produce final report.
           review of the
           submission;
           Time consumed by
           preparing and issuing
           tenders;
           MEWF puts low
           effort to review final
           report.




                                                                                                     73
6. Concluding Remarks
The National Strategy on Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth and the CC Action Plan
(LCGGP) must aim to for practical yet effective M&E and Reporting activities, building upon and
improving the existing systems and current activities of the institutions involved that provides valuable
and accurate data to better report on the targets established and assess policy effectiveness.
In support of the LCGGP, the World Bank has prepared this report with the aim of helping the
Romanian Government to operationalize the strategic path chosen by the country for implementing
its NCCS. This report focuses on MRV activities and requirements stemming from EU and UNFCCC
obligations, and new maritime GHG reporting requirements. It also seeks to provide additional context
on voluntary MRV activities happening at the local level and describes scientific and technological
activities and organizations that may feed data into the LCGGP.




                                                                                                      74
References
This section provides the references used in this report, organized by subsection.


Section 1 References
Dagnet, Y., Fei, T., Elliott, C., Qiu, Y. 2014. “Improving Transparency and Accountability in the Post-
2020 Climate Regime: A Fair Way Forward.” Working Paper. Washington, DC: Agreement for Climate
Transformation 2015 (ACT 2015). Available online at www.wri.org/our-work/project/ act-
2015/publications.
Ecologic Institute. 2014. Assessment of climate change policies in the context of the European
Semester, Country Report: Germany
EU Commission, 2015. Regulation (EU) 2015/757 of 29 April 2015 on the monitoring, reporting and
verification of carbon dioxide emissions from maritime transport, and amending Directive
2009/16/EC, http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32015R0757&from=EN
EU Commission. 2014. Guidance Document on Monitoring and Evaluation. European Cohesion Fund;
European Regional Development Fund. Concepts and Recommendations.
EU Commission. 2014. Implementing Regulation (EU) No 749/2014 of 30 June 2014 on structure,
format, submission processes and review of information reported by Member States pursuant to
Regulation (EU) No 525/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council.
EU Commission. 2014. Implementing Regulation (EU) No 215/2014 of 7 March 2014 laying down
rules for implementing Regulation (EU) No 1303/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council
laying down common provisions on the European Regional Development Fund, the European Social
Fund, the Cohesion Fund, the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development and the European
Maritime and Fisheries Fund.
EU Commission. 2014. Delegated Regulation C(2014) 1539 establishing substantive requirements for
a Union inventory system and taking into account changes in the global warming potentials and
internationally agreed inventory guidelines pursuant to Regulation (EU) No 525/2013 of the
European Parliament and of the Council.
EU Commission, 2013, “Guidelines on developing adaption strategies,” Commission Staff Working
Document. http://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/adaptation/what/docs/swd_2013_134_en.pdf
EU Commission, 2013, “Greenhouse gas Monitoring Mechanism Regulation (MMR). Regulation (EU)
No 525/2013.EU Commission, 2013. REGULATION (EU) No 525/2013 OF THE EUROPEAN
PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL of 21 May 2013 on a mechanism for monitoring and reporting
greenhouse gas emissions and for reporting other information at national and Union level relevant
to climate change and repealing Decision No 280/2004/EC
EU Commission, 2013. DECISION No 529/2013/EU OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE
COUNCIL of 21 May 2013 on accounting rules on greenhouse gas emissions and removals resulting
from activities relating to land use, land-use change and forestry and on information concerning
actions relating to those activities



                                                                                                    75
EU Commission, 2009. DECISION No 406/2009/EC OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE
COUNCIL of 23 April 2009 on the effort of Member States to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions
to meet the Community’s greenhouse gas emission reduction commitments up to 2020
EU Commission, 2009. COMMISSION STAFF WORKING DOCUMENT SWD(2012) 107 final - Guidelines
for the 2012 technical review of greenhouse gas emission inventories to support the determination
of Member States' annual emission allocations under Decision 406/2009/EC. Available at:
http://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/effort/docs/swd_2012_107_en.pdf.
EU Commission, 2003. DIRECTIVE 2003/87/EC OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE
COUNCIL of 13 October 2003 establishing a scheme for greenhouse gas emission allowance trading
within the Community and amending Council Directive 96/61/EC (Text with EEA relevance)
European Environment Agency, 2013, “EMEP/EEA Air Pollutant Emission Inventory Guidebook,”
Technical Report No. 12/2013. http://www.eea.europa.eu/publications/emep-eea-guidebook-
2013ent of climate change policies in the context of the European Semester, Country Report:
Germany
European Topic Centre on Air and Climate Change (ETC/ACC), 2010, “Guiding principles for
adaptation to climate change in Europe.”
http://acm.eionet.europa.eu/docs/ETCACC_TP_2010_6_guiding_principles_cc_adaptation.pdf
Falconer A, Micale V, Vasa A, Yu Y, Zuckerman J, 2012. Meeting Emerging MRV Needs in China,
Germany, Italy, and the United States: Are Countries Prepared? Climate Policy Initiative.
Meyer-Ohlendorf, N. et al. 2015, An Effective Governance System for 2030 EU Climate and Energy
Policy: Design and Requirements Ecologic Institute.
http://www.ecologic.eu/sites/files/publication/2015/meyer-ohlendorf-15-effective-governance-
syystem-2030.pdf
UNFCCC, 2013. Decision 24/CP.19 Revision of the UNFCCC reporting guidelines on annual inventories
for Parties included in Annex I to the Convention.


Section 2 References
Ecofys, 2014. Fourth EU ETS MRAV Compliance Review: Final Report,
http://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/ets/monitoring/docs/report_4th_ets_mrav_compliance_en.pdf
Ecofys, 2014. Fourth EU ETS MRAV Compliance Review: Annex II Country Fiches,
http://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/ets/monitoring/docs/report_4th_ets_mrav_compliance_annex_
2_en.pdf
EU Commission, 2015. Regulation (EU) 2015/757 of 29 April 2015 on the monitoring, reporting and
verification of carbon dioxide emissions from maritime transport, and amending Directive
2009/16/EC,
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32015R0757&from=EN
EU Commission, 2013. Regulation (EC) No 525/2013 of 21 May 2013 on a mechanism for monitoring
and reporting greenhouse gas emissions and for reporting other information at national and Union
level relevant to climate change and repealing Decision No 280/2004/EC,


                                                                                                 76
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2013:165:0013:0040:en:PDF
EU Commission, 2009. Directive 2009/16/EC of 23 April 2009 on port State control,
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2009:131:0057:0100:EN:PDF
EU Commission, 2009. Directive 2009/21/EC of 23 April 2009 on compliance with flag State
requirements
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2009:131:0132:0135:EN:PDF
EU Commission, 2008. Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 of 9 July 2008 setting out the requirements for
accreditation and market surveillance relating to the marketing of products and repealing Regulation
(EEC) No 339/93,
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2008:218:0030:0047:en:PDF
EU Commission, 2002. Regulation (EC) No 1406/2002 of 27 June 2002 establishing a European
Maritime Safety Agency,
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32002R1406&from=EN
Romanian Government, 2014. Decision modifying Government Decision No. 811 /2010,
http://mt.ro/web14/documente/acte-normative/2014/12_06/text_proiect.pdf
Romanian Government, 2011. Decision no. 250/2011 of 05 April 2011 transposing Directive
2009/21/EC,
http://www.rna.ro/servicii/riie/acte_normative/aprilie2011/Ordin%20nr.%20250%20din%2004.201
1.html
Romanian Government, 2010. Decision No. 811 /2010 of 4 August 2010 transposing Directive
2009/16/EC
http://www.rna.ro/servicii/riie/acte_normative/oct2010/Hotarare%20nr.%20811%20din%2008.201
0.html
Romanian Government, 2006. Decision no. 780/2006 of 14 June 2006 establishing the EU ETS and
transposing Directive 2003/87/EC,
http://mmediu.ro/app/webroot/uploads/files/2014-10-20_HG_780_2006.pdf
The following interviews and email information exchanges were also conducted as part of the
background research on the new EU Maritime MRV Regulation:
      Interview and information exchange with Ms Gherghița (Geta) Nicodim, Greenhouse gas
       expert, Climate Change Directorate, Ministry of Environment, Waters and Forestry on the
       topic of transposal of relevant EU Directives into the national legislation and identifying
       relevant institutions, on 12 May 2015.

      Interview with Mr. Marian Popescu, National PSC Coordinator, Romanian Naval Authorities,
       on the topic of port Stat control and inspections, 19 May 2015.
      Information exchange with Ms Daniela Ionescu, Director for International Relations and
       Quality Management, Romanian Accreditation Association (RENAR), on the topic of
       accreditation of verifiers, on 10 June 2015.


                                                                                                 77
       Interview with Heiko Kunst, Policy Officer for GHG emissions from maritime transport, DG
        Climate Action, European Commission on the status of the regulation and further steps by the
        European Commission, on 30 April 2015.


Section 3 References
How to develop a Sustainable Energy Action Plan (SEAP)- Guidebook,
http://www.covenantofmayors.eu
Large Infrastructure Operational Programme, http://www.fonduri-ue.ro
Technical Assistance Operational Programme, http://www.fonduri-ue.ro
Regional Operational Programme, http://www.mdrap.ro
Quick Reference Guide Financing Opportunities for Local sustainable Energy 2014-2020, published in
December 2014, http://www.covenantofmayors.eu
The Covenant of Mayors in Figures and Performance Indicators: 6-year Assessment, JRC
Science and Policy Reports, http://ec.europa.eu/jrc/en/institutes/iet
2006 Guidelines – Volume 1- general Guidance and reporting
http://www.ipcc.ch./pdf/activity/2006gls-brochure.pdf


Section 4 References
Politică Regională de Inovare - Strategia Regională de Inovare Regiunea Vest, România 2005-2020.
Available at: www.nord-vest.ro
Dolghin N., Sarcinschi A., Dinu MS (2004) Riscuri şi ameninţări la adresa securităţii României.
Actualitate şi perspectivă (2004). Editura Universităţii Naţionale de Apărare Bucureşti. Available at:
http://cssas.unap.ro/ro/pdf_studii/riscuri_si_amenintari_actualitate_si_perspectiva.pdf
European Commission Research and Innovation performance in EU Member States and Associated
countries Innovation Union progress at country level Luxembourg: Publications Office of the
European Union 2013 — 330 pp. Available at: https://ec.europa.eu/research/innovation-
union/pdf/state-of-the-union/2012/innovation_union_progress_at_country_level_2013.pdf




                                                                                                     78
       Romania Climate Change Advisory Report: D2 – Monitoring, Reporting, and Verification




                                                Annexes

Annex 1. Giurgiu Emission Inventory – Energy Use and CO2 Tables
The following tables provide snapshots of the energy consumption for Giurgiu’s selected key sectors
and CO2 emissions; Giurgiu also separately calculates urban heating and combined heat and power
energy use and CO2 emissions.
Table A1-1a: Giurgiu Energy consumption, 2010




                                                                                                79
        Romania Climate Change Advisory Report: D2 – Monitoring, Reporting, and Verification


Table A1-1b: Giurgiu CO2 emissions, key sectors, 2010




Table A1-2: Giurgiu Urban heating, CHP and CO2 emissions




                                                                                               80
                                              Romania Climate Change Advisory Report: D2 – Monitoring, Reporting, and Verification



 Annex 2. Institutional Contributors to Scientific Knowledge on CC&A
 Table A2-15 provides an overview of the key institutions that contribute to scientific knowledge relating to climate change and adaptation (CC&A) in Romania,
 such as by addressing relevant environmental factors, processes or features of society/population behaviour. The table includes elements both directly and
 indirectly mentioned as related to CC&A by the respective institution. Many other institutions may also conduct relevant research, such as institutions in
 subordinated to Romanian Academy including Institutul de Economie Naţională, Institutul de Economie Mondială “Costin Murgescu”, Institutul de Sociologie,
 however there was insufficient information available online to assess their contributions.

 Table A2-15 Overview of major institutional contributors to scientific knowledge on CC&A knowledge in Romania


                                                                                                                       Research activity

                                          Systematic                                                                       Mitigation and development of a low carbon society
Institute or organization
                                          observation           Understanding Impact, vulnerability and
                                                                                                              Energy and                                 Economy
                                                               natural processes    adaptation                               Management of natural                       Public health, social,
                                                                                                              transport,                                 and green
                                                                                                                                  resources                                  community
                                                                                                               industry                                   growth
                                                                Atmosphere,
 Administratia Nationala de             Atmospheric and
                                                                climate,
 Meteorologie (ANM)                     terrestrial climate,
                                                                weather, land
 (http://www.meteoromania.ro/anm)       weather
                                                                use
                                        River mapping,          Above and
 Institutul National de Hidrologie si
                                        hydrological            underground
 Gospodarirea Apelor (INHGA)
                                        observations,           hidrology/wat
 (http://www.inhga.ro/)
                                        flooding                er resources
                                                                Pedology, soil
 Institutul Național de Cercetare-                              (bio)chemistry
 Dezvoltare pentru Pedologie,                                   , soil quality,
 Agrochimie si Protecția Mediului       Soil resources          agriculture
 (INCDPAPM-ICPA)                                                and
 (http://www.icpa.ro/)                                          environmental
                                                                protection
                                                                                  Conservative
 Institutul Național de Cercetare-                              Agricultural
                                                                                  agriculture, agricultural
 Dezvoltare Agricolă Fundulea (INCDA)                           crops and                                                  Nitrate management
                                                                                  crops and forages
 (www.ricic.ro)                                                 production
                                                                                  selection



                                                                                                                                                                                                  81
                                                 Romania Climate Change Advisory Report: D2 – Monitoring, Reporting, and Verification


                                                                                                                         Research activity

                                             Systematic                                                                      Mitigation and development of a low carbon society
Institute or organization
                                             observation        Understanding Impact, vulnerability and
                                                                                                             Energy and                                     Economy
                                                               natural processes    adaptation                                 Management of natural                       Public health, social,
                                                                                                             transport,                                     and green
                                                                                                                                    resources                                  community
                                                                                                              industry                                       growth
 Institutul Național de Cercetare-
                                                                Crops
 Dezvoltare pentru Cartof si Sfecla de                                            Potato selection, pests
                                                                resistance and
 Zahar Braşov (INCDCSZ)                                                           control
                                                                tolerance
 (www.potato.ro)
 Institutul Național de Cercetare-
 Dezvoltare pentru Biologie şi Nutriţie
                                                                                                                             Reducing nitrogen emissions
 Animală Baloteşti (INCDBNA)                                                                                                                                             Food safety
                                                                                                                             from livestock
 (www.ibna.ro)

 Institutul Național de Cercetare-
                                                                Forest decline,
 Dezvoltare pentru Silvicultura “Marin
                                           Forest health and    wildlife                                    Woody fast
 Dracea”, including Inventarul                                                    Insects and diseases,
                                           forest related       dynamics,                                   growing
 National al Vegetatiei Forestiere                                                land improvement
                                           parameters           land                                        species
 (INCDS,IFN)
                                                                conversions
 (http://roifn.ro/site/)
                                                                                  Coordination of
                                                                                  agricultural research,
 Academia de Stiinte Agricole si Silvice                                          supports development
 (http://www.asas.ro/wcmqs/)                                                      of programmes, policy,
                                                                                  strategies on
                                                                                  agriculture
                                           State forest                           Forest stand
 Regia Nationala a Padurilor Romsilva      damages by                             vulnerability,
 (www.rosilva.ro)                          insects, storms,                       biodiversity
                                           others                                 conservation
 Institutul Național de Cercetare-
 Dezvoltare pentru Imbunătăţiri                                                                                              Design of irrigation systems
 Funciare (ISPIF)(http://ispif.ro/)
 Institutul Național de Cercetare-         River corridors                                                  Geothermal
 Dezvoltare pentru Domeniul                mapping, soil                                                    resources
                                                                                  Landslide risk mapping,
 Geologiei, Geofizicii, Geochimiei şi      properties                                                       mapping,
 Teledetecţiei Bucureşti (IGR)             mapping                                                          shale gas




                                                                                                                                                                                                    82
                                                 Romania Climate Change Advisory Report: D2 – Monitoring, Reporting, and Verification


                                                                                                                          Research activity

                                             Systematic                                                                       Mitigation and development of a low carbon society
Institute or organization
                                             observation        Understanding Impact, vulnerability and
                                                                                                            Energy and                                         Economy
                                                               natural processes    adaptation                                  Management of natural                       Public health, social,
                                                                                                            transport,                                         and green
                                                                                                                                     resources                                  community
                                                                                                             industry                                           growth
 (www.igr.ro)                                                                                             resources
                                                                                                          mapping
                                                                                Environmental Danube
 Institutul Național de Cercetare-
                                                                                and Black Sea history,    Sea-based
 Dezvoltare pentru Geologie şi                                                                                                Sustainable management of
                                                                                coastal adaptation and    wind energy
 Geoecologie Marină Bucureşti                                                                                                 geo-biodiversity and land
                                                                                mitigation, erosion       potential, CO2
 (GEOECOMAR)                                                                                                                  resources
                                                                                management, marine        CCS
 (www.geoecomar.ro)
                                                                                geohazards
 National Institute for Research-          Physical,
 Marine Development “Grigore               chemical, and
 Antipa”(RMRI)                             biological marine
 (http://www.rmri.ro/)                     environment
 Institutul National pentru Cercetare si                                                                                      Biodiversity, conservation of
 Dezvoltare pentru Stinte Biologice                             Biodiversity,                             Biotechnology       plant resources, remote
 (INCDSB Bucureti)                                              genetics                                  for biofuels        sensing on forest, river basin
 (http://www.dbioro.eu/)                                                                                                      management
                                                                                                          Smart
 Institutul National pentru Cercetare si                                                                  materials for
 Dezvoltare pentru Fizica Materialelor                                                                    energy
 (INCDFM) (www.infim.ro)                                                                                  industry
                                                                                                          application
 Institutul National pentru Cercetare si
 Dezvoltare pentru Fizica Pamantului       Earthquakes
 (INCDFP) (http://www.infp.ro)
                                                                Atmospheric
                                                                research,                                 Energy
 Institutul National pentru Cercetare si
                                                                aerosol                                   storage,
 Dezvoltare pentru Opto-electronica
                                                                climatology,                              Biofuels/
 (INOE2000)
                                                                changes of                                renewable
 (http://www.inoe.inoe.ro)
                                                                urban                                     fuels
                                                                systems,




                                                                                                                                                                                                     83
                                                Romania Climate Change Advisory Report: D2 – Monitoring, Reporting, and Verification


                                                                                                                     Research activity

                                              Systematic                                                                 Mitigation and development of a low carbon society
Institute or organization
                                              observation    Understanding Impact, vulnerability and
                                                                                                        Energy and                                      Economy
                                                            natural processes    adaptation                                Management of natural                       Public health, social,
                                                                                                        transport,                                      and green
                                                                                                                                resources                                  community
                                                                                                         industry                                        growth
                                                             atmospheric
                                                             particles
                                                                                                       Smart
                                                                                                       transport,
 Institutul National pentru Cercetare si
                                                                                                       technologic
 Dezvoltare pentru Tehnologii
                                                                                                       producer
 Moleculare si Izotopice
                                                                                                       biodiesel,
 (INCDTIM)(http://www.itim-cj.ro)
                                                                                                       alternative
                                                                                                       energy
 Institutul National pentru Cercetare si
 Dezvoltare pentru Masinarii si                                                                        Biomass crops,
                                                                                                                         Soil conservation
 Instalatii Destinate Agriculturii si                                                                  bio-
                                                                                                                         technologies
 Industriei Alimentare                                                                                 combustibles
 (INMA)(www.inma.ro)
                                                             Biodiversity,
 Institutul de Biologie al Academiei
                                                             ecological
 Romane (IBIOL) (http://www.ibiol.ro)
                                                             zoning
 Institutul de Cercetare a Calităţii Vieţii
 al Academiei Romane (ICCV)                                                                                                                                          Economie socială
 (http://www.iccv.ro)
 Institutul de Economie Agrara al
                                                                                                                                                                     Economic models for
 Academiei Romane (EADR)                                                                                                 Agricultural soils resources
                                                                                                                                                                     regional development
 (http://www.eadr.ro/)
                                                                                                       Earth
 Institutul de Geodinamică "Sabba                                                                      geophysics
 S.Ştefănescu" al Academiei Romane                                                                     and climate
                                                                                                       interaction
                                                                                                                                                        Economic
 Institutul de Geografie al Academiei                        Regional
                                                                                                                                                        impacts on
 Romane (IGAR)                                               projections of
                                                                                                                                                        major
 (http://www.geoinst.ro/)                                    climate
                                                                                                                                                        sectors




                                                                                                                                                                                                84
                                               Romania Climate Change Advisory Report: D2 – Monitoring, Reporting, and Verification


                                                                                                                        Research activity

                                           Systematic                                                                       Mitigation and development of a low carbon society
Institute or organization
                                           observation         Understanding Impact, vulnerability and
                                                                                                           Energy and                                     Economy
                                                              natural processes    adaptation                                 Management of natural                       Public health, social,
                                                                                                           transport,                                     and green
                                                                                                                                   resources                                  community
                                                                                                            industry                                       growth
 Institutul Naţional de Cercetări
                                                                                                                                                                        Adaptation to social and
 Economice al Academiei Romane
                                                                                                                                                                        economic changes
 (INCE) (http://www.ince.ro)
 Institutul de Prognoză Economică al
                                                                                                                                                                        Indicators of economic
 Academiei Romane (IPE)
                                                                                                                                                                        and social performance
 (http://www.ipe.ro)
                                                                                                          Wind power
                                                                                                          plant,
                                                                                                          renewables
 Institutl de Studii si Proiectari
                                                                                                          and co-
 Energetice (ISPE)
                                                                                                          generation,
 (http://www.ispe.ro)
                                                                                                          optimiszations
                                                                                                          of supply
                                                                                                          schemes
                                                                               Crops tolerance,
 Universitatea de Stiinte Agricole si    Agricultural crops                    economic risks for
                                                                                                                            Improvement of
 Medicina Veterinara Bucuresti           and production                        farms, mapping risks
                                                                                                                            conservative technologies
 (USAMV) (www.usamv.ro/)                 risks                                 for crops, horticultural
                                                                               species & livestock
                                                                                                          Recover
                                                                                                          energy from
 Politehnica din Bucuresti (UPB)                                                                          waste,
 (http://www.upb.ro/)                                                                                     alternative
                                                                                                          energy
                                                                                                          sources
                                                                                                                                                                        System for management
 Universitatea Babes Bolyai (UBB)                                              River basin                CCS
                                                                                                                                                                        and intelligent analysis
 (http://www.ubbcluj.ro/ro/)                                                   management                 technology
                                                                                                                                                                        of diseases
 Universitatea de Medicina si Farmacie
 Cluj (UMF)
 (http://www.umfcluj.ro/ro/)




                                                                                                                                                                                                   85
                                             Romania Climate Change Advisory Report: D2 – Monitoring, Reporting, and Verification


                                                                                                                Research activity

                                           Systematic                                                               Mitigation and development of a low carbon society
Institute or organization
                                           observation    Understanding Impact, vulnerability and
                                                                                                     Energy and                                   Economy
                                                         natural processes    adaptation                              Management of natural                       Public health, social,
                                                                                                     transport,                                   and green
                                                                                                                           resources                                  community
                                                                                                      industry                                     growth
                                                                                                                                                                Monitoring of public
 Institutul de Sanatate Publica (INSP)
                                                                                                                                                                health, vulnerable
 (http://insp.gov.ro/)
                                                                                                                                                                people
 Inspectoratul General pentru Situaţii
                                                                                                                                                                Monitoring of natural
 de Urgenţă (IGSU)
                                                                                                                                                                disasters, wildfires
 (http://www.igsu.ro/index)
                                                                                                                                                                Labor market, social
 Institutul de Munca si Protectie                                                                                                                               policies and
 Sociala (INCSMPS)                                                                                                                                              phenomena, socio-
 (http://www.incsmps.ro/)                                                                                                                                       human aspects related
                                                                                                                                                                to process of change
                                                                                                                                                  Sustainable
                                                                                                                                                  developme
                                                                                                                                                  nt of
                                                                                                    CCS of energy
                                                                                                                                                  industry
                                                                                                    related
 Institutul National pentru Cercetare si                                                                                                          and
                                                                                                    emissions,
 Dezvoltare pentru Protectia Mediului                     Monitoring of   Mapping hazards,                                                        extraction
                                                                                                    mitigation
 (ICIM) (http://www.incdpm.ro/ro/)                        climate         urban hazards                                                           of natural
                                                                                                    cement
                                                                                                                                                  resources,
                                                                                                    production
                                                                                                                                                  applied
                                                                                                    industry
                                                                                                                                                  research
                                                                                                                                                  and
                                                                                                                                                  technology
                                                          Monitoring of
                                                          traffic                                                                                 Manageme
                                                          parameters                                                                              nt of
 Institutul de Cercetari in Transporturi                  for roads,                                                                              sustainable
 (http://www.incertrans.ro/)                              aviation,                                                                               traffic and
                                                          railroads,                                                                              transport
                                                          naval,                                                                                  solutions
                                                          maritime




                                                                                                                                                                                           86
