Dissemination Note Series

Romania: Toward a Low Carbon and Climate Resilient Economy

                               Transport Sector Analysis


Sector Overview


In Romania, as well as in many other East European countries, transport sector GHG emissions are
increasing fast and their growth is expected to continue into the future, accompanying the on-going
economic convergence with the EU.
                                                                                          Trends in Romania’s Transport Emissions
                                                                                              Compared to EU-28 (1990=100)
            16 000 of transport emission growth
The main drivers                                                                 130
in Romania 15are000 increasing car ownership and
                                                                                 120
            14 000
usage and 13      high-emission old vehicle fleet.
              a 000                                                              110
Road transport
            12 000is the source of 91 percent of the                             100
transport emissions, while the corresponding EU
            11  000
                                                                                  90
            10 000
              percent.
average is 72 9 000                                                               80
             8 000                                                                70
             7 000
             6 000                                                                60
                                                                                       1990   1994     1998      2002   2006   2010
         Romania’s     1994 emissions
                   transport
                  1990       1998 2002 are
                                        2006                       2010
                                                                                                                                Source: EEA
      projected to rise by 34 percent in 2015-                               Rising incomes have made it possible for more
    2050. However, the recommended Green                                     households to own cars and to move to the suburbs,
        package of measures is estimated to                                  the latter leading to the falling land use densities in
                                                                             urban areas. Urban sprawl pushed up the costs of
    achieve a much lower emissions growth of                                 public transportation and in many cases made it
     24 percent and the Super Green package                                  financially non-viable. In turn, reduced availability
                lowers that to 17 percent.                                   of public transport exacerbated car usage: not
                                                                             only significantly more cars are on the roads, but
                                                                             the number and lengths of car trips are increasing.
Also, Romania, typically for the East European area, has a large share of old vehicles with high emission
intensity. Processes in the freight segment are similar: motorization rates have increased, pushing out the
less emission intensive rail.

In 2013, the transport sector accounted for 13.0 percent of Romania’s total emissions1, still significantly
below the EU average of 25.3 percent. However, from 1990 to 2012, the transport sector’s share in total
emissions increased by 78 percent in Romania and only by 10 percent in the EU. Currently, transport
emissions are falling in the EU and this trend is expected to continue, while Romania’s emissions are set to
grow with rising incomes and EU convergence.



1
 This covers emissions from transport (road, rail, inland navigation and domestic aviation) and includes the GHG
emissions regulated by the Kyoto Protocol and relevant for transport (carbon dioxide, methane, and nitrous oxide).
Decoupling2 transport sector GHG emissions from economic growth is a key challenge. While the
level of transport emissions in Romania is expected to increase even if an ambitions set of mitigation
measures is implemented, reducing the pace of emission growth is feasible albeit challenging.

Transport is the second biggest GHG emitting sector in Romania, following the energy sector, and is
therefore critical for mitigation. Romania has already put in place policies that will slow the growth of
sector emissions, including fuel taxation, vehicle scrappage scheme, parking pricing and new vehicle
registration tax, as well as urban traffic management and restrictions on urban access and speed.

However, more efforts are needed. Transport
mitigation goals can be accomplished by
channeling demand for transport to low emissions
transportation modes and low emission vehicles,
as well as by increasing the availability of public




                                                                                                                                                www.pinterest.com
transport and building walking and biking zones,
in conjunction with creating disincentives to
driving in urban areas.

Minimizing transport externalities (such as local air quality, congestion, noise, reduced safety, inequity and
health impact) translates into significant societal benefits (more so than in other sectors) and therefore is a
critical part of mitigation. In addition, placing mitigation co-benefits at the center of green transport policy
packages will motivate more informed discussions of green actions in transport.


Methodology


The objective of the analysis was to assess the impact of green policies and investments on transport
emissions. For this purpose, the Romania Transport Strategic Emission Prediction Tool (TRANSEPT)
–was developed.

It is a bottom-up detailed engineering model and                                         Each module applies policy interventions under
includes four modules for calculating emissions:                                         three scenarios – Baseline, Green and Super
    transport demand,                                                                    Green.
    vehicle stock;                                                                       The Baseline scenario is based on The Romanian
    vehicle and driving efficiency,                                                      General Transport Master Plan and is consistent
    fuel consumption                                                                     with the Baseline in the EC’s “Trends to 2050”
                                                                                         model. Apart from modeling, the assessment
                                                                                         involved a non-quantitative evaluation of the
                                                                                         barriers to implementation and the externalities
                                                                                         of each green measure.

                                                                                         The costs of the green measures have been
                                                                                         estimated using international case study
                                                                                         evidence and adjusted to the Romanian context.

                                                                                         Marginal abatement cost curve (MACC) analysis
                                                                       www.freepik.com




                                                                                         was conducted to assess cost effectiveness and
                                                                                         abatement potential of the measures and to
                                                                                         illustrate their benefits relative to each other in a
                                                                                         form useful for policy discussions.
2
 This term means a desirable change from the current situation when real GDP and transport emissions grow at the same rate (in parallel) to a
situation when transport emissions growth, whether positive or negative, will be lower than real GDP growth.
The outcome of the analysis is a set of proposed green measures, their cost (investment and
operational), and their abatement potential.

Green interventions were selected based on a multi-criteria analysis that took into account the following
characteristics:

	                    (a) investment cost to the government;
	                    (b) cumulative emission savings;
	                    (c) cost effectiveness of abatement (unit abatement cost);
	                    (d) barriers to implementation;
	                    (e) externalities.

The externalities included local air quality, congestion, noise, safety, and social and health impact3. The
costs of delivering the selected green measures were estimated using international case study evidence
and then adjusted to the Romanian context.

A more ambitious Super Green scenario included all assessed green measures, while a smaller scale Green
scenario comprised a shorter list of measures that have higher performance according to the multi-criteria
analysis -- most importantly, have lower cost, both total and per unit of CO2 abated.


Findings


The findings show that Green interventions in Romania lead to a significant reduction of GHG
emissions growth as compared with the Baseline and to a gradual decoupling of transport sector
emissions growth from economic growth, thus achieving the goal of transport sector mitigation
(Figure 1).

The growth of emissions will continue in all scenarios within the 35-year timeframe of this assessment,
although with different rates across scenarios. Under the Baseline, emissions grow by 34 percent over
the period 2015-2050, but only by 24 percent in the Green scenario and by 17 percent in the Super Green
scenario. These results are in line with many studies stating that emissions reduction in transport is hard
to achieve; more so in Romania and other countries of Eastern Europe where motorization rates are still
rising. Instead, policies in these countries should aim at achieving reduced growth of transport emissions.


                      Figure 1. Green scenarios achieve significant abatement as compared with the Baseline, leading to decoupling
                                                      of transport emissions from economic growth
         23
                                                                                                  250
         22                                                                                       225

         21                                                                                       200
                                                                              MtCO2e and € bln.




                                                                                                  175
         20
MtCO2e




                                                                                                  150
         19
                                                                                                  125
         18                                                                                       100

         17                                                                                       75

                                                                                                  50
         16
                                                                                                        2010


                                                                                                                 2015


                                                                                                                         2020


                                                                                                                                2025


                                                                                                                                        2030


                                                                                                                                                2035


                                                                                                                                                       2040


                                                                                                                                                               2045


                                                                                                                                                                      2050
              2015



                        2020



                               2025



                                       2030



                                              2035



                                                      2040



                                                              2045



                                                                       2050




                               BAU    Green   SuperGreen                                                       GHG emissions from transport (Green Scenario)     Real GDP

a. Romania’s transport emissions under alternative carbon abatement           b. Romania’s transport GHG emissions and real GDP trends, 2010-2050
scenarios                                                                     (2010 = 100)
3
  These were considered at a qualitative level, but not included in costs.
The main modeling outcomes include abatement potential, cost, and the cost effectiveness (cost
per unit of abatement) of the selected green interventions for the period 2015-2050.

Cumulative abatement potential of the recommended measures in the Super Green scenario in 2015-2050
is 68 MtCO2e and in the Green scenario is 36.7 MtCO2e.
The measures delivering the highest abatement are:
(a) speed restrictions;
(b) fuel tax increase;
(c) programs encouraging efficient driving patterns, with advertising campaigns targeted at private car
users and training programs in freight and public transport,
(d) a progressive new vehicle registration tax (Environmental Stamp) promoting low emission vehicles.

Together, these four measures deliver 49.7 MtCO2e of abatement in 2015-2050, or 73 percent of the total
abatement achieved in the Super Green scenario4.

Three other recommended measures are aimed
at reducing urban emissions through offering
alternatives:

    	       driving in the cities
	           include walking and biking zones for 	
	           active travel
	           parking infrastructure.


These measures are supported by behavioral
incentives to limit urban driving:
	           low emission zones restricted to higher 	




                                                                                                                                                       townoflovers.wordpress.com
	           emission vehicles
	           user fees in congested areas,
	           parking pricing.



Additional measures encourage investment in low emission public vehicles. The scrapping of ageing and
high-polluting vehicles is supported through subsidies to the price of more efficient vehicles.

Financing needs for the recommended measures in transport rise sharply between the Green and
the Super Green scenarios, but still remain modest, as incremental investments within a large sector.


Under the Green scenario, additional investments total about €135 million over 2015-505 but almost €1.7
billion in the more ambitious Super Green scenario. Most of the costs are incurred in the first fifteen years,
during 2015-2030. In the first five years, 2015-2020, the implementation of the recommended transport
measures will require just above €60 million in the Green scenario but approximately €608 under the Super
Green scenario.


4
 Abatement in the Green scenario is lower than from these four measures because due to the cost criterion used in the selection, not all of them are
included in the Green scenario.
5
 Discounted at four percent rate.
As the last step of the analysis, a marginal abatement cost curve (MACC) provided a framework to
present the outcomes of the transport sector analysis in a form useful for policy discussions.

Cost and abatement potential of the proposed interventions estimated in this assessment are used as
an input into a tool developed at the World Bank to calculate MACC parameters6. The most cost efficient
measures are the fuel price tax increase, scrappage scheme, vehicle registration tax, parking pricing, and
urban congestion pricing; the measures delivering maximum abatement are speed restrictions, vehicle
registration, and fuel price taxation.



Conclusions and Recommendations



As Romania’s motorization rate converges with that of the EU, transport emissions are expected to
grow even if green measures in the sector are implemented.

Unlike in other sectors, where the objective is to reduce emissions, the goal of green growth development
in transport in Romania is to decouple growth of emissions from economic growth. The main areas of
concern coincide with the top drivers of emissions – the old vehicle fleet, increasing private ownership of
vehicles, and growing usage of vehicles – should be addressed using policy or behavioral incentives such
as taxes, regulations, fees and pricing aimed at encouraging replacement of old vehicles and discouraging
driving.


The proposed mitigation action plan recommends a set of actions on the basis of the estimates
made in this assessment.

Particular policy instruments recommended include adjustment of fuel pricing; the New Vehicle Registration
Tax (Environment Stamp), which would be levied according to a vehicle’s Euro standard, CO2 emissions,
and engine displacement, with a discount rate applied depending on the age of vehicle; parking pricing,
in conjunction with tightened parking regulation and enforcement, as a solution to city congestion; and
air travel taxation, to control growing demand for air travel at the margins. In urban areas, a combination
of parking charges with an effective and efficient public transport system and good walking and cycling
facilities creates behavioral changes that lead to reduced driving. A modal shift from road to much less
emission-intensive rail transportation, or to public transport (national rail system, local bus, tram, or
trolleybus systems) could help contain road transportation demand and emissions, while also resulting in
a co-benefit of decreased road congestion and reduced road accidents.


Institutional arrangement and coordination are also critical.

Actions should start with collaborations between transport stakeholders, such as Government ministries,
the rail sector, the City of Bucharest, municipalities, bus operators, and parking management organizations.
More complicated but also necessary actions in this area should aim at creating clear governance structures
and contractual arrangements, as well as increasing administrative and technical capacity to support
strategy development and project implementation.




6
 See Chapter 9 in: Romania: A Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth Country Assessment, World Bank, 2015, forthcoming in 2015. This
chapter discusses the MACC approach used in this assessment across sectors.
Project co-financed by the European Regional Development Fund through OPTA 2007-2013




Romania:
Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth Program OPERA-CLIMA




                                          For more information and the publications of the
                                          OPERA-CLIMA Program, please visit its webpage at:
                                                       http://opera-clima.ro/en/
