Dissemination Note Series

Romania: Toward a Low Carbon and Climate Resilient Economy

                     Monitoring and Evaluation

An effective and efficient monitoring and evaluation system for Romania’s National Climate Change
Strategy is essential to ensure that resources are used as fully, effectively, and efficiently as possible.

Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) can be defined as the systematic and objective measurement and
assessment of progress and performance of an intervention. A comprehensive system documents activities,
outcomes, and impacts; promotes transparency and accountability; and facilitates continuous learning.
The system should also evolve, expand, and improve over time to adapt to changing needs, priorities,
capabilities and available data.

Climate policy evaluation uses data to answer specific questions about the implementation, outcomes,
and effects of policy or related issues. A theory-based approach facilitates evaluation of the entire
implementation process. Through the development of indicators for each step in the process, it is possible
to not only learn which policies are successful or not, but also why they succeeded or failed and how they
can be improved.




              Policy (Re-)                      Policy                               Policy
                Design                     Implementation                          Evaluation

         (Re-) design & implement M&E                                       Evaluate by analyzing monitoring
                                         Ongoing monitoring of indicators
                     system                                                      data & other indicators




                                              Feedback loop


The structured and on-going process of evaluating Romania’s National Climate Change and Low-Carbon
Green Growth Strategy 2016-2030 (NCCS) and associated 2016-2020 Action Plan for Climate Change
(APCC) will provide policy-makers with the means to judge whether policies and related actions meet their
intended purposes and provide feedback on outcomes and consequences that will help inform future
efforts. This is especially important as policy-makers are still developing an understanding of what makes
good policy around climate change mitigation and adaptation.

M&E of the NCCS and APCC will require pragmatism regarding what is possible within current constraints
as well as a clear sense of purpose with defined roles, responsibilities and accountability. But it also has
great potential to:
	       Enhance understanding among policy-makers and other key stakeholders of Romania’s climate 	
	       change risks and vulnerabilities, and;
	       Help identify cost-effective approaches to reduce those risks, as well as reduce greenhouse gas 	
	       (GHG) emissions.
There is no need to “reinvent the wheel” as existing M&E and reporting systems can be built upon,
and have the potential to generate valid information.

There are strong links between climate action at the national level and international agreements.
Consequently, Romania is able to build upon the existing foundation for monitoring and evaluating (M&E)
public policies when developing a comprehensive system for M&E for the NCCS and APCC.

These links include institutional arrangements and M&E activities for existing climate change-related
policies and measures, notably those derived from the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (UNFCCC) and the Kyoto Protocol, plus the requirements for EU Member States regarding the
M&E of the EU-level climate and energy package, and the 2020 goals for smart, sustainable, and inclusive
growth. For example, relevant indicators are already being monitored by the National Institute of Statistics,
National Authority for Energy Regulation, as well as EU Operational Programme Management Authorities.
New indicators can be developed as necessary.

M&E addressing the NCCS is but one important piece of a broader national M&E strategy tailored to national
circumstances and priorities, one that ‘looks’ both downwards and upwards, so that national decisions
are informed by sub-national experiences and Romania is able to effectively share its progress with the
international community.

Romania’s current obligations, activities, and capacities regarding climate change M&E and
reporting and international best practices were assessed.

The existing M&E for climate change issues was examined, including international reporting requirements
and current M&E practices for national policies, as well as relevant institutional capacities, roles, and
responsibilities. Current reporting responsibilities include:
     UNFCCC level: as for national inventories, national communications, biennial reports, and emission
     reduction pledges.
     EU level: including GHG emissions; public funding; relevant policies and actions; sustainable
     development and climate change and adaptation benefits or costs.
     In addition, international best practices for M&E of climate change strategies and actions were
     reviewed, with particular focus on EU Member States.

Few countries have comprehensive national climate change-related M&E systems, yet there are
numerous examples of good practice in specific sectors, such as health and energy, which are
relevant to Romania. International best practices clearly point to developing an evaluation framework for
the NSCC and APCC using a theory-based approach that incorporates the OECD Development Assistance
Committee criteria of relevance, efficiency, effectiveness, impact, and sustainability. To the degree in which
specific criteria are addressed, evaluation methods and indicators would be tailored to the individual policy
instrument or policy package, stage of implementation and evaluation objectives. The solid, yet flexible,
evaluation framework proposed is consistent with existing Romanian, EU, and UNFCCC principles.

A theory-based evaluation framework integrates well with the EU’s evaluation culture, which
continues to deepen and evolve. There is increasing focus on usefulness of evaluation results as a
planning tool during all stages of implementation, not only at the end stage related to document outcomes.
There is ongoing internalization of the value of evaluation at the EU and MS levels, prompted in part by
requirements for structural funds and the use of Regulatory Impact Assessments within EU legislative
bodies and national bodies, as well as the transfer of knowledge and practice through other MS, and the
network of Evaluation Societies.

There is no comprehensive M&E system for NCCS or APCC, but Romania has the foundations of a
M&E system for public policies that it can build upon. There is a general framework for M&E of all public
policies, not only those relating to climate change. However, M&E and Reporting of public policies is not
yet comprehensively or consistently performed. To date, most evaluation activity is associated with EU
requirements for specific initiatives.
The Ministry of Environment, Waters and Forests has primary responsibility.
The national system for monitoring GHG emissions and mitigation-related policies and measures, under
the oversight of the Ministry of Environment, Waters and Forests (MEWF), provides a starting point for a
comprehensive M&E system for the NCCS and APCC, although it is not yet functioning as smoothly as it
could. Further capacities are needed on climate change and adaptation topics at the operational level.
Climate change forums and platforms are missing at the regional or local levels.

In Romania, as well as internationally, there is vastly more experience with M&E for mitigation
actions than for climate resilience and adaptation.
There is currently little experience on the subject
of climate change adaptation and resilience, which
is also overseen by the MEWF. M&E for mitigation
actions for climate resilience and adaptation face
unique challenges. For example, there is a new
dimension of uncertainty. No universally applicable
indicator exists, instead context-specific indicators
are required to measure reduction in vulnerability
or other proxies for the success of adaptation in
all the different sectors affected. Adaptation M&E
can build on experience from different sectors
and disciplines, such as tools and indicators from
environmental monitoring, environmental impact
assessments, cost-benefit analysis, and M&E
approaches for disaster risk reduction as well as
general evaluation principles.

A practical and effective monitoring and evaluation system is critical for the success of Romania’s
National Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan. The development of the M&E system for the NCCS
and APCC should begin immediately and built on components of the existing M&E systems, and as much
as possible, on the current activities of institutions already involved in monitoring.

A theory-based approach is recommended for evaluating the NSCC and APCC. The theory-based
approach facilitates an iterative process of design, evaluation, and redesign based on lessons learned so
that the “successes and failures” can be determined and inform future policy. Regular evaluations should
be performed at the APCC level, and also in-depth for specific policies, as needed. Fostering a “culture
of evaluation” will help to fully utilize the M&E system’s potential and take advantage of the feedback to
increase effectiveness and better target resources.

MEWF should ensure that adequate financial and human resources for the building, operationalizing
and on-going expansion of the M&E system are allocated. This not only includes ensuring sufficient
dedicated staff, but also necessary stakeholder engagement, review, knowledge exchange, and outreach
activities. In addition, it includes broader evaluation activities, collecting stakeholder feedback on
evaluation reports, and adjusting the NCCS and APCC over time. Additional capacities are needed, and
ensuring that adequate human resources with the appropriate knowledge and skills regarding climate
change topics and evaluation are committed will be important. Staff training programs are essential.
Also, relevant MEWF staff should actively engage in international networks for sharing knowledge and
experience with other technical / evaluation experts and institutions.

Communication and information exchange (including a clear and efficient process for data sharing)
must be established and maintained between all governmental entities associated with the M&E
system. To improve system functioning and proactively address any weaknesses , there is a need for
increased communication and data / information exchange between relevant government entities at all
governance levels to improve system functioning and proactively address any weaknesses.
Engage stakeholders and provide them the opportunity to give feedback. Consultation and feedback
are an integral part of the M&E system and help to ensure transparency and accountability to the public
and the wider stakeholder community.

Pay special attention to the M&E of actions for climate change adaptation. The foundation for M&E
of mitigation actions is much better established. Therefore, the MEWF should therefore give particular
attention to the M&E of the adaptation components of the NSCC and APCC, including close liaison with
Ministries responsible for monitoring investments in adaptation under the EU Operational Programmes.




Project co-financed by the European Regional Development Fund through OPTA 2007-2013




Romania:
Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth Program OPERA-CLIMA




                                                   For more information and the publications of the
                                                   OPERA-CLIMA Program, please visit its webpage at:
                                                                 http://opera-clima.ro/en/
