            The Political Economy of Reform: Moving from Analysis to Action

                                      A Global Learning Event

                                            - Final Report -
Background

In June 2010, a two-day workshop entitled “The Political Economy of Reform: Moving from Analysis to
Action” was held in Washington, D.C. with the goal of exploring the roles that political economy analysis can
play in informing and guiding real-world reform efforts. The event brought together participants from
various sectors: representatives of donor organizations, senior journalists, private firms active in
development policy and practice, academics and applied researchers, and World Bank senior operational
staff. The keynote address highlighted five frontiers of political economy analysis and set an ambitious
agenda for the ensuing presentations and discussion. These five frontiers include the following:

         1) Gaining a real-world sense of what is possible, and expanding the feasible space for reform:
            Operationally relevant political economy analysis that is regularly updated to capture relevant
            changes on the ground can dynamically achieve two sets of goals. First, it can shed light on the
            feasible space for reform. Second, and more importantly, it can actively engage and support
            actors to surmount what may seem unfeasible in order to make change happen.

         2) Knowledge-driven change: Once actionable political economy analysis is produced, how can it
            translate into actual reform? The type of dynamic knowledge that has local legitimacy and
            ownership would not only identify the actual agents of change, but also catalyze and nurture
            their collective capacity for action.

         3) Challenging the knowledge production process: Political economy analysis for whom, by
            whom, and how? Successful and sustainable operationalization requires a paradigm shift on
            three dimensions: a) the client: the final beneficiary of the analysis should be the change
            agents on the ground and not the donor agencies; b) the producer: political economy analysis
            with potential for triggering reform ownership should be undertaken by local analysts (perhaps
            with the support of international experts); c) the process: instead of a passive research output,
            analysis commissioned and produced locally for the change agents needs to be organically
            integrated upstream in their own work.




                                                                                                      Page 1
         4) Operationalization: The subsequent step following an understanding of why political economy
            is important and what it can contribute to change processes on the ground entails developing
            concrete operational tools that reform managers can use to translate findings into action on
            the ground.

         5) Institutional recognition and mainstreaming: So far, political economy is not mainstreamed in
            the development sector, and, given the range of projects, is quite limited in scope. Recognition
            of the fact that politics matter is long overdue and imperative. A deep understanding of the
            underlying politics of reform is crucial for successful policy design and implementation.

This paradigm shift towards a dynamic political economy of reform triggers several policy implications. The
institutional role of donors needs to be redefined in terms of support recipients.

Social entrepreneurs, civil society organizations and reform leaders should become the main focus of
institutional support. Their vision, combined with tools of empowerment, information asymmetry
correctives, and collective action solutions, should increase the likelihood of successful and sustainable
reform.

Policy and practice implications emerging from the event

Efforts were made to draw out the practical and policy dimensions from the many lessons that emerged
from the workshop discussions. These policy and practice implications are organized under the five frontiers
of political economy analysis described above.

    1) Gaining a real-world sense of what is possible, and expanding the feasible space for reform:

       Using political economy for discovering and nurturing the possibilities for action: Some participants
        expressed concerns about the fatalistic nature of analyses that usually describe narrow feasibility
        spaces for reform and underestimate the likelihood of equilibria shifts. On the ground, there are
        actors however, who, given the adequate tools, can credibly drive such change. Channeling and
        connecting their voices can redefine feasibility.

       Reshaping thinking from what is missing to what is there: There is now broad agreement that
        developing countries often lack robust institutions and resources to promote sustainable
        development. The frontier of change should encompass precisely the opposite: the presence of
        creative local modes of problem-solving that successfully and vibrantly substitute for malfunctioning
        states. Harnessing their innovative and inspiring energies, and amplifying their demonstration effect
        within the international community will shape the future.

    2) Knowledge-driven change

       Working towards a dynamic political economy: Most participants agreed that static desk analyses
        have minimal impact on driving development processes. Dynamic political economy analyses entail
        two stages: first, map the landscape, identify the rules of the game and feasibility spaces, and set up



                                                                                                       Page 2
    mechanisms for continuous political context updates; second, and more importantly, change the
    rules of the game by connecting agents.

   Coalition building as the political economy of collective action on the ground: The discussion
    emphasized the need for and the challenges posed by collective action for reform: 1) building
    coalitions among drivers of change takes a long time and is an unpredictable process; 2) these
    coalitions are difficult to sustain even if various stakeholders do decide to sit at the negotiating table
    at the onset. Collective action is dynamic, and must be cultivated as it evolves over time.

   Rethinking minimal conditions for action: Developing countries rarely meet minimal conditions for
    coalition building and sustainable collective action: 1) a functioning state and reasonable societal
    and political order; 2) clear dividing lines between state and civil society. Nonetheless, instead of
    getting mired by a fatalistic view of development, international organizations should promote
    debates on the goals they intend to achieve. Must there be some order and a functioning state
    before it can institute reforms, or can reforms be used to enhance order and create a functioning
    state? Within this tension, we can identify new windows of opportunity for action and shape a fresh
    strategic vision of development. A political economy approach has a comparative advantage in
    identifying feasible entry points for reform even in fragile situations (post-conflict recovery setting,
    for example).

   Reversing causality: Political will and a strong civil society are not inputs, but rather outcomes of the
    coalition building process.

   Understanding dynamic coalition formation as a prerequisite for policy decisions: Analytical work on
    the structure and evolution of coalitions in developing countries should inform donor strategies.
    Participants have identified key issues that have an impact on collective action potential: a) the
    identification of a focal point for change; b) communication of clear benefits for potential
    supporters; c) credibility and legitimacy; d) the expansion of the initial coalition over time to
    incorporate multiple actors and issues beyond the initial set of supporters; e) the timing of coalition
    building.

   Challenging coalition-building myths: 1) Coalition building should not be seen as a mature, one-shot
    process; 2) Coalitions are necessary but not sufficient for self-reinforcing change; 3) Coalition
    building can be used for positive as well as nefarious purposes. Often, coalitions trying to prevent
    reforms are more successful at solving collective action problems, while progressive interests
    aggregate themselves with more difficulty.

   Channeling information flows through technology: Strategic communication of the reform message
    should become an integrative part of coalition building efforts. Information technology is
    transforming the architecture of solving collective action problems and correcting information
    asymmetries.




                                                                                                      Page 3
3) Challenging the knowledge production process: Political economy analysis for whom, by whom, and
how?

During the sessions, participants pondered concrete ways of translating the policy vision into operational
realities. Two opinion streams emerged: some participants advocated for full transparency and broad
dissemination of political economy analyses, whereas others favored a more incremental process that would
communicate findings first to managers and decision makers, and only over time to a broader audience.

For whom?

      Actionable information that “unleashes actors of change:” Knowledge generated through political
       economy research cannot remain stored on the shelf. From a policy perspective, its most important
       consequence is supporting change agents’ participation in political life based on such information.

      Local reform actors as main beneficiaries of political economy analysis: Intervention within the
       formal institutions and structures has limited impact, given the chronic misalignment of objectives
       between donors and client governments. International development organizations should allocate
       equal time to civil society and state counterparts. Related to the issue of credibility and legitimacy of
       political economy analysis, donors should also work towards increasing its visibility on the ground by
       directly engaging with organizations that have actual stakes in the development outcomes, e.g., civil
       society organizations and professional associations.

      Timing, feasibility and contingent beneficiaries of political economy analysis: Some participants
       called for a phased approach for information dissemination in sensitive contexts, with implications
       for the selection of beneficiaries. First, analysis should exclusively benefit managers and decision
       makers, followed, over longer time horizons, by a broader dissemination of findings to the public.

      Information transparency and donor goals: In between the two camps calling for either full and
       unconditional transparency of political economy analyses, or for restricted use of findings confined
       to managers and those who occupy sensitive positions, some participants argued for a goal
       contingent approach to transparency. Accordingly, the development agency would first need to
       decide on the primary goal it wants to pursue: succeed in achieving targets, or promote policy
       dialogue in a given country? The answer to this question will then guide the strategy of information
       use and the selection of the final beneficiary of political economy analysis.

By whom?

The debate revolved around the question of who has comparative advantage to undertake operationally-
relevant political economy analyses: country experts with in-depth local expertise or international
consultants?

      Western-centric research templates versus local modes of problem solving: The epistemological tools
       of political economy knowledge production should be further debated and refined. What kind of
       bird’s eye view do we need for understanding local contexts? Western-democracy / rational


                                                                                                        Page 4
    bureaucracy type models, or flexible analytical lenses allowing the possibility for other forms of
    problem solving modes developed locally?

   Shifting the focus towards local knowledge - indigenous political economy production: multilateral
    donor institutions should shift the input of political economy analyses towards local practice; in
    some cases, a combination of international and local experts is essential for a deep understanding of
    context.

   Identifying unexpected sources of information: Reform and political economy analysis of the change
    process often come from unexpected places. Regular citizens, informal networks already existing in
    societies or country representatives in practice exchange forums can provide on-ramps for
    operationally-relevant information on the political context.

   Stakeholder partnerships through information production and dissemination: One of the practical
    uses of political economy diagnostics resides in developing partnerships among a configuration of
    stakeholders who can work together on data collection and analysis, and contribute to the success
    of reform efforts.

   Donor role transition - from conjoiner of power and knowledge to identifier of talent and knowledge:
    development organizations should transition from their traditional role of information producer to
    that of broker of knowledge flows. The convening and connecting organizational power offers a
    unique opportunity to identify local creativity and integrate it into global flows of shared
    development experiences. Information intermediation and brokerage will overhaul the entire
    production process of political economy analysis.

   Collaborating with other donors: Most development organizations have already developed tools for
    political context updates and analysis. A formal or informal platform of knowledge sharing within
    the donor community can provide a wider base of information collection than simply relying on a
    narrow pool of local informants.

   Connecting two types of political economy: methodological toolkit versus in-depth area knowledge:
    Actionable political economy analysis entails synergistic insights derived from two distinct
    epistemological families: on one hand, theoretical core mechanisms, and methods of research; on
    the other hand, a deep dynamic understanding of the idiosyncrasies of a specific country and reform
    context. The donor community’s role could consist of combining area specific forms of political
    knowledge with theoretical principles and regularities, and standardizing such information.

   Creating a laboratory of experimental thinking on political economy: The donor community, taking
    advantage of its convening power, could develop and institutionalize a laboratory for brainstorming
    and experimenting with creative and practical political economy tools that might be codified and
    mainstreamed for better reform design.




                                                                                                  Page 5
How?

      From international best practice to good local fit: The transition from “international best practices”
       to “good local fit” should be systematically accompanied by a rethinking of the context specific
       needs of achieving results. Political economy has a comparative advantage in guiding this
       customization process.

      Normative reevaluation: Political economy is uniquely situated to challenge normative assumptions
       and, in time, adjust policy prescriptions. Some participants emphasized the need for a more
       sophisticated understanding of the relationship between corruption, rent seeking and social
       structure, mode of production, and political stability. Dismantling rents, increasing transparency,
       building coalitions despite their normative clout in the development narrative, can have unintended
       consequences in some circumstances.

      Developing an open architecture of development: factoring in the risk of empowering governments
       that often stifle civil society, development organizations could have a comparative advantage in
       harnessing vibrant pre-existing networks that enable information flows on the ground (religious
       networks, consumer goods markets, mobile telephony, radio and media, etc.).

      The role of experimentation, trial and error efforts for policy innovation: If change agents have an
       active political economy understanding of context, this should allow for constant adaptation and
       recalibration along the reform path.

      Redirecting change: participants addressed the question of policy directionality. Should reforms
       come from above or should donors listen to the community needs on the ground? The change
       process, in order to acquire ownership and credibility, should be homegrown. This bottom up
       approach to development needs to be synchronically accompanied by a multiplicity of decentralized
       information flows. Such a process would also attenuate the fiduciary risk of donor institutions
       stemming from development goals perceived on the ground as social engineering.

      Equipping change agents with tools of political economy and coalition building: The donors have the
       capacity to strengthen the capacity of reformers to solve collective action problems, correct
       informational asymmetries and strategically communicate the costs and benefits of policy change to
       a wide public.

      Developing platforms for linking local reformers with other change agents – Shared practice and
       modes of problem solving have a multiplier effect against entrenched networks of corruption.

      Connecting reformers with resources in order to build capacity and enable them to pursue policy
       goals.

      Calibrating expectations about the pace of reform through a political economy of risk assessment:
       The majority of participants agreed that the false dichotomy of “transformational versus
       incremental” reforms needs to be reconceptualized. In most cases discussed during the workshop,

                                                                                                      Page 6
       the transformative reforms were but a series of sustained incremental changes driven by local
       actors. Instead, understanding the political risks that incumbents might face when supporting
       reform efforts might be analytically more useful for gauging the possible scope and pace of change.

      Risk management: A government’s willingness to implement reforms depends on the level of
       political risk triggered by the process. Accordingly, the policy question for donor institutions is about
       changing actors’ incentives in support of reform as much as it is about minimizing risk. Oftentimes,
       donors can engage in constructive risk management, by narrowing the scope and pace of the initial
       reform: e.g. facilitating a local experiment, limiting it to one particular sector, etc.

      Negotiating the virtues and perils of transparency: The participants debated the optimal level of
       transparency for the political economy production process. Two schools of thought emerged: some
       argued for full transparency and unconditional dissemination of findings within the broader
       community of change agents. Others opted for a narrower base of information sharing at both
       stages of production and dissemination. They offered specific examples of reforms that benefited
       from some lack of visibility and transparency. In such cases, reformers were shielded from powerful
       vested interests by keeping a low profile during the change process.

   4) Operationalization of political economy findings:

Participants converged on the principle of a more active use of the information produced by political
economy work. Here are some tools for operationalization that were discussed:

      Mapping of actors, incentives, stakes and institutions: Participants have drawn distinctions among
       the many types of political economy: 1) a toolkit of building blocks and theoretical mechanisms. This
       conceptualization of PEA generates the template (or the general framework) that needs to be filled
       by context-specific information (Who are the stakeholders? What are the preferences? How much
       power do they have within the system?). There are many available frameworks within the donor
       community that converge towards this common set of questions. 2) the second type of in-depth
       country expertise answers the questions raised by the general framework and fills in the blanks.
       Some participants shared concrete analytical tools that have been used by donors and domestic
       reformers in East Asia and elsewhere. The comparative advantage of these types of analytical tools
       lies in the analysis provided on all possible interactions among stakeholders, as well in the
       identification of reform supporters that would not have been immediately apparent a priori.

      Consulting local elites on alternative reform scenarios: Coming up with alternative reform scenarios
       and gaining a real-world understanding of the ways in which these scenarios interact with incentive
       sets of elite stakeholders has been used as an effective tool for gauging potential support for
       reform. Experiences that participants shared range from key informant consultative approaches to
       quantitatively-driven multi-stakeholder modeling. These tools include presenting political economy
       analysis findings to elite representatives and asking for their feedback on how they think reform
       efforts would affect them and their constituencies, collecting a range of hard data on the



                                                                                                        Page 7
    preferences of various elite stakeholders and relevant groups and using a simulation model to
    determine what might be considered the most feasible reform option.

   Tools for collective action include the following: 1) developing platforms of shared experiences and
    learning; 2) identifying: a) a coalescing focal point for collective action; b) concrete benefits for
    supporters in order to motivate them to join the coalition; c) a coherent strategic communication
    campaign for communicating the costs and benefits of collective action to all participants; 3) using
    systematic tools to identify the best coalition partners and the right timing for coalition building; 4)
    using an appropriate mix of information and communications technology for solving information
    asymmetries and collective action problems.

   Political context updates: Reform efforts are often implemented in country contexts prone to
    unexpected changes that can occur over relatively short time horizons. In the development sector,
    there is no identifiable standardized practice for generating a continuous stream of information for
    updating findings of political economy analyses in light of such changes. In contrast, political officers
    at embassies as well as senior editors and journalists are able to continuously scan their local
    environments by managing and cultivating relationships with those who are "in the know."
    Experience has also shown that some enterprising governance and public affairs specialists working
    for international organizations have been able to provide this type of service to their project teams
    and country offices. Given the sensitive reform contexts in which development organizations
    operate, the process of gathering actionable political context updates requires repeated interaction
    among change agents and key informants. The in-country teams of various development agencies
    could have a comparative advantage in developing libraries on the political issues of interest to
    development projects and programs, updated on a regular basis.

   Monitoring and evaluation: Once policy changes are enacted, implementation is supposed to
    contribute to achieving desired outcomes of reform. Deviations at this stage can derail even the best
    policy prescriptions from reaching their beneficiaries. Some participants from the private sector
    discussed tools they have used for tracing and evaluating reform implementation on the ground.
    Examples of specific techniques of monitoring include: 1) identifying on-ramps for political economy
    analyses relevant to implementation during stakeholder meetings; 2) interjecting the political
    dimension of technical work; 3) organizing regular learning events and meetings where participants
    from different countries exchange practical lessons in terms of monitoring; 4) safeguarding the
    perception of independence of organizations involved in monitoring. In some circumstances,
    independent third-party monitors manage to establish reputations as “independent” not only from
    government but also from political interest groups. Participants also raised concerns regarding
    sources of funding for monitoring and their effects on perceived independence on the ground; 5)
    use of technology and innovation for being able to trace implementation (i.e. call centers where
    citizens can promptly file claims, scorecards, devices for monitoring school attendance, innovative
    geo-mapping, etc.); 6) identification of the appropriate channels of influence on implementation.
    There were several opinions on this issue: some participants argued for accessing formal institutions
    for monitoring, whereas others advocated for the role that civil society ought to play.


                                                                                                     Page 8
    5) Institutional recognition of operationally-relevant political economy analysis

The participants emphasized two concerns related to: a) the external credibility, legitimacy, political nature
of development institutions in analyzing and guiding reform processes; b) the internal organizational
incentives affecting the political economy agenda.

On the role of donors, the debate revolved around the tension between political economy and the explicit
mandate of some multilateral organizations to be technocratic and apolitical. The following conclusions
emerged:

       Buy-in among high-level decision-makers: There is a sense that the concept of “political” analysis
        might be context sensitive. On the other hand, the impact of corruption and conflict on
        development outcomes has already entered the mainstream narrative of development, and is
        accepted as such by policy makers. As part of a coherent communication strategy, high-level events,
        such as annual meetings of ministers, could serve as information platforms to advocate for the
        necessity of political economy, and help address disagreements and misunderstandings related to
        what “political” economy work actually entails.

       The political nature of donors: There needs to be a widespread recognition of the fact that donors
        are political entities; the concrete steps of action should therefore focus on standardizing the
        staffing policies and the tools that would help mainstream political economy work within donor
        organizations.

       Legitimacy and credibility: Political economy analysis and the change processes facilitated by it
        should be legitimate and credible within the community where reform emerges. This entails a
        redefinition of the traditional role of donors as top down knowledge and policy prescribers.
        Legitimacy of operationally relevant political economy can be derived only from collecting, brokering
        and analyzing information from a multiplicity of sources.

       Local empowerment: Donors cannot be the driver of any reform, but once the change agents and
        catalysts have been identified, they can help correct information asymmetries and provide tools for
        effective collective action.

On organizational incentives of donor agencies influencing the political economy agenda, the problems and
recommendations identified by participants include the following:

       Challenging fundamental operational assumptions: the state (the client government) is not
        necessarily a benevolent actor. Incumbent politicians have career incentives, and are sometimes
        deeply entrenched in rent-seeking networks. Because governments are currently the primary
        clients, some members of the donor community suffer from chronic misalignment of means with
        objectives. The very tools designed to build governance often end up empowering corrupt groups
        with political clout.




                                                                                                      Page 9
   Refining the results approach: organizational timeframes value rapid deliverables at the expense at
    real impact on the ground. Moreover, it is often the case that the “results” desired by international
    organizations are not aligned with those of the client government.

   Adjusting incentives for operational political economy production: The pressure of results delivery in
    relatively short periods of time might have a perverse result on risk taking (entailed by programs
    actively incorporating operationally-relevant political economy).

   Mitigating/hedging risk aversion: The donor community needs to question the risk aversion that
    acts as a disincentive to undertaking political economy analyses. Reforms often take place in
    insecure environments where fiduciary standards are low. From the perspective of decision makers,
    the right balance must be struck between using private information responsibly, on one hand, and
    not apologizing or giving in to political pressures, on the other.

   Interdisciplinarity and cross-sectoral integration: The segmentation of programs in many
    development organizations impedes multidisciplinary conversations on operationally relevant
    political economy. The sudden realization that political economy matters for development risks
    projectizing it, which would then result in the reproduction of a silo mentality in political economy
    findings. Political economy analysis that is relevant to realities on the ground tends to be cross-
    sectoral and interdisciplinary and, as such, the projectization of such analytical work should be
    prevented as much as possible.

   Avoiding the danger of narrowly locating political economy work within the organization:
    Institutional buy-in of PE work cannot be confined to only one sector or thematic area and requires
    broader thinking about integration with projects and programs.

   Creativity with regard to the funding sources for political economy work: Participants pointed out
    practical problems posed by funding operationally relevant analyses, and proposed setting up
    private funds allocated to such analyses, as a possible solution.

   Rethinking the relationship between relatively large donors and smaller development organizations
    on the ground: there is a danger of over-burdening bureaucratization if donors expect smaller
    organizations contributing to political economy work in the field to comply with what may be seen
    as standard reporting requirements; an organic bottom up approach to accountability and reporting
    developed first in the smaller organizations and then fed back into bureaucratic processes of larger
    organizations might be more flexible.

   Developing an open culture of organizational learning: the development community should build an
    active repository of lessons learnt following reform interventions.




                                                                                                 Page 10
