   Current Process: Pre-Judgment Attachment



                     Registration: Plaintiff has completed case
                       registration or is registering the case                      Commercial
                                                                                    Court &
 Not-Expedited: plaintiff files request to
attach moveable items in the court where
                                                                                    Enforcement
    the case was filed and is pending.


                                       Expedited: Plaintiff files a request for
                                                                                    Assessment Tool
Plaintiff pays fee                    pre-judgment attachment of moveable
                                         items at registration desk in court


Judge may request evidence that
plaintiff has right to the items                               Plaintiff pays fee



  Judge issues the order                           Expedited Judge issues the
   granting attachment                             order granting attachment




           Execution Officer (EO) goes to place where items are located


                                                                                    Developed by
 Debtor is present & attachment oc-                                                 Heike Gramckow
curs at residence or his place of busi-                 Items are considered        & Omniah Ebeid
 ness, then – both sign the minutes                           attached
 and EO provides a copy to Debtor




  Debtor requests to be custodian          Parties do not propose a custodian


                EO is concerned      No one who is present
EO appoints                                                       EO appoints
                  Debtor will       agrees to be custodian &
 custodian                                                         custodian
                 destroy items         debtor is present

                                                                                    Governance Global Practice
             EO presents request         EO must          Custodian present at
              to execution judge      appoint debtor       time of attachment
© 2016 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org



Disclaimer

This Tool is published to promote the World Bank’s work to the development community with the least possible delay. The
manuscript of this document therefore has not been prepared in accordance with the procedures appropriate to formally edited
texts. Some sources cited in this paper may be information documents that are not readily available. This Tool is a product of
the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank. The findings, interpretations and
conclusions expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development, the World Bank and its affiliated organizations, or those of the executive directors of the World
Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work.
The boundaries, colors, denominations and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the
part of the World Bank of the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries edited texts.
Some sources cited in this paper may be information documents that are not readily available. The findings, interpretations and
conclusions expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development, the World Bank and its affiliated organizations, or those of the executive directors of the World
Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The
boundaries, colors, denominations and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part
of the World Bank of the legal status.

Rights and Permissions

The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemination of its knowledge, this work
may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long as full attribution to this work is given. Any queries
on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H
Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2422; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.

For permission to photocopy or reprint, please send a request with complete information to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.,
222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-4470, www.copyright.com.

Contact Details

Justice and Rule of Law
Governance Global Practice
The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, DC 20433 USA
worldbank.org/justice | jrol@worldbank.org
Commercial Court &
Enforcement Assessment Tool
Developed by Heike Gramckow & Omniah Ebeid
     ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS



     This publication was developed and prepared by World Bank staff under the
     auspices of the Justice and Rule of Law Practice Group of the Governance Global
     Practice (GGP), the World Bank. The draft was reviewed by Lubomira Beardsley,
     Senior Council, Justice and Rule of Law Group, Governance Global Practice, Mahesh
     Uttamchandan, Lead Financial Sector Specialist, Finance & Markets Department,
     Finance & Markets Global Practice, Sylvia Solf, Senior Private Sector Development
     Specialist, Trade & Competitiveness Global Practice, and Jorge Luis Silva Mendez,
     Public Sector Specialist, Governance Department, Governance Global Practice.
     We are indebted to them for their insightful and helpful comments and feedback.




II   COMMERCIAL COURT AND ENFORCEMENT ASSESSMENT TOOL
CONTENTS


       Acknowledgements	II
       About the Authors	 IV
       Abbreviations	V
       COMMERCIAL COURT & ENFORCEMENT ASSESSMENT TOOL	 1
       Introduction	1
       Preparing for the Assessment 	                  6

       PHASE I – LEGAL FRAMEWORK REVIEW	                                        9
       A.	 Laws and Regulations to be Reviewed	                                10
       B.	 Legal Analysis	                                                     12
       C.	 Process Mapping Based on the Legal Framework	                       20

       PHASE II – INSTITUTIONAL INFORMATION	                                   29
       A.	 Organizational Structures and Management Arrangements	              30
       B.	 Courts and Judges	                                                  35
       C.	 Physical Facility and Infrastructure 	                              41
       D.	 Automated Systems 	                                                 43
       E.	 User Access to Information 	                                        47
       F.	 Court Access to User Feedback 	                                     50

       PHASE III – WORK PROCESSES	                                             52
       A.	 The Walk-Through 	                                                  52
           1.	   Filing/Registering a Case 	                                   54
           2.	   Notification of Parties/Service of Process 	                  58
           3.	   Pre-Judgment Attachment of Movable Property 	                 61
           4.	   ADR Services	                                                 64
           5.	   Court Hearings/Experts/Continuances	                          70
           6.	   Issuance of Judgments	                                        77
           7.	   Execution /Enforcement of Judgments	                          80
           8.	   Sale of Movable Property by Public Sale/Auction	              84
       B.	 The Process Map	                                                    87

       PHASE IV – DATA COLLECTION	                                             88
       Implementation Approach	                                                88

       PHASE V – DRAFTING AND FINALIZING THE ASSESSMENT REPORT	                90
       Overall Assessment Approach: Preliminary Discussions with the Client	   90
       Phase V Activities/Components	                                          91

       ANNEXES	93
       Annex 1 – Legal Process Map: Mandatory Pre-Filing Conciliation	  93
       Annex 2 – Current Process: Notification for Commercial Cases	    94
               – New Process: Notification Recommendation	              95
       Annex 3 – Case Data Request	                                     96
       Annex 4 – Small Claims Courts	                                  100



                                  COMMERCIAL COURT AND ENFORCEMENT ASSESSMENT TOOL   III
     ABOUT THE AUTHORS



     Dr. Heike Gramckow is a Lead Counsel with the Justice and Rule of Law Group in the Governance Global
     Practice of the World Bank in Washington, DC, where she advises on justice reform issues and conducts related
     research. She has been working on justice sector reform issues for nearly 30 years. Before joining the Bank,
     she was Deputy Director of the International Division of the National Center for State Courts and served as
     Director for Research and Development for the American Prosecutors Research Institute. Dr. Gramckow has
     worked with courts, prosecutors, and police in the United States and throughout the world, especially on justice
     system management and reform. She has directed justice reform programs and assessments, and provided
     advice to the governments of numerous countries, including Argentina, Bosnia, Bulgaria, Egypt, Germany, Haiti,
     Hungary, Indonesia, Kenya, Mali, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Nigeria, Papua New Guinea, Romania, Saudi
     Arabia, Serbia, Syria, the United Arab Emirates, and the United States. In her career, Dr. Gramckow has worked
     with common law, civil law, Shari’a-based, and customary justice systems. She has trained judges, prosecutors,
     and court personnel on management, budget and strategic planning, reengineering, and other substantive
     issues, such as victim assistance, drug case management, juvenile offenders, and domestic violence. She has
     also provided advice on establishing sustainable mechanisms for continuing education, introducing effective
     information and communications technology (ICT) solutions and designing good governance structures that
     support democratic and accountable agencies. Dr. Gramckow holds a law degree and a doctorate in law from
     the University of Hamburg, Germany. She has taught undergraduate and graduate courses on international
     criminal justice systems and juvenile justice at American University and the George Washington University in
     Washington, DC, and is widely published in the United States and internationally.




     Omniah Ebeid is a Senior Justice Sector Specialist with Justice and Rule of Law Group in the Governance
     Global Practice of the World Bank in Washington, DC, where she advises on justice reform issues worldwide.
     She has been working on legal, legislative and justice sector reform issues for over 20 years. Prior joining the
     Bank, she was Director of the International Cooperation Department and the Human Rights Office at the Abu
     Dhabi Judiciary where, in addition to her responsibilities, she oversaw justice reform projects for the courts and
     Public Prosecution Office. She also served as Program Manager for the Abu Dhabi Government Restructuring
     Committee where she oversaw the restructuring of the judiciary, and prosecution office and establishment of
     the judicial council. Her international development work also included managing a regional justice program
     headquartered in Jordan linking over 13 ministries of justice across the MENA region. She also worked in Egypt on
     a comprehensive justice sector reform program focusing on assessing court operations and capacity, improving
     case management practices and automating court processes as well as advised Civil Society Organizations on
     project development and evaluation. Throughout her career, Omniah worked with civil and common law justice
     systems. She started her career working with courts in the United States and was a trial lawyer in the private
     sector as well as the public sector with the Texas Attorney General’s Office before becoming a lobbyist for cities
     focusing on civil service and employment related issues. She also has extensive experience with legislative
     review and drafting. Omniah holds a BA in Political Sciences and a Doctorate of Jurisprudence from South Texas
     College of Law, Houston.




IV   COMMERCIAL COURT AND ENFORCEMENT ASSESSMENT TOOL
ABBREVIATIONS



        ADJD   Abu Dhabi Judicial Department
        ADR    Alternative Dispute Resolution
        CMS    Case Management System
        EO     Execution Officer
        EU     European Union
        FIC    First Instance Court
        GDP    Gross Domestic Product
        IFC    International Finance Corporation
        IT     Information Technology
        MOJ    Ministry of Justice
        OECD   Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
        PC     Personal Computer
        POA    Power of Attorney
        URL    Uniform Resource Locator
        VC     Video Conference
        WBG    World Bank Group




                               COMMERCIAL COURT AND ENFORCEMENT ASSESSMENT TOOL   V
Commercial Court &
Enforcement Assessment Tool

Introduction

BACKGROUND
An effective and efficient justice system is essential for sustained economic growth. In a well-functioning,
independent, and efficient justice system, decisions are taken within a reasonable time and are predictably and
effectively enforced, and individual rights, including property rights, are adequately protected. Among other
objectives, the efficiency of the judicial system is important for creating a good business climate, attracting
foreign direct investment, securing tax revenues, and supporting economic growth.1 Research has shown that
weak contract enforcement, for example, raises the cost of borrowing and shortens loan maturities,2 with a
resulting negative effect on investment and GDP.3 Weak court enforcement systems have also been linked to
late payments, which can lead to liquidity issues for companies and increase insolvency.4

Since the publication of the World Bank’s World Development Report 2005, the importance of well-functioning
courts to strengthening the investment climate and ultimately to reducing poverty and boosting shared
prosperity has been brought to the forefront and become internationally recognized.5 Indicators of commercial
court performance, and business community perceptions of and trust in the courts, are a part of the World Bank
Group’s (WBG) country-level investment climate assessments and its influential Investment Climate Surveys
and Doing Business reports.6 Court performance has also become an element of European Union (EU) and
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) accession.7 Helping countries to improve
commercial court operations and ensure improved accessibility and effective delivery of services are important
components of the development assistance provided by the WBG. The Commercial Court and Enforcement
Assessment Tool has been designed to assist assessment teams and client agencies in this effort.




1	 Bénassy-Quéré, A., Coupet, M. and Mayer, T. (2007), Institutional Determinants of Foreign Direct Investment. World Economy, 30: 764–782.
   doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9701.2007.01022.x.
2	 BAE, K.-H. and GOYAL, V. K. (2009), Creditor Rights, Enforcement, and Bank Loans. The Journal of Finance, 64: 823–860. doi:10.1111/j.1540-
   6261.2009.01450.x; L. Laeven, G. Majnoni / Journal of Financial Intermediation 12 (2003) 178–197.
3	 Bianco, Jappelli, and Pagano (2002), Courts and Banks: Effects of Judicial Enforcement on Credit Markets, http://www.csef.it/WP/wp58.pdf ;
   Laeven and Majnoni (2003b); Djankov et al. (2008).
4	 Intrum Justitia (2013). https://www.intrum.com/Global/IR/AR/English/IJAR2013_ENG.pdf.
5	 See World Bank, World Development Report 2005: A Better Investment Climate for Everyone (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2004),
   http://go.worldbank.org/97ZFM8ERI0.
6	 See World Bank, Doing Business 2015 (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2015), http://www.doingbusiness.org/reports.
7	See http://www.oecd.org/legal/accession-process.htm.




                                                                                                                           introduction         1
    ABOUT THE TOOL
    For many years, teams from the World Bank and International Finance Corporation (IFC) have been responding
    to requests from governments and judiciaries for help in understanding what is needed to improve commercial
    court operations and contract enforcement mechanisms and to better respond to the needs of court users.

    The “Commercial Court and Enforcement Assessment Tool,” hereafter referred to as “the Tool,” is designed
    to assist in understanding key approaches to enhancing the performance of commercial courts and enforcement
    agencies for better service delivery and user access across a country or a subnational location. Building on a
    range of assessments conducted by the WBG and others for over two decades, the Tool essentially provides a
    comprehensive and systematic way to understand the current state of affairs at a court or enforcement agency,
    develop targeted and realistic recommendations for improvement, and assist in generating, implementing, and
    monitoring reform efforts. The Tool was initially developed to assist the Abu Dhabi Judicial Department (ADJD)
    in addressing efficiency concerns related to major commercial cases. Based on the WBG’s knowledge of the
    country context and local court environment, the methodology was adjusted and applied to all commercial
    courts in the Emirate. After being tested in several countries with varying resource and development levels—
    namely, Nepal, Mali, and India—the Tool was adjusted and refined for use in any court system worldwide.


    OVERVIEW
    Considering that the focus of this particular instrument has been to respond to requests for assistance in
    improving court and court enforcement operations within the investment climate context, the Tool focuses on
    the main elements that influence effective operations, user access, and service delivery in commercial courts or
    specialized commercial divisions or benches.

    To obtain an understanding of these areas, the Tool focuses on concurrent assessments of:

    •	 The legal framework as it relates to commercial case processing;
    •	 The work environments and workflow of current judicial procedures, from the initial filing of a case through
       the final enforcement of judgments as applied at the courts, with a focus on internal efficiencies and services;
    •	 User experiences and perceptions, including those of judges, courts, and enforcement staff and users;
    •	 Court and enforcement data.

    These concurrent assessments aim to yield comprehensive information that can then be analyzed in relation to
    best practices in well-performing courts as well as the particular local context (including country resources and
    requested scope as identified by the client country). The analysis forms the basis of the targeted recommendations
    that are then discussed in detail with the client. These discussions provide an opportunity for the client to
    deliberate and reflect on what is needed in terms of improvements and corresponding resources and to identify
    priority areas.


    METHODOLOGY
    Implementation of the Tool is broken down into five phases, the majority of which can be undertaken concurrently
    in order to avoid delays and allow the time and opportunity to verify information as needed. The methodology
    provides a comprehensive and systematic approach to collecting and analyzing different data sources (both
    qualitative and quantitative) to understand performance and service delivery gaps. When combined, the
    results from each phase enable the development of a clear picture of how the court is operating and the
    legal constraints and potential opportunities for improvements in each process, from filing to enforcement.
    The results are carefully analyzed in light of best practices in well-performing courts worldwide and the local
    context, thus allowing for the development and presentation of specific and targeted recommendations. This
    provides a useful basis upon which to draw appropriate conclusions for designing realistic improvements, which
    also requires sufficient expertise and understanding of improvement options, change implications, and other
    requirements.




2   COMMERCIAL COURT AND ENFORCEMENT ASSESSMENT TOOL
                                         Assessment Preparation
                         (selecting court with client and agreeing to scope of assessment)

                                       Phase I – Legal Framework
                                          (review of all laws & regulations)

                                 Phase II – Foundational Information
         (organizational structure & management, judicial cadre &courts, infrastructure, automation, access)

                             Phase III – Work Processes & Experiences
                             (on-site collection of information on all court processes)

                                    Phase IV – Case Data Collection
                                          (collection of case-specific data)

                                             Phase V – Analysis
                                   (analysis of all data collected and draft report)




Phase I: Legal Framework Review. Reviewing the legal framework that governs the processing of commercial
cases clarifies how and why processes are carried out in a certain way; whether the court’s processes are legally
required or internally created; and whether the legal framework is outdated, does not support modernization
and reform activities, and/or is not in line with best practices. Undertaking this review feeds into and expedites
the completion of the on-the-ground process-mapping exercise and also enables the team to identify both
legally and administratively required improvements as well as the division of responsibilities between the court
and enforcement agency.

Phase II: Foundational Information. When assessing a commercial court system and developing targeted
and realistic recommendations, it is necessary to understand the organizational structure and management
arrangements (e.g., organization, staffing, strategic planning, performance management, and budget); physical
facilities and infrastructure; automated systems; user access to information and services; and court access to
user feedback.

Phase III: Workflow Assessment. An on-site review of how a case is processed is necessary for capturing what
court users experience and mapping actual processes used on the ground (as opposed to what is provided
by laws within guidelines). This activity provides both the data needed to develop process maps and also
information on supporting systems, staffing capacity, infrastructure, and actual user experience.

Phase IV: Case Data Collection. This phase focuses on obtaining court performance and case-specific data
for all commercial cases. Statistical case data are an integral part without which the completion of the overall
analysis is not possible; the data also enable the team to identify and verify bottlenecks that are causing delays
and provide a statistical evidence base for the analysis and recommendations that are ultimately delivered to
the client. This phase is also important because it allows the team to have a better understanding of how the
judiciary is collecting, using, and reporting on case data and the extent to which management is relying on such
data in its decision and policy-making process. It also helps identify the technical and automation capacity of
the judiciary, as well as the need for improvements.

Phase V: Data Analysis. This phase focuses on verifying, reviewing, and analyzing all the data collected in
Phases I–IV and preparing the first draft of the report that will be presented to the client for discussion. Once
discussions have taken place, revisions may be necessary before presenting the final report to the client.



                                                                                                       introduction   3
    IMPLEMENTATION APPROACH
    The underlying goal of the assessment activities is to provide the client with the information needed to make
    the requisite changes, present global good practice examples, and ultimately raise the capacity of the client’s
    judicial system. To this end, the implementation of the Tool is based on a participatory approach in which the
    client is kept engaged throughout the process and apprised at all times not only of what is being done and the
    reasons for collecting particular data, but also of the potential improvement needs and what the court can and
    should do. Engaging with the client throughout the implementation process can also be mutually beneficial, as
    it allows the assessment team to build a solid relationship with the client, which facilitates the data collection and
    verification process and builds buy-in for the final recommendations. In many cases, the client may even begin
    making changes before the assessment is completed, using the partial findings and suggestions provided by the
    team. This approach benefits the client by providing it with ample opportunities to discuss realistic improvement
    options and needs and to tap into the expertise and knowledge of the assessment team.


    SCALABILITY
    Each country, court, and agency is driven by its own policy goals, needs, priorities, and resources, among many
    other factors. This aspect is reflected in the design of the Tool, as it can be scaled up or down, depending on
    the client’s needs, resources, and reasons for implementing the assessment.

    The Tool is flexible and can be adjusted to assess the processing of various types of cases, including minor and
    major commercial, bankruptcy, debt collection, other civil, and so forth. Moreover, it is not limited to any one
    legal or judicial system and can easily be adjusted and implemented in common, civil, customary, and Shari’a
    law systems.

    Although all five phases included in the Tool are generally required in order to obtain a full understanding of
    all the areas that influence effective and accessible operations, the scope and level of detail required in each
    phase will differ with each client country. Depending on the needs or client request, only select phases may be
    carried out. For example, one client may be initially interested in a review of the legal framework and advice on
    adjusting it. In other client countries, the court or enforcement agency may be interested only in how well its
    own operations can be improved. A full assessment using the Tool can require six to 12 months, depending on
    the size of the courts and the availability of data and other documents, including all laws (ideally in a language
    that is accessible to the assessment team). This step requires resources that are sufficient enough to collect all
    the needed information, carry out an in-depth analysis, and produce a comprehensive report that can inform
    short-, medium-, and long-term reform agendas.

    When resources are limited, the Tool may be scaled down to support an initial one- or two-week on-site data
    collection effort. Especially where data are scarce (or not very reliable) and resources for extensive case file
    reviews to develop the needed data are lacking, an initial assessment based on interviews, observations, and
    more general aggregate data can be a helpful first step toward developing a more wide-ranging reform agenda,
    one that would also focus on creating the capacities and systems required to first develop and then evaluate the
    essential processing data.

    In addition to serving as a guide for improvements, for those clients about to embark on reform activities,
    the results of the assessment can also serve as a baseline against which future changes can be measured. To
    ensure successful implementation, the Tool provides guidance related to collecting data, scaling the tool, and
    exploring alternative data collection options.


    RESOURCE NEEDS
    Since the Tool is tailored to each client’s focus area, needs, capacities, and resources, the costs associated
    with implementing it will differ from one country or agency to another. The client determines the scope of the
    assessment early in the process, which will guide future implementation. An initial assessment can be conducted




4   COMMERCIAL COURT AND ENFORCEMENT ASSESSMENT TOOL
in the span of several weeks by two or three experts at a cost of under US$50,000. A full assessment in several
court locations in one country can take up to a year and cost over US$600,000, depending on the accessibility
of laws and data as well as travel requirements and other related costs.


BENEFITS OF USING THE TOOL
•	 The Tool provides a standardized, systematic, and comprehensive approach for collecting information and
   identifying improvement needs for a judiciary/court and enforcement agency. This ensures that data from
   all relevant information sources are compiled in an efficient and systematic manner that allows for cross-data
   validation. Especially when more than one court or enforcement agency is part of the assessment, uniform
   data collection is essential to ensure that data can be compared in order to understand performance and
   delivery differences.

•	 The provided data collection instruments reduce preparation time for the team. They can be shared early on
   to discuss data needs and requirements with the client and to begin data collection locally, if that is feasible.

•	 As with any tool of this kind, the real challenge is not just in collecting and ensuring the validity of the
   needed data but also in performing the analysis. Here, the Tool provides some guidance on compiling and
   analyzing the results. At the same time, although the data will tell a story of court performance over time,
   understanding and interpreting the story still tends to require experience and expertise to draw practical
   conclusions with meaningful recommendations for change. Thus, although the Tool makes the data collection
   easier and ensures a systematic approach, it does not replace the expert review and input required to analyze
   the information gained from the multi-method data collection and to recommend meaningful and realistic
   change processes and inputs that will make a difference.

•	 The Tool can serve to guide reform efforts by providing a blueprint for short-, medium-, and long-term
   improvements. It can also be the basis for developing detailed and realistic action plans.

•	 The Tool produces reports that can serve as a baseline against which future improvements can be measured.

•	 The Tool enables courts and their enforcement agencies to have a better understanding of what information
   they, along with other related entities, should be collecting in order to effectively monitor and improve
   performance and service delivery over time.

•	 Application of the Tool can serve to enhance the capacity of the client. Engaging with the client during
   implementation, explaining why particular data sets are being collected and how they can be used, and
   providing lessons learned from other well-performing judiciaries together provide the client with valuable
   information and opportunities to discuss improvements that can serve to increase the client’s own capacities
   to affect changes.

We are excited that many other courts and enforcement agencies are interested in applying this instrument and
envision that it will continue to evolve over time. We know that understanding courts and their enforcement
operations has many facets, and our combined experience will continue to shape the Tool and other future
assessment lessons that we hope to capture and share to advance court performance and service delivery
beyond current best practice standards.




                                                                                                     introduction      5
    Preparing for the Assessment

    To prepare for the assessment, the team must engage with the client in detailed discussions about results
    expectations, the purpose, scope, and objectives of the assessment, and what the client should expect to learn
    and provide throughout the process.

    These discussions are important to ensure that there is clarity about what the assessment can deliver, what the
    time and resource needs are, and what involvement from the client will be needed. At this stage, the team
    should come out of the discussions with a clear picture of the availability of the various pieces of information
    and data from the courts and other agencies, the need for supplemental data collection, and client capacities
    to support or facilitate the assessment. The team should also consider the need for and availability of additional
    local consultants to support data collection and an evaluation of the legal framework and/or to coordinate
    meetings and interviews.

    Particularly when more than one court location is the focus of the assessment, it will be important to clarify
    accessibility questions and the need for formal authorization to share data, conduct observations and interviews,
    and determine whether all courts that are handling commercial cases have to be involved or if a representative
    sample would suffice and how such a sample should be selected.

    In preparation, the team should request case data on the prospective court in order to determine whether that
    court can be assessed (e.g. the court should have a large enough caseload to draw reliable conclusions about
    the processing of commercial cases). In those cases where the court does not meet the requisite criteria, the
    client must select another or an additional court to better reflect the overall caseload of the commercial courts
    and allow the team to conduct its analysis.

    Preliminary meetings with management. Once the court(s) to be included have been agreed upon and
    selected, the Bank team is advised to hold preliminary discussions with the client prior to beginning of the
    assessment in order to:

    •	 Identify and agree to the scope of the assessment (i.e., how limited or comprehensive it will be)
    •	 Outline the assessment steps and requirements, as well as discuss the planned process in detail and answer
       any questions the client may have
    •	 Outline the resources and level of engagement required from the client (and individual courts and other
       agencies) to complete the assessment and obtain full support
    •	 Agree upon a client focal point (person or committee) that the team can rely on for support throughout the
       assessment
    •	 Discuss data availability and access to court and agency information issues
    •	 Provide a timeline for the deliverables (i.e., the draft and final reports)
    •	 Agree upon a dissemination strategy and communications approach

    Plans and material for continuous client communication and feedback. The Bank’s approach is to closely
    engage with the client throughout the assessment process. Keeping the client apprised on the progress and
    engaging in a dialogue about the initial findings and improvement needs are important to building the capacity
    of the client and paving the way to faster implementation of reform. In some instances, the client may even begin
    making changes before the completion of the assessment, using the partial findings and suggestions provided
    by the team. This approach also works to build trust, ultimately facilitating the completion of the assessment.
    In the interests of clarity and consistency, it is helpful to prepare a one-page summary outlining the purpose,
    methodology, and envisioned timelines to share with staff and others who will be involved in the assessment.



6   COMMERCIAL COURT AND ENFORCEMENT ASSESSMENT TOOL
Identification of client counterpart and assessment coordinating individual or team. Coordinating the data
collection process can be time consuming and requires a high level of engagement with the client. To facilitate
this process, the Bank team is advised to request that the client identify an individual or team of people with
whom the Bank team can coordinate the various assessment tasks. The more courts that are included in the
assessment across various locations, the more important it is to have a clear coordination mechanism in place
that facilitates data collection and client feedback communication. The client’s coordinating team/individual
should have access to judges and court/other relevant staff and counterparts, and the capacity to arrange for
interviews and meetings, coordinate with the Bank’s team missions, and work on the ground and via e-mail.

NOTE: The team is advised to use the form below to ensure contact information is up-to-date, especially when
more than one entity is involved. When completed, the team should also share it with the client to facilitate
communication between all those involved in the assessment.



                                     ASSESSMENT PREPARATION
     Assessment Contact Information
 1   Address of court/judiciary


 2   Official working days & hours


 3   Key counterpart                         -Name:
                                             -Title:
                                             -Telephone #:
                                             -Mobile #:
                                             -E-mail:
 4   Ministry of Justice (MOJ) or            Individual contact info:
     judiciary coordinating committee/
     group/individual                        Members of committee (names and best way to contact each):
                                             1)
                                             2)
                                             3)
                                             4)
                                             5)
                                             6)
                                             7)
                                             8)
                                             9)
                                             If the committee meets on a regular basis, state the frequency of
                                             the meetings:


                                             Key contact on the committee & contact info:




                                                                                 Preparing for the Assessment     7
     5   World Bank Assessment Team             Name:    contact info:
                                                Name:    contact info:
                                                 Name:   contact info:
         (Bank team contact information should
                                                 Name:   contact info:
         be provided to the client to facilitate
         communication.)                         Name:   contact info:
                                                Name:    contact info:
                                                Name:    contact info:
                                                Name:    contact info:

     6   Court(s)/agencies to be assessed
         (to be determined by the client with
         input from the Bank, as needed)




8   COMMERCIAL COURT AND ENFORCEMENT ASSESSMENT TOOL
Phase I


Legal Framework Review
 Phase I of the assessment focuses on reviewing and assessing the legal and
 regulatory framework that governs the handling of commercial cases. This
 step allows for a better understanding of how the laws and regulations may
 be affecting—negatively or positively—the processing of commercial cases
 as well as user access.




IMPLEMENTING PHASE I
The successful completion of this portion of the assessment depends on two factors: 1) access to all relevant
laws, regulations, and internal rules in a language that is accessible to the team; and 2) the assessment team’s
legal expertise and capacity to analyze and map legal processes as envisioned by the law. This phase can begin
in conjunction with Phase II. Obtaining copies of laws and regulations may be difficult and time consuming
in many countries, as some judiciaries may not have or be able to provide laws electronically, while others
may even have difficulty providing them on paper. In many cases, the laws will not exist in English or another
language assessment team members can read well, which will require the allocation of additional time and
resources for translation. Once available and depending on the complexity of the country’s legal framework and
the legal expertise of the team, an analysis of the legal framework will be conducted, the results of which will
serve as the basis for the recommendations.

Phase I is a significant part of the assessment in that it clarifies how and why processes are carried out in a
certain way. It also determines whether the actions of the court or enforcement agency are legally required or
internally created; how users have access (including access to interpretation, legal assistance, and fee waivers);
and whether the legal framework is outdated, does not support modernization (including electronic solutions)
and reform activities, and is not in line with best practices. In addition, understanding the legal framework prior
to conducting the process mapping required in Phase III will not only expedite the latter, but also enable the
identification of targeted changes or improvements both legally and administratively.

In some cases, the review may involve an examination of particular laws and/or draft legislation. This may be
requested by the client, who is looking for advice on certain draft legislation and/or to better understand the
impact of some proposed legislation. It may also be necessary when a draft law is likely to be passed in the
foreseeable future to ensure that the assessment is still relevant.




                                                                                Phase I: LEGAL FRAMEWORK REVIEW       9
     METHODOLOGY
     1.	 Obtain copies of all laws and regulations, including drafts that may be pending final adoption, selected
         decrees and court rules, and any other legally binding orders, etc.
     2.	 Conduct a review and analysis of the legal and regulatory framework.
     3.	Develop a process map for each major case event (i.e., filing, notifications, etc.), based on the legal
         requirements.


     MAJOR FACTORS TO BE CONSIDERED
     •	 The review should be conducted by a team member with a legal background/education and good knowledge
        and understanding of the litigation process in general, and by someone who understands the organizational
        impact of the legal framework.
     •	 The legal review should be completed prior to conducting the “Case Workflow” (i.e., before process maps
        of the actual as-is process required in Phase III are developed).
     •	 The legal review and analysis is time consuming and may require an assessment of the laws in multiple
        languages.
     •	 The potential for delays in this phase exists when laws must be translated into English.
     •	 Identifying and engaging with skilled translators should be considered early on in the process.
     •	 The team should be cognizant that developing a process map for each process that is based purely on the
        law already requires considerable time; depending on the complexity of the laws and the processes, this can
        take anywhere from a few days to a few weeks.


     A.	 Laws and Regulations to be Reviewed

     PURPOSE
     In order to have a solid understanding of the legal framework governing the handling of commercial cases,
     specific laws and regulations that address the various processes must be reviewed and analyzed.

     •	 The list provided below is illustrative, and additional laws may need to be obtained and reviewed, depending
        on the nature of the legal framework in each country.
     •	 The team should request not just the current laws, regulations, and internal rules, but also any pending drafts.
     •	 Where official legal commentaries exist, they should also be requested and reviewed to assist in the analysis
        of the current situation and options for changes.
     •	 The list provides the assessment team with an overview of the type of issues that must be assessed.
     •	 The list is a tool that allows the team to manage the legal review process by keeping track of which laws/
        regulations or local decrees or orders were obtained. The list should be adjusted based on what is needed
        in a particular jurisdiction.
     •	 The list should be shared with the client to facilitate the collection and review process and to allow the team
        and client counterparts to manage and discuss progress.




10   COMMERCIAL COURT AND ENFORCEMENT ASSESSMENT TOOL
                  PHASE I – LEGAL FRAMEWORK REVIEW – REQUEST FORM
                                                                         Check All That Are Available
    Laws & Accompanying Regulations
    (federal and local, if applicable)                                  English
                                                                                          Official Language
                                                                  (or other language)
 1 Constitution
 2 Civil (commercial) and enforcement procedures
 3 Notaries
 4 Company law
 5 Alternative dispute resolution (ADR)/ mediation/arbitration/
   reconciliation laws
 6 Experts
 7 Evidence (commercial and civil)
 8 Court fees
 9 Electronic transactions
10 Electronic signatures and payments
11 Law establishing commercial courts
12 Commercial procedures
13 Lawyers/regulation of the law practice
14 Interpretation
15 Bailiffs (enforcements officers and notifiers)
    Ministerial, Supreme Court,                                         English
                                                                                          Official Language
    Judicial Council Decrees/Orders                               (or other language)
 1 Establishing commercial courts
 2 Establishing judicial panels
 3 Establishing qualifications required of commercial judges
 4 Establishing time standards (for case processing)
 5 Establishing performance standards for judges
 6 Governing ADR services provided (if any)
 7 Local court rules (commercial courts)
 8 Establishing case processing procedures and guidelines
 9 Regulating the practice of law
                                                                        English
    Administrative Orders/Decrees                                 (or other language)
                                                                                          Official Language

 1 Establishing the commercial courts
 2 Establishing the qualifications of mediators or
   whoever is conducting ADR
 3 Organizational structure of the courts
 4 Qualification of judges (if any)
 5 Qualifications/terms of reference for ADR providers (if any)
 6 Establishing the performance evaluation process for judges
 7 Establishing the performance evaluation process
   for administrative staff
 8 Other
                                                                             Phase I: LEGAL FRAMEWORK REVIEW   11
                                                                                English
          Policies & Procedure Manuals                                    (or other language)
                                                                                                   Official Language

       1 Court services/court support
       2 Notaries
       3 Registration
       4 Notification
       5 Hearings
       6 Execution/enforcement
       7 Sale of property (auctions, etc.)
       8 ADR (if offered)




     B.	 Legal Analysis

     PURPOSE
     The purpose of this review is to better understand the court’s legal/legislative environment and how the laws
     and regulations may be affecting, negatively or positively, the processing of commercial cases.


     WHEN UNDERTAKING THIS REVIEW, THE TEAM SHOULD:
     1.	 Pay particular attention to what the laws allow or require with regard to each step in the case process, from
         registration to the enforcement of judgments and sale of property.
     2.	 Use the list of topics outlined below as a guide when reviewing the laws—the list points to issues that should
         be reviewed closely when analyzing each law.
     3.	 Focus on identifying legislative and rule impediments to the efficient processing of cases, that is, timelines,
         rules for postponements, complaints and appeal options, etc.
     4.	 Communicate with the client, as needed, to obtain clarifications. In many cases, the laws are written in such
         a way that it is difficult for team members to fully understand what is intended by certain provisions. Having
         open communication channels with counterparts and access to judges or others with a good understanding
         of the laws is necessary for successfully completing this task.


     ONCE COMPLETED, THIS REVIEW WILL:
     A.	 Serve to facilitate the analysis of how the laws are impacting the processing of commercial cases by identifying
         legally created bottlenecks and ineffective procedures throughout the entirety of the case process, from
         filing to enforcement
     B.	Enable the assessment to analyze the laws in light of international best practices and provide targeted
         recommendations
     C.	 Enable the team to develop legal “process maps” outlining in detail the legal procedural requirements
     D.	 Allow the team to more efficiently conduct an on-site “walk-through” or a Phase III process-mapping exercise
         and verify and identify whether the processes are legally required or a result of internally created practices


     GUIDANCE
     The form below is intended to draw the team’s attention to particular issues within each law that may affect the
     efficiency and effectiveness of case processing. The list of issues is not necessarily inclusive but is intended to
     serve as a guide to the team while conducting the legal review and analysis.



12   COMMERCIAL COURT AND ENFORCEMENT ASSESSMENT TOOL
                              PHASE I – LEGAL FRAMEWORK REVIEW
1.	  Civil Procedures Law/Code
   Key Areas to be Assessed
   Enactment & review               -	 When was the law enacted?
                                    -	 Has the law been amended? When?
                                    -	 Which entity(s) is responsible for reviewing and amending laws?
                                    -	 Does the law have implementing regulations?
                                    -	 How are laws amending laws—describe if possible.

   Jurisdiction                     -	 Jurisdiction of the courts: threshold (major, minor, expedited courts, etc.)
                                       and subject matter
                                    -	 Commercial court—subject matter and threshold for minor and
                                       major cases
   Definition of commercial         	 Does the law define what constitutes a commercial dispute?
   dispute
   Filing/registration procedures   -	 Documents required, including power of attorney (POA) and notarized
                                       documents
                                    -	 Evidence required at time of filing, if any
                                    -	 Where registration is conducted and the filing process
                                    -	 Fees assessed and by whom?
                                    -	 Electronic payments allowed?
                                    -	 Electronic filing allowed?
                                    -	 Judicial panel assignment—how are cases assigned? How are judges
                                       assigned?
                                    -	 Time frame for first hearing—when and how is it set?
                                    -	 File completion review undertaken? If yes, who reviews the files? What is
                                       the process?
                                    -	 Time frame for notification
                                    -	 Documents required for notification request
                                    -	 Process for alternative notification? Electronic notification?
                                    -	 Postponement allowed? Any limitation on granting postponement?
                                    -	 Can a party request an expert at the time of filing? What effect, if any, does
                                       the request have on the case process?

   Power of attorney (POA)          -	 Requirement for executing a POA
                                    -	 Process required
                                    -	 Documents required
                                    -	 How long does it take to execute a POA?
                                    -	 What is the cost, and how is it calculated and by whom?

   Notarized documents              -	 Must contracts be notarized?
                                    -	 If yes, how are contracts notarized? What is the cost and how is the cost
                                       assessed?
                                    -	 Any other documents that must be notarized in order for the courts to
                                       accept them?



                                                                                     Phase I: LEGAL FRAMEWORK REVIEW    13
         Expedited cases             -	 Does the law define expedited lawsuits?
                                     -	 Where does a party file the case and what is the filing process?
                                     -	 What documents are required at the time of filing?
                                     -	 Is there a court dedicated to handling an expedited case?
                                     -	 Expedited judges—do they exist?
                                     -	 Are judges assigned to expedited courts on a permanent or temporary
                                        basis?
                                     -	 What are the powers/authority of the court?
                                     -	 What are the fees, if any, that are required to file an expedited case?
                                     -	 Request for pre-judgment attachment—how can a party request it? What
                                        is the process and cost? Where? What effect does the request have on the
                                        case process?


         Pre-judgment attachment     -	 When can a party request it?
         (movable property)          -	 What are the documents required?
                                     -	 How to request attachment and where to file/make the request?
                                     -	 What is the effect of requesting attachments on the first hearing date and
                                        notification process?
                                     -	 Attachment process—how is property attached and by whom and when
                                        (time limitation)?
                                     -	 What are the fees? How are they assessed and by whom?
                                     -	 Where is the property stored?
                                     -	 If property is not moved, how is it protected?
                                     -	 Is a custodian appointed to guard the property that was not moved? How
                                        is the custodian appointed and by whom? Are custodians paid for their
                                        services?


         Notification procedures     -	 What documents are required to begin notification?
                                     -	 What is the process for notifying defendant(s)—who and how?
                                     -	 What are the time limitations for completing notification?
                                     -	 What is the effect of unsuccessful notification?
                                     -	 Alternative notification methods (publication and other methods)—
                                        what is allowed, what are the requirements, what are the process and
                                        procedures, what is the role of the judge, if any, in the process?
                                     -	 E-notification—is it provided for and allowed?


         Hearings                    -	 What types of hearings are provided for?
                                     -	 How are hearings scheduled? And by whom?
                                     -	 What kind of notification is provided? E-notification allowed? Phone calls
                                        or text messages allowed?
                                     -	 What is the effect of parties not appearing?
                                     -	 Postponements—do they require a hearing?
                                     -	 What time standards are in place, if any?




14   COMMERCIAL COURT AND ENFORCEMENT ASSESSMENT TOOL
Continuances            -	 Does the law define when they can be granted? Any requirements that
                           must be met before granting?
                        -	 Are there limitations for granting continuances?
                        -	 What kind of notice is required to parties?
                        -	 What is the effect of granting a continuance?
                        -	 How are continuances requested—by the parties? By court?

Judgments               -	 What is the process for issuing final judgments?
                        -	 What are the time limitations for issuance of judgments?
                        -	 How are judgments issued? Process for announcing the judgment—
                           who and how?
                        -	 How do parties receive notice that a judgment is issued?
                        -	 Signing the judgment—who must sign and what is the process?
                        -	 When is a judgment executable?
                        -	 How can parties obtain a copy of the judgment?
                        -	 Are there any restrictions as to who can obtain a copy, if any?
                        -	 Are judgments published? E-publication provided for?


Appeals                 -	 Are appeals allowed in all cases?
                        -	 What are the time frames for appealing a first-instance-level case?
                        -	 What are the time frames for appeals of an appellate court judgment?


Execution/enforcement   -	 What is an executable judgment?
                        -	 What is the process for beginning the procedure? Which agency is
                           responsible?
                        -	 Expedited execution—if available, what is the process?
                        -	 If and when execution requested, does the request constitute a new case?
                        -	 What documents are required to file for execution of judgment?
                        -	 What is the cost? How is it assessed and by whom?
                        -	 Process for executing a judgment (movable property)—how and by
                           whom?
                        -	 Does the law allow for private enforcement? If so, what is the process and
                           who oversees it?
                        -	 Does the law clarify when a judgment has been successfully executed?
                        -	 Can parties offer a settlement? Alternative settlement? If yes, when and how?
                        -	 Attached property—does the law provide for how it is moved and sold?
                        -	 Auction/sale of property to satisfy a judgment—when, who, and how?
                        -	 Is the auction undertaken by the court (who) or by private auctioneer?
                        -	 Does the law provide guidelines on what is allowed or required if the
                           auction Is not successful? Can the auction be postponed or held again?
                           What are the time frames?
                        -	 Distribution of proceeds of a sale—who, how, and when?




                                                                     Phase I: LEGAL FRAMEWORK REVIEW       15
         Translation/interpretation          -	 Are the courts required to provide translation services to litigants who
                                                can’t communicate in the official language of the court?
                                             -	 Who is required to make the request?
                                             -	 Who bears the cost of the translation?

      2.	  ADR Law
         Enactment & review                  -	 When was the law passed and when was it last amended?
                                             -	 Does the law have implementing regulations?

         Services                            -	 Does the law allow for the use of ADR mechanisms?
                                             -	 If yes, which services (mediation, arbitration, etc.) are provided for and are
                                                they mandatory?
                                             -	 If ADR is mandatory, when is it required in the process?
                                             -	 What type of cases are subject to ADR?
                                             -	 Does the law provide for court-annexed and/or court-provided ADR
                                                services? If yes, which type?

         Cost                                -	 Are ADR services provided free of cost or are they fee based?
                                             -	 If the law provides for more than one type of service, then what is the cost
                                                for each?
                                             -	 If cost based, then how are the fees calculated and who pays?
                                             -	 Are e-payments allowed?

         Mediation                           -	 Is it voluntary or mandatory?
                                             -	 If voluntary, what is the authority of the judge, if any, in recommending it?
                                                When does it take place?
                                             -	 If mandatory, then when is it required?
                                             -	 Does the law provide for a timeline for completion?
                                             -	 If mediation fails, what happens to the dispute?
                                             -	 Are the settlement agreements final and enforceable?
                                                Can they be appealed?
                                             -	 If it is not court-annexed mediation, who is mediating cases? How are
                                                mediators selected?
                                             -	 If it is court annexed/provided mediation, how are mediators selected?
                                                Does the law provide selection criteria? Are the criteria clearly defined?
                                             -	 Evaluation of mediators—does the law provide for performance
                                                evaluations? Standards?

         Other ADR services                  -	 What is offered and how is it offered?
         (arbitration, conciliation, etc.)   -	 What types of case are handled?

         Small claims court                  -	 Does the law provide for small claims courts?
                                             -	 If yes, what is the court’s jurisdiction? What is the court’s subject matter
                                                and threshold?
                                             -	 Are the Judgments final and executable?
                                             -	 Can the judgments be appealed? Where and when?
                                             -	 Fees—are they assessed and how?
                                             -	 Does the court allow or provide for ADR? If so, what kind of service and what
                                                is the cost? When is it provided? What is the effect of resolving the dispute?



16   COMMERCIAL COURT AND ENFORCEMENT ASSESSMENT TOOL
3.	  Court Fees Law
   Enactment & review            -	 When was the law passed and when was it last reviewed and amended?
                                 -	 Does the law have implementing regulations?

   Cap on case filing fees       -	 Does the law impose a cap on filing fees in:
                                       1)		 Civil cases?
                                       2)		 Commercial cases (minor and major)?
                                 -	 If yes, what is the cap in each type of case?

   Assessment of filing fees     -	 Are there guidelines on how to assess filing fees for each case type?
                                 -	 Who assesses the fees?
                                 -	 Are e-payments provided for and allowed? If not, how are filing fees paid?

   Objecting to assessed case    -	 Are parties provided with the right to object to the fees assessed?
   filing fees                   -	 If yes, how and what is the process?
                                 -	 Who has the authority to reduce the fees?

   Exemptions from case          -	 Does the law provide for any exemptions from paying filing fees?
   filing fees                      If so, what type of cases are exempted from filing fees?
                                 -	 What documents are required, if any, when requesting and exemption?
                                 -	 What is the process for requesting an exemption and who has the
                                    authority to grant it?

   Waivers, reductions,          -	 Does the law have a waiver provision?
   and postponements of          -	 Does the law provide for a waiver scheme? How, what is required, how
   case filing fees                 long does it take to issue a waiver, and who decides?
                                 -	 Does the law allow for a reduction of fees (upon request of the party)?
                                 -	 What is the scheme and process required to obtain a fee reduction? How,
                                    what is required, how long does it take to grant it, and who decides?
                                 -	 Does the law allow for a postponement of payment of fees?
                                 -	 If yes, what is the scheme and process for obtaining a postponement?
                                    How, what is required, how long it takes to issue a waiver, and who decides?

   Payment of case filing fees   -	 How are filing fees paid? What is the process—when and where to pay?
                                 -	 Does the law address /allow or prohibit e-payment?

   Refunds                       -	 When are refunds allowed?
                                 -	 Who has authority to issue a refund?

   Other fees                    -	 Does the law provide for payment of fees for other court services, e.g.,
                                    electronic filing, etc.?
                                 -	 If yes, list the services.

4.	  Evidence Law
   Enactment & review            -	 When was the law passed and when was it last reviewed and amended?
                                 -	 Does the law have implementing regulations?




                                                                              Phase I: LEGAL FRAMEWORK REVIEW      17
         Evidentiary Process         -	 When is evidence presented in the case?
                                     -	 Are hearings required to present evidence?
                                     -	 Does the law provide for deliberation? Cross examination of witnesses?
                                     -	 Does the law have standards for submission of evidence?
                                     -	 Does the law provide for deadlines for entering evidence into the record?
                                     -	 What is the authority of judges with regard to evidentiary matters?
                                     -	 Is there a separate law governing evidence in commercial disputes? If so,
                                        this law must be reviewed.
                                     -	 Does the law allow for early evidence disclosure?
                                     -	 What is the timeline for disclosure of evidence?
                                     -	 What is the timeline for evidentiary deliberation?

      5.	  Experts
         Enactment & review          -	 When was the law passed and when was it last reviewed and amended?
                                     -	 Does the law have implementing regulations?

         Request, selection,         -	 Who can request an expert and when (any limitation on request?)
         & appointment               -	 Can the court appoint an expert on its own?
                                     -	 Does the judiciary employ experts as staff?
                                     -	 If yes, does the law provide for hiring criteria/qualifications?
                                        Evaluation criteria?
                                     -	 Does the judiciary keep and control a register for experts?

         Expert fees                 -	 Who bears the expert’s fees?
                                     -	 How is the expert fee assessed and paid? When is it paid?
                                     -	 Is e-payment allowed?
                                     -	 If not, then how are the fees paid?

         Expert Reports              -	 How are expert reports presented? In open court/hearings, what happens
                                        during hearings and can the experts be questioned by the court and/or
                                        the parties?
                                     -	 Does the law outline any standards for how reports are prepared and
                                        presented?
                                     -	 Does the law provide for deadline (time frame) for presenting reports?
                                     -	 Does the law allow for continuances for presenting reports? Any standards
                                        that must be met? How many continuances may be granted for this
                                        purpose?
                                     -	 Does the law provide for penalties for failing or delaying in presenting the
                                        report?
                                     -	 Are reports filed with the court clerks or are they presented in a hearing in
                                        open court, etc.?
                                     -	 What is the authority and role of the judge?

         Performance                 -	 Does the law provide for a code of conduct or practice regulating the work
                                        of experts?




18   COMMERCIAL COURT AND ENFORCEMENT ASSESSMENT TOOL
6.	  Electronic Transaction & Signature
   Enactment & review                -	 When was the law passed and when was it last reviewed and amended?
                                     -	 Does the law have implementing regulations?

   Electronic signatures             -	 Does the law provide for the use of e-signatures for authenticating
                                        documents?
                                     -	 Does the court require e-signatures for electronic court filings?

   Electronic filing                 -	 Does law permit court filings to be accepted in electronic format?
                                     -	 Does law permit court records (case files) to be maintained exclusively in
                                        electronic format?

   Electronic payment                -	 Does law permit the receipt of court fees and other payments by
                                        electronic transfer (e.g., credit card, debit card, electronic funds transfer)?


   Electronic service/notification   -	 Does law permit service of official court notices by electronic media
                                        (in lieu of paper document delivery)? Under what conditions is this
                                        capability used?




                                                                                   Phase I: LEGAL FRAMEWORK REVIEW        19
     C.	 Process Mapping Based on the Legal Framework

     PURPOSE
     After having reviewed the laws, the team should next develop an initial process map depicting each step
     required and/or permissible by law for each case process, from registering a case to enforcing a judgment,
     including the required timelines.

     Developing these maps will assist the team in a number of ways. It will help to: 1) clarify all legal processing
     requirements; 2) identify areas that may be vague and thereby potentially lead to different interpretations and
     applications by judges; and 3) identify areas of the laws that would need to be amended as well as areas where
     the courts can develop improved internal processes. Having these documents will also enable the team to
     conduct the subsequent “process walk-through” more efficiently and allow them to differentiate between what
     is legally required and what has been internally applied by the courts. (See Annex 1, Illustrative Legal Process
     Map)

     These sets of process maps will specifically feed into three other tasks: 1) the subsequent development of the
     “as-is work-flow maps” for each process; 2) the overall analysis of the processes used; and 3) the development
     of targeted and realistic recommendations for change.


     METHODOLOGY: 1) detailed review of relevant laws, regulations, decrees, orders, and court rules.


     WHILE UNDERTAKING THIS TASK, THE TEAM SHOULD:
     1.	 Allocate ample time for its completion and be very detail oriented
     2.	 Carefully note where the laws are vague or do not address an issue altogether
     3.	 Verify legal ambiguities with knowledgeable persons at the courts (i.e., commercial court judges)
     4.	 Ensure that a process map is completed for all the case processes, including:
          a)	Registration
          b)	 Notification/service of process
          c)	 Pre-judgment attachment of movable property
          d)	 Alternative dispute-resolution (ADR) services and processes if used and by type of service provided
          e)	 Court hearings
          f )	 Experts—request, cost, judicial authority, and process
          g)	 Issuance of judgments
          h)	 Execution/enforcement of judgments, including:
               –	 Sale of attached property by public auction
               –	 Distribution of the sale proceeds




       The tasks outlined on the following pages are intended to aid in capturing the legal processing
       requirements in sequence. This information can then be more easily transposed into process maps.
       The lists and maps together allow for a well-developed validation process with local legal experts, a
       basis for a legal analysis of inefficiencies, and options for improvements.




20   COMMERCIAL COURT AND ENFORCEMENT ASSESSMENT TOOL
a. Registration


                                     REGISTRATION
                                  Who is        Who is
                                Responsible   Responsible                         Specific
                    Documents                               Time
 Step Description                   for           for                  Cost   Article/Section
                     Required                             Limitation
                                 Initiating   Completing                        in the Law
                                  Action        Action
 1

 2

 3

 4

 5

 6

 7

 8

 9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25




                                                               Phase I: LEGAL FRAMEWORK REVIEW   21
     b. Notification


                                NOTIFICATION/SERVICE OF PROCESS
                                         Who is           Who is
                                       Responsible      Responsible                         Specific
                         Documents                                    Time
      Step Description                     for              for                  Cost   Article/Section
                          Required                                  Limitation
                                        Initiating      Completing                        in the Law
                                         Action           Action
      1

      2

      3

      4

      5

      6

      7

      8

      9

     10

     11

     12

     13

     14

     15

     16

     17

     18

     19

     20

     21

     22

     23

     24

     25




22   COMMERCIAL COURT AND ENFORCEMENT ASSESSMENT TOOL
c. Pre-judgment attachment


                PRE-JUDGMENT ATTACHMENT OF MOVABLE PROPERTY
                                  Who is        Who is
                                Responsible   Responsible                         Specific
                    Documents                               Time
 Step Description                   for           for                  Cost   Article/Section
                     Required                             Limitation
                                 Initiating   Completing                        in the Law
                                  Action        Action
 1

 2

 3

 4

 5

 6

 7

 8

 9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25




                                                               Phase I: LEGAL FRAMEWORK REVIEW   23
     d. ADR (if used and by type, e.g., mediation, conciliation, etc.)


                                                     ADR
                                         Who is           Who is
                                       Responsible      Responsible                         Specific
                         Documents                                    Time
      Step Description                     for              for                  Cost   Article/Section
                          Required                                  Limitation
                                        Initiating      Completing                        in the Law
                                         Action           Action
      1

      2

      3

      4

      5

      6

      7

      8

      9

     10

     11

     12

     13

     14

     15

     16

     17

     18

     19

     20

     21

     22

     23

     24

     25




24   COMMERCIAL COURT AND ENFORCEMENT ASSESSMENT TOOL
e. Court hearings, experts, and continuances


                    COURT HEARINGS, EXPERTS, AND CONTINUANCES
                                  Who is         Who is
                                Responsible    Responsible                         Specific
                    Documents                                Time
 Step Description                   for            for                  Cost   Article/Section
                     Required                              Limitation
                                 Initiating    Completing                        in the Law
                                  Action         Action
 1

 2

 3

 4

 5

 6

 7

 8

 9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25




                                                                Phase I: LEGAL FRAMEWORK REVIEW   25
     f. Issuance of judgments


                                      ISSUANCE OF JUDGMENTS
                                         Who is           Who is
                                       Responsible      Responsible                         Specific
                         Documents                                    Time
      Step Description                     for              for                  Cost   Article/Section
                          Required                                  Limitation
                                        Initiating      Completing                        in the Law
                                         Action           Action
      1

      2

      3

      4

      5

      6

      7

      8

      9

     10

     11

     12

     13

     14

     15

     16

     17

     18

     19

     20

     21

     22

     23

     24

     25




26   COMMERCIAL COURT AND ENFORCEMENT ASSESSMENT TOOL
g. Execution/enforcement of judgment


                      EXECUTION/ENFORCEMENT OF JUDGMENT
                                  Who is        Who is
                                Responsible   Responsible                         Specific
                    Documents                               Time
 Step Description                   for           for                  Cost   Article/Section
                     Required                             Limitation
                                 Initiating   Completing                        in the Law
                                  Action        Action
 1

 2

 3

 4

 5

 6

 7

 8

 9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25




                                                               Phase I: LEGAL FRAMEWORK REVIEW   27
     h. Sale of attached movable property by public sale


                          SALE OF MOVABLE PROPERTY BY PUBLIC SALE
                                         Who is           Who is
                                       Responsible      Responsible                         Specific
                         Documents                                    Time
      Step Description                     for              for                  Cost   Article/Section
                          Required                                  Limitation
                                        Initiating      Completing                        in the Law
                                         Action           Action
      1

      2

      3

      4

      5

      6

      7

      8

      9

     10

     11

     12

     13

     14

     15

     16

     17

     18

     19

     20

     21

     22

     23

     24

     25




28   COMMERCIAL COURT AND ENFORCEMENT ASSESSMENT TOOL
Phase II


Institutional Information
 Phase II entails collecting detailed information that will serve to provide the
 Bank team with a foundational understanding of the organization as a whole
 and its capacity.




LIST OF THE TYPES OF INFORMATION TO BE COLLECTED:
A.	Organizational structure and management arrangements (e.g., organization, staffing, strategic planning,
    performance management, and budget)
B.	 Judicial cadre and courts (e.g., judicial panels, commercial court jurisdiction, and judicial rotation, etc.)
C.	 Physical facilities and infrastructure
D.	Automated systems
E.	 User access to information and services
F.	 Court access to user feedback


METHODOLOGY FOR COLLECTING THE INFORMATION
The Bank team will need to collect organizational documents and data and to arrange a number of targeted
interviews and in-depth meetings with commercial court/bench judges, court support staff, and other
administration staff as well as management teams. Based on the subject matters addressed, the team should
request the assistance of the client in scheduling these meetings, provide ample notice and reasons for the
meeting, and furnish a draft agenda with a summary of the subject matters to be discussed—the more detailed
the information the better prepared the interviewees will be. This task is time consuming because of the difficulty
in coordinating and arranging the meetings.

The willingness to meet may also be an issue due to busy schedules and a disinclination to share information
with outsiders. As such, the assessment team should plan ahead by allowing sufficient time for the client to
coordinate these meetings. Flexibility is required and the team must be as accommodating as possible to the
judges and staff.


VERIFICATION
The information provided during the initial meetings will often have to be verified and expanded upon, and at
times, additional issues may need to be clarified further. This process requires flexibility and time.



                                                                              Phase iI: INSTITUTIONAL INFORMATION     29
     A.	 Organizational Structures and Management Arrangements

     PURPOSE
     When assessing a commercial court system, it is necessary to understand the organizational and management
     arrangements in place. For instance, whether the courts are managed by the Ministry of Justice or a judicial
     council will not only influence the type of changes recommended but will also help identify who may affect
     such changes and who must be interviewed during the assessment. It is critical to understand the type and
     extent of the authority exercised over the courts, judges, and staff; the overall organizational structure; the
     existing internal capacity to support efficient processes; and the interplay between the various entities within
     the judiciary in order to develop targeted and realistic recommendations that are based on the actual local
     structures, needs, and capacity.

     Another significant area that must be addressed is the existence of a strategic vision and goals that the organization
     is aiming to achieve (i.e., whether a strategic plan is in place). Absent a strategic direction, achieving medium-
     and long-term improvements can be problematic, as court resources may be diverted to other priorities, which
     may be detrimental to achieving sustainable improvements and results. In addition to guiding the court’s
     activities, having clear goals is also important for setting performance standards and developing a court culture
     that is built on understanding and striving to achieve a unified vision.


     METHODOLOGY: 1) desk review of court documents and data; and 2) interviews with judges, court staff, and
     other agency staff.




                                  PHASE II – FOUNDATIONAL INFORMATION
          Organizational Structure & Management Arrangements
       1 Organizational chart of               Available:                     Not available:
         the judiciary/MOJ
                                               If yes, then attach a copy of any recent or planned chart.

                                               Any recent or planned changes?

                                               Yes:                           No:

                                               If yes, describe the changes.



       2 Describe the supervision              Judicial Council (if any):
         authority of the following
         entities/persons.                     Court Presidents:

                                               Judicial Inspection Department:

                                               Minister of Justice:

                                               Others (explain):




30   COMMERCIAL COURT AND ENFORCEMENT ASSESSMENT TOOL
3 High Judicial Council (if any)       Total # of members:

                                       Who appoints the members?

                                       Are members appointed based on position held? If not, then what is the
                                       basis of appointment?


                                       How long (term of services)?

                                       What are the duties & responsibilities of the council?

                                       Does the council have a Secretariat?

                                       Support staff? How many?



   Staffing
A  Experts
1 Number of all judges (including      Year:                       Total#:
  commercial court judges) at the
  national level for at least the past Year:                       Total#:
  3 years
                                       Year:                       Total#:

   Total # of first-instance-level     Year:                       Total#:
   judges (including commercial
   court judges)                       Year:                       Total#:

                                       Year:                       Total#:

2 Number of dedicated                  Year:                       Total#:
  commercial court judges at first-
  instance level                       Year:                       Total#:

                                       Year:                       Total#:

3 Number of judges who serve           Year:                       Total#:
  on commercial courts in addition
  to another court (first-instance     Year:                       Total#:
  level)
                                       Year:                       Total#:

4 Length of assignment at
  the commercial courts (first-
  instance level)


5 How are the commercial court
  judges selected?




                                                                              Phase iI: INSTITUTIONAL INFORMATION   31
      6 Total number of female judges at
        the commercial courts

      7 Total # of appeals courts judges     Year:                         Total#:
        nationally for the past 3 years
                                             Year:                         Total#:

                                             Year:                         Total#:

      8 Total # of supreme/cassation         # of Judges:
        court judges

      9 Number of female judges by           First Instance:
        court level (for the past 3 years)
                                             Appeals:

                                             Cassation:

                                             Administrative:

                                             Other courts:

      B  Administrative Staff
      1 Total # of administrative staff      Total #:
        at the national level
                                             Total # of full-time staff:

                                             Total # of part-time staff:

                                             Total # of contract staff:

      2 Total # of administrative staff      First Instance:
        per court level
                                             Appeals:

                                             Cassation:

                                             Administrative:

                                             Other courts:

      3 Total # of female staff              First instance:
        per court level
                                             Appeals:

                                             Cassation:

                                             Administrative:

                                             Other courts:




32   COMMERCIAL COURT AND ENFORCEMENT ASSESSMENT TOOL
4 Total # administrative staff        Civil:
  per court type
                                      Commercial:

                                      Family:

                                      Bankruptcy:

                                      Other courts:

5 Total # of female staff             Civil:
  per court type
                                      Commercial:

                                      Family:

                                      Bankruptcy:

                                      Other courts:

   Strategic Plan
1 Strategic plan developed?           Yes:                        No:
                                      If yes, obtain a copy.

                                      When and how was the plan developed? Who was involved?


                                      What is the period that the strategic plan covers?


                                      Has an implementation plan(s) been developed?


                                      How often are implementation plans reviewed and updated?


                                      Who oversees implementation of the strategic plan?


                                      Who reports on the progress of the strategic plan, to whom and how
                                      often?

                                      How often is the strategic plan reviewed?


                                      Is the strategic plan published? Where?


2 If no strategic plan is in place,   Explain
  what guides the judiciary
  in long-term planning and
  performance management?




                                                                             Phase iI: INSTITUTIONAL INFORMATION   33
         Performance Management
      1 Have performance standards         For the organization?
        been developed? Explain.
                                           Yes:                         No:

                                           For the judges?

                                           Yes:                         No:

                                           For the support staff?

                                           Yes:                         No:

      2 Has a performance management       Yes:                         No:
        system been developed?
                                           If yes, describe the system and whether it is fully or partially functioning.



      3 Is the performance management      Yes:                         No:
        system automated?
                                           If yes, describe the level of automation and function.



         Budget
      1 Fiscal year                        From:                        To

      2 Who holds and manages the          Year:                        Person/entity:
        budget (for the past 3 years)?
                                           Year:                        Person/entity:

                                           Year:                        Person/entity:
      3 What kind of input do the courts
        have in the budget development
        process?


         How is the court’s input
         captured/collected?



      4 What is the overall budget         Year & allocation:
        allocation to the judiciary for
        the past 3 years?                  Year & allocation:

                                           Year & allocation:

      5 What is the budget allocation      Year:                %:             amount allocated:
        to commercial courts for the
        past 3 years?                      Year:                %:             amount allocated:

                                           Year:                %:             amount allocated:




34   COMMERCIAL COURT AND ENFORCEMENT ASSESSMENT TOOL
 6 What is the percentage (%) of       a)	 staff by court type and location:
   budget allocation to:
                                       b)	 equipment & supplies:

                                       c)	 other court services:

                                       d)	 capital investment:

                                       e)	 IT & automation:

                                       f )	   training & professional development of judges and staff:

                                       g)	infrastructure:

                                       h)	 legal aid (if any):

 7 Revenues (from court fees, etc.)
   —describe/list.




B.	 Courts and Judges

PURPOSE
This information is collected to provide a better understanding of the human resource capacity at the commercial
court(s).


METHODOLOGY: 1) review of laws; 2) review of human resources data; and 3) interviews with judges and
court staff.




                           PHASE II – FOUNDATIONAL INFORMATION
     Courts & Judges
 A  Court Information                                                                         (1st Instance & Appeals Levels)
 1 Have specialized commercial         Yes:                               No:
   court(s) or benches been
   established?
 2 Were the commercial courts/         Yes:                               No:
   benches established by law or a
                                       If yes, please attach a copy of the decree/law.
   decree?
 3 When were the commercial
   court(s) or benches established?




                                                                                         Phase iI: INSTITUTIONAL INFORMATION    35
      4 How many courts/
        benches were established?

      5 What is the jurisdiction of the                  Geographic:
        commercial courts/benches?
                                                         Subject matter:

      6 What is the jurisdictional                       Minor cases:
        threshold for commercial
        disputes?                                        Major cases:

                                                         Other:

      7 Indicate number of existing                      Minor cases:
        commercial courts/ benches &
        geographic distribution.
                                                         Major cases:
         (If assessing more than one city, please list
         all courts in each city.)

      B  Judicial Panel Info                                                            (Commercial Courts: First-Instance Level Only)
      1 Total # of judges at commercial
        courts (include # of female
        judges)
      2 Total # of commercial panels (if                 Major cases:
        the court operates by panels)
                                                         Minor cases (if the cases are handled by panels):

      3 Total # of judges per panel                      Major panels:

                                                         Minor panels (if the cases are handled by panels):

      4 Total # of support staff in all
        commercial courts (major &
        minor) by location
      5 Total # of staff supporting panels               # of staff in major panels:
        by type (major & minor)
                                                         # of staff in minor panels:

      6 To whom does the staff report?

      7 Is the staff performance
        evaluated by the judges?

      C  Judicial Rotation/Transfer
      1 Are judges regularly rotated/                    Yes:                          No:
        transferred between the various
        types of courts?                                 If yes, explain-


      2 How often are judges rotated/
        transferred?




36   COMMERCIAL COURT AND ENFORCEMENT ASSESSMENT TOOL
3 What is the basis for rotation/         Explain:
  transfer?

   Is it based on specialization or are
   they rotated to other courts and
   panels regardless of expertise
   (commercial, criminal, etc.)?
4 Who recommends the rotation?

5 Who approves the rotation?

6 What is the minimum # of years
  a judge must serve in one court/
  position before being rotated?
7 On average, how many years
  does a judge serve in the
  commercial courts before being
  transferred to a non-commercial
  court?
D  Judicial Year
1 Duration                                From:                                  To:

2 Judicial holidays                       From:                                  To:

                                          From:                                  To:

E  Training & Professional Development
   Judges
1 Who/what entity is in charge of
  the professional development
  of judges (assessing needs,
  developing and implementing
  training, etc.)?
2 What percentage of the budget           Year:                                  %:
  is allocated to judicial training
  (for the past 3 years)?                 Year:                                  %:

3 How are training needs
  determined/assessed?
4 Is feedback on training needs           Yes:                                   %:
  obtained from judge?
                                          If yes, how is feedback obtained?

                                          How often is feedback obtained?

5 Is there a training plan                Yes:                                   No:
  for judges?
                                          If yes, specify the plan’s duration.

                                          If yes, is the plan regularly reviewed and adjusted based on feedback by
                                          judges?



                                                                                 Phase iI: INSTITUTIONAL INFORMATION   37
         Preparatory training
      1 Are all judges required to           Yes:                                     No:
        complete induction/preparatory
        training prior to beginning their    If yes, describe the training and its duration.
        service?


      2 Are commercial court                 Yes:                                     No:
        judges required to complete
        preparatory training prior           If yes, describe the training and its duration.
        to being assigned to the
        commercial court?

         Specialized training
      1 Do commercial court judges           Yes:                                     No:
        receive specialized training?
                                             If yes, describe the training.


                                             If, yes, is it mandatory?


                                             If yes, how often—every year or every other year, etc.?


      2 Do other specialized judges (e.g.,   Yes:                                     No:
        bankruptcy, family, etc.) receive
        specialized training?                If yes, is it mandatory?

                                             If yes, how often?

         Continuing judicial training
      1 Are all judges offered continuing    Yes:                                     No:
        training?
                                             If yes, it the training mandatory?

                                             How often is it required? Yearly?

      2 Are commercial court judges          Yes:                                     No:
        required to complete continuing
        training?                            If yes, how often?

                                             Who provides the training?

      3 Is training a factor that is         Yes:                                     No:
        considered in the judges’ yearly
        performance evaluation?              If yes, explain.




38   COMMERCIAL COURT AND ENFORCEMENT ASSESSMENT TOOL
   On-the-job training (practical training)
1 Is on-the-job/practical training      Yes:                                     No:
  provided to all judges?
                                        If yes, is it a part of a formalized program or is it informally implemented?


                                        If formalized, describe the program.




2 Is on-the-job training provided       Yes:                                     No:
  to commercial court judges?
                                        If yes, how long do judges train?


                                        Is it required prior to sitting on the bench or after?


3 Has a mentoring program for           Yes:                                     No:
  judges been developed?
                                        If yes, briefly describe the program.




   Overseas training
1 Has an overseas training              Yes:                                     No:
  program (where judges are
  provided the opportunity to           If yes, describe the program.
  train with other judges abroad)
  been developed?

                                        How long has the program been in place?


   Court Staff
1 Who /what entity is in charge of
  professional development and
  training of staff?
2 What percentage of the budget
  is allocated to staff training (for
  the past 3 years)?
3 How are training needs
  determined/assessed?

4 Is feedback on training needs         Yes:                                     No:
  obtained from staff?
                                        If yes, how is feedback obtained?


                                        How often is it obtained?




                                                                                 Phase iI: INSTITUTIONAL INFORMATION    39
      5 Is there a training plan for staff?   Yes:                                    No:

                                              If yes, how often is the plan reviewed and updated?


         Continuing training
      1 Is all staff offered continuing       Yes:                                    No:
        training?
                                              If yes, is the training mandatory?

                                              How often is it required? Yearly?

      2 Is training a factor that is          Yes:                                    No:
        considered in the staff’s yearly
        performance evaluation?
      3 Has a mentoring program for           Yes:                                    No:
        staff been developed?
                                              If yes, briefly describe the program.




         On-the job training (practical training)
      1 Is on-the-job/practical training      Yes:                                    No:
        provided to all staff?
                                              If yes, is it a part of a formalized program or is it informally implemented?


                                              If formalized, describe the program.




      2 Is on-the-job training provided       Yes:                                    No:
        to commercial court staff prior to
        serving on the court?                 If yes, how long do staff members train?



      3 Has a mentoring program for           Yes:                                    No:
        staff been developed?
                                              If yes, describe the program.




         Overseas training
      1 Has an overseas training              Yes:                                    No:
        program (where staff are
        provided the opportunity to           If yes, describe the program.
        train with other court staff
        abroad) been developed?
                                              How long has the program been in place?




40   COMMERCIAL COURT AND ENFORCEMENT ASSESSMENT TOOL
C.	 Physical Facility and Infrastructure

PURPOSE
The condition and layout of the court’s physical infrastructure particularly impacts the efficiency of court
procedures and the ease of use and access. At times, minimal changes that do not require substantial resources
and effort can significantly improve the way the courts are processing cases and delivering services. For instance,
establishing an information desk or relocating an existing one to an area that is visible to the public upon entering
the court building, or posting additional signs in different languages, may provide the type of assistance that
self-represented and other users might find very helpful. In many courts, the infrastructure capacity may also
impact how the cases are processed; there may be an insufficient number of courtrooms, for example, which
could contribute to delays in scheduling hearings, or the courtrooms may be located in remote areas, thus
making it hard for litigants to access the court and difficult for experts and parties to appear in a timely fashion.

Having detailed information about infrastructure and service capacity is essential when analyzing what needs to
improve and how.


METHODOLOGY: 1) On-site assessment.


Note: For each court building, complete the table below.

                             PHASE II – FOUNDATIONAL INFORMATION
     Physical Facility & Infrastructure - Court Building
 A  Accessibility
  1 Is parking available for the         Yes:                                      No:
    public?
                                         If yes, describe the condition (is parking sufficient for the public, is it
                                         convenient for users, etc.).


                                         If no, where are court users parking?


  2 Were the commercial courts/          Yes:                                      No:
    benches established by law or a
    decree?                              If yes, provide details:


  3 Does the building have security?     Yes:                                      No:

                                         If yes, provide details:


  4 Is the building handicapped          Yes:                                      No:
    accessible (ramps available)?
                                         If yes, describe their condition of the ramps and if they are being used.


  5 How many entrances are
    available for public use?




                                                                                   Phase iI: INSTITUTIONAL INFORMATION   41
      6 Do lawyers have separate            Yes:                                     No:
        entrances?
      7 Does the building have separate     Yes:                                     No:
        entrances for judges?
                                            If yes, are the entrances visible to the public?

                                            Are the entrances for judges secure?

      B  Assistance to Litigants & Lawyers
      1 Does the building have one-stop- Yes:                                        No:
        filing of cases for court users?
      2 Information desk                    Yes:                                     No:

                                            If yes, how many staff members are providing assistance?

      3 Signage                             Are the signs:

                                            -	Clear?
                                            -	 Easily seen by the public?
                                            -	 Available in multiple languages?
                                            -	 Sufficient to guide users?

      4 Does the building have              Yes:                                     No:
        dedicated space for lawyers’ use?
                                            If yes, is Internet access available?

                                            Describe the space.



      5 Does the public have dedicated      Yes:                                     No:
        space for its use (waiting areas,
        etc.)?                              If yes, describe the space.



      C  Condition & Features
      1 Describe the overall condition
        of the building.
      2 Number of floors

      3 Number of floors with
        courtrooms
      4 Staircases                          Describe location:

                                            Total #:

                                            Accessibility of stairs—can they be easily found?

                                            Condition of stairs




42   COMMERCIAL COURT AND ENFORCEMENT ASSESSMENT TOOL
  5 Are elevators available?           Yes:                                    No:

                                       Describe the condition.

                                       Are they all in working condition?

                                       Describe the capacity and if they sufficiently meet the needs of the public.

                                       Are the stairs visible and easily found by the public?

                                       Do judges have separate elevators?


  6 Emergency exits                    Yes:                                    No:

                                       If yes, how many?

  7 Fire detection/prevention system Yes:                                      No:

                                       Is the detection system in working condition?

  8 Basement                           Yes:                                    No:

                                       Condition:

  9 Power generator                    Yes:                                    No:

                                       Location:

10 Does the building have adequate Yes:                                        No:
   restrooms for public use (women
   and children)?                  Accessibility to the public:

11 Are there additional court          Yes:                                    No:
   buildings/annexes that have
   commercial courts?                  If yes, how many?

                                       Location:




D.	 Automated Systems

PURPOSE
Automated systems support and contribute to the efficient processing of cases by streamlining many clerical
tasks and recordkeeping activities. More importantly, automation can provide accurate court performance data
that enable court managers to establish and monitor court performance goals. Another important benefit of
automated systems is the ability to disseminate court and case information to litigants and the public over
the Internet (this capability is assessed separately in the Access to Court Information section). The level of
automation differs in every judiciary, depending on the available resources, planning, technical capacity, and
strategic direction, among other factors. Detailed information must be obtained in order to determine existing



                                                                               Phase iI: INSTITUTIONAL INFORMATION    43
     automation capacities, the types of automated services already being delivered to court users and made available
     to judges and court staff, and any plans for automating or enhancing current systems at the court and user levels.

     Having this type of information will enable the team to analyze the current local technical capacities and to
     determine targeted recommendations to either develop systems and/or enhance current ones.


     METHODOLOGY: 1) interviews with case management system and/or IT staff; 2) interviews with judges and
     court support staff; 3) review of user manuals and court staff training materials; and 4) review of development
     and technical systems documentation.




                                  PHASE II – FOUNDATIONAL INFORMATION
          Automated Systems
       1 Does the judiciary have an automated       Yes:                                    No:
         case management system (CMS)?
       2 Do judges use the system?                  Yes:                                    No:

       3 Does court support staff use the           Yes:                                    No:
         system?
       4 Does management use the system             Yes:                                    No:
         (e.g., generate statistical reports)?
       5 If a CMS is in place, do judges and        Yes:                                    No:
         staff rely on paper files in addition to
         electronic files                           If yes, which functions are still undertaken in paper format?




          CMS-Current Core Capacities               Exists                                    Planned For (date)
          Processes
       1 Basic case filing

       2 Calculation and receipt of
         court fee
       3 Notification

       4 Attachment of property

       5 Experts

       6 ADR processes

       7 Hearing scheduling

       8 Judicial decisions and judgments

       9 Sale of property by public sale/auction




44   COMMERCIAL COURT AND ENFORCEMENT ASSESSMENT TOOL
10 Are all these functions linked             Yes:               No:
   electronically in one system?
                                              Explain:
    Is data shared and are all functions
    linked electronically in one integrated
    system, or are there multiple
    independent systems with little or no
    electronic data sharing?

11 Which of these processes are linked in     -	
   the system?                                -	
                                              -	
                                              -	
                                              -	


    Additional Functions                      Exists                          Planned For (date)
    Supplemental to Core Capacities
 1 Electronic document management             Yes:               No:
   system?

    If so, are electronic documents
    regarded as official case records?
 2 Is the system linked to other agencies     Yes:               No:
   (police, etc.)?
                                              If yes, which agencies?


 3 Automated back-office functions:

    a)	 Budget & finance management           Yes:               No:

    b)	Payroll                                Yes:               No:

    c)	 Human resources                       Yes:               No:

    d)	 Procurement and asset                 Yes:               No:
        management
    e)	 Other automated functions

 4 Automated judicial support functions:

    a)	 Laws database                         Yes:               No:

    b)	 Court decisions database              Yes:               No:

    c)	 Text search functions                 Yes:               No:

    d)	 Judicial decision-making support      Yes:               No:

 5 Performance management reports             Yes:               No:




                                                                        Phase iI: INSTITUTIONAL INFORMATION   45
      6 Key reports generated by the CMS       Types	
                                               -	
                                               -	
                                               -	
                                               -	
                                               -	
                                               -	
                                               -	
                                               How frequently are the reports generated?

                                               Who is using the report(s) and for what?

                                               Are court management decisions informed by CMS reports?

                                               Are any report(s) published for public review/access?


         CMS Development
      1 Was the CMS developed in-house or
        was its development outsourced?

         Who/what entity is in charge of
         developing the CMS?
      2 What software platforms are used
        (e.g., database management system,
        programming language/environment,
        other key software products
        employed)?
      3 Were end users (judges/court staff)    Yes:                                No:
        involved in the development of
        the CMS?                               If yes, explain how they were involved.


      4 If no CMS is in place, are there any   Yes:                                No:
        plans to develop a system?
                                               Explain.


         CMS Enhancements/Upgrades
      1 Who is in charge of upgrading
        the CMS?

      2 Has the judiciary established a        Yes:                                No:
        mechanism for obtaining user
        feedback (from judges, staff,          If yes, explain the mechanism used (e.g., focus groups, working
        and litigants)?                        groups, etc.).
      3 Describe the specific automated
        systems improvements or upgrades
        that are planned during the next
        12 months.


46   COMMERCIAL COURT AND ENFORCEMENT ASSESSMENT TOOL
E.	 User Access to Information

PURPOSE
Providing access to information (i.e., court services and procedures, laws, required forms, etc.) to lawyers and
litigants, especially those who are not represented, can improve their experience at the courts as well as help
reduce delays and increase transparency and accountability. Having access to information educates users and
allows them to better understand how to navigate the courts, which may in turn facilitate the work of the judges
and staff and increase user trust.

The type of information collected in this section will enable the team to identify what information is currently
being provided to the public; how it is provided (i.e., in traditional paper documents or electronically, online,
etc.); and whether there is a strategy and mechanisms for identifying and meeting the needs of the court users,
among other objectives.


METHODOLOGY: 1) website assessment; 2) court information/customer services center or desk assessment;
3) interview with court staff and court users; and 4) observations.




                            PHASE II – FOUNDATIONAL INFORMATION
 1.	 User Access to Information                                                         (paper & electronic formats)
     Does the judiciary have a website?      Yes:                                     No:

                                             URL:

                                             Language(s) offered in website content:


                                             List the categories of information provided to court users:

                                             -	
                                             -	
                                             -	
                                             -	
                                             -	

     Who is responsible for maintaining
     and updating the website?
     How often is the website updated?


     Does the website provide users with     Yes:                                 No:
     access to court forms?
                                             a)	 If yes, which forms are available?


                                             b)	 Are the forms clear and easy to understand?




                                                                              Phase iI: INSTITUTIONAL INFORMATION      47
         Does the website provide users with     Yes:                                   No:
         access to informational materials
         explaining court processes and filing   a)	 If yes, describe what is provided.
         requirements, etc.?

                                                 b)	 Are the documents clear and easy to understand?



         Does the website provide access         Yes:                                   No:
         to laws?
                                                 If yes, what is available and in which languages? List.




         Are court judgments published on        Yes:                                   No:
         the website?
         Does the website allow for creating a   Yes:                                   No:
         unique and private user profile and
         for editing the profile?
         Are users provided with access to       Yes:                                   No:
         e-services?
                                                 a)	 If yes, what type of e-services?



                                                 b)	 Describe (e.g., e-filing, access to case information, etc.).



                                                 c)	 Are the submitted electronic forms automatically processed by
                                                     the CMS?



                                                 d)	 How long have the services been provided?



         Do court users have access to           Yes:                                   No:
         e-services for routine case-related
         correspondence?
         Does the system support official        Yes:                                   No:
         court communication with customers
         via e-mail, text messages, Twitter,     If yes, what modes are supported and in which languages?
         Facebook, or other electronic social
         media?

         Are court judgments published on the    Yes:                                   No:
         website?
                                                 If yes, what is available and in which languages?




48   COMMERCIAL COURT AND ENFORCEMENT ASSESSMENT TOOL
2.	 Non-Electronic Access
   Do court users have access to        Yes:                                     No:
   information in paper format?
                                        a)	 If yes, what is available (informational brochures, forms, etc.)?


                                        b)	 Is the information available in multiple languages? Which?


                                        c)	 Is it clear and easy to understand?


                                        d)	 Are courts users utilizing the information (based on observations)?



   Do court users have access to laws   Yes:                                     No:
   in paper format?
                                        a)	 If yes, what is available and in which language? List.


                                        b)	 Are the laws easily accessible to users (and for free)?



3.	 Access to Services/Assistance
   Do court users have access to a      Yes:                                     No:
   customer/information service desk?
                                        a)	 Is the Information Desk easily seen and found upon entering the
                                            building?


                                        b)	 Describe its condition.


                                        c)	 Do the desk staff have access to an automated system?


                                        d)	 How many staff members are manning the desk?


                                        e)	 What is the function of the staff?


                                        f )	 Do staff members speak more than one language?


                                        g)	 Do staff members appear to be helpful to the public?


                                        h)	 Are they courteous?


                                        i)	 Have the staff members been trained in customer service?




                                                                           Phase iI: INSTITUTIONAL INFORMATION    49
          Do users have access to a law library?   a)	Litigants:
                                                   Yes:                                 No:
                                                   b)	Lawyers:
                                                   Yes:                                 No:
          Do users have access to a daycare or
          dedicated area for children?

      4.	Other
          Does the judiciary have a                Yes:                                 No:
          Communication Department/
          Divisions?                               a)	 If yes, describe duties & responsibilities of the Department.


                                                   b)	 Total # of staff:
                                                       Management :                     Support staff:


                                                   c)	 What type of collaboration do they have with other government
                                                       entities?



          Has a Communication Plan and/or          Yes:                                 No:
          Strategy been developed?
                                                   a)	 Who is responsible for implementing the Plan?


                                                   b)	 Is the Plan reviewed regularly? How often?




     F.	 Court Access to User Feedback

     PURPOSE
     To ensure the delivery of services that meet the needs and demands of users, courts must have access to regular
     feedback from litigants, lawyers, and the business community. By utilizing various methods and tools such as user
     surveys, focus groups, etc., the court is able to not only identify what is needed but also address any problems
     or issues as they arise more quickly, thus enabling the delivery of more effective services. User feedback is
     important for both regularly identifying needs and obtaining feedback prior to launching new services or tools.
     Getting this type of feedback allows the court the opportunity to fine tune the service/tool before launching
     it while also educating the public on the utility and benefit of using the Tool. Engaging with users on a regular
     basis is also beneficial for generally raising their awareness of the suite of services provided or planned for by
     the court.


     METHODOLOGY: 1) interviews with court staff, lawyers, and members of the business community; and 2)
     document review (surveys, communication strategy, etc.).




50   COMMERCIAL COURT AND ENFORCEMENT ASSESSMENT TOOL
                          PHASE II – FOUNDATIONAL INFORMATION
   Court Access to User Feedback
1 Does the judiciary obtain feedback     Yes:                                     No:
  from court users?
                                         If yes, how? (Describe methods/tools used.)

                                         -

                                         -

                                         -

                                         -

                                         How often is feedback obtained and analyzed?


2 Does the court obtain feedback prior   Yes:                                     No:
  to launching new services and tools?
                                         If yes, describe.

3 Does the court utilize user surveys?   Yes:                                     No:

                                         a)	 How often are they administered?

                                         b)	 Are they developed and administered in-house or is this activity
                                             outsourced?

                                         c)	 What issues are usually surveyed?


4 How are the user survey results used
  by the court?
5 Are the survey results published?      Yes:                                     No:

                                         If yes, are they published on the website? Annual reports?


6 Does the court use focus groups?       Yes:                                   No:

                                         a)	 If yes, how often are they held?

                                         b)	 What issues have been addressed by focus groups?

7 Does the judiciary have a mechanism    Yes:                                   No:
  for engaging with the legal
  community?                             Roundtable discussions?

                                         Focus groups?

                                         Informal meetings?

                                         Conferences?

8 How, if at all, does the judiciary
  engage with the business community?



                                                                           Phase iI: INSTITUTIONAL INFORMATION   51
     Phase III


     WORK PROCESSES
      Phase III focuses on obtaining on-site, detailed information on how com-
      mercial cases are actually processed, from the registration of a case to the
      enforcement of a judgment, at each court location.
      The information compiled will supplement the legal review and analysis com-
      pleted in Phases I and II and serve to provide the team with a more com-
      plete and realistic picture of the current processes, practices, systems, and
      resources that are in place.
      The information obtained in this phase will also enable the team to develop an
      “as-is” picture of every court and enforcement process, which will clarify actual
      bottlenecks and support the development of recommendations that address
      not just the legal frameworks but administrative court processes and prac-
      tices also, as well as local variations among the courts and agencies assessed.



     METHODOLOGY
     1.	 Conducting a “walk-though” for each process from case registration to completion of the enforcement of
         judgments
     2.	 Capturing detailed information on the scope of services, systems, staffing capacity, and infrastructure
     3.	 Verifying the information obtained during the walk-through
     4.	 Developing the “as-is” process map for each process, capturing user action as well as court action at each step



     A.	 The Walk-Through

     PURPOSE
     On-site review of how a case is processed throughout the court is a necessary element, without which the final
     analysis will not be detailed enough to provide practical and realistic recommendations. This part is especially
     important for capturing what court users will experience, and it maps actual processes used on the ground as
     opposed to guidelines or perceptions.



52   COMMERCIAL COURT AND ENFORCEMENT ASSESSMENT TOOL
To obtain this information, the team should conduct a walk-though whereby members will essentially pretend
to be a party that is filing a case, attending hearings, enforcing a judgment, etc. Detailed information on the
actions that staff members and judges are using to complete these processes should also be captured during
the walk-through. The purpose of the walk-though is twofold:
1.	 To enable the team to develop the actual work flow maps; and
2.	 To obtain information on the accessibility of supporting systems, staffing capacity, infrastructure, and actual
    user experience.


PREPARATION
The team is advised to discuss this approach in detail with the client. Because the client must dedicate some
time and effort to this part of the assessment (e.g., staff to accompany the assessment team and arrange and
participate in meetings), it is important to fully explain in advance what will be required of the client and how
long the process may take. Client engagement throughout this task is essential. An initial meeting with the
relevant unit managers to explain the purpose and type of information to be collected is helpful before the
process begins.


CONDUCTING THE WALK-THROUGH
The team must do the following:
1.	 Go step-by-step through the entirety of a commercial case process (from filing to notification to enforcement
    of judgments, etc.).
2.	 Observe and inquire as to how processes are undertaken and completed; who is responsible for completing
    a process and decisions; where actions and decisions occur; how long it takes to complete a process; the
    documents required; and the cost associated with the particular process and how and when payment is made.
3.	 Capture all internal processes used by the court staff.
4.	 Capture all actions that users must take to complete each process.

Additional Information. The team must also observe and gather information pertaining to actual infrastructure
and human resource capacities, among other features. This information, which can be captured using the form
below, is intended to provide a full and realistic picture of not only the processes but all supporting systems
and resources in place. Court infrastructure and resources often tend to significantly influence processing ease
and user experience. Having all of this information will form the basis of the overall analysis, leading to the
development of targeted and locally relevant recommendations.

Verification. The team will capture many processes and other supporting information from different sources,
some of which may have to be verified. Verification should be undertaken by meeting with individual staff
members and judges and asking for clarification or further explanation. Ensuring that the information gathered
is reliable and correctly reflects what is happening on the ground will require advance planning with the client
as well as flexibility in setting up meetings and accommodating the staff’s schedules. The team should allocate
ample time for this task.


METHODOLOGY: 1) observations; 2) staff queries; 3) collection of forms and templates used by the courts;
and 4) screen shots of processes as captured by the automated CMS.


TEAM COMPOSITION
The team should include at least two staff members with knowledge of court processes in order to produce two
particular forms (attached below for each process):
1.	 One that captures information on infrastructure and service capacity; and
2.	 A second that is intended to outline all the steps required to initiate and complete a process.

Information for both forms will need to be collected simultaneously by at least two team members.


                                                                                        Phase iII: WORK PROCESSES     53
     1.	 Filing/Registering a Case

     PURPOSE
     The process of registering a case may be entirely initiated and completed electronically in some judiciaries. In
     others, it may require litigants and lawyers to go to the courthouse, obtain certified copies of power of attorney
     and/or contracts, and interact with more than one court staff in different locations in order to simply file a case.
     The efficiency with which a court handles this initial step depends on the legal requirements, internally created
     procedures, level of automation, and capacity of staff, among other factors.

     In order to fully understand how filing is undertaken in a judiciary, the quality of the support systems provided
     to litigants, and how efficient and effective the process is, detailed information about what is required of parties
     and what is provided by the court must be gathered and analyzed. In addition to enabling the team to conduct
     a thorough analysis, this information will also support the development of a reliable “as-is” flow chart and feed
     into the overall analysis.

     METHODOLOGY: 1) observation; and 2) interviews with staff, judges, business lawyers, and litigants.


     a. Scope of services and capacity
     (Additional copies of this form should be made and completed for each building housing commercial courts.)


                                    PHASE III – ON-SITE DATA COLLECTION
          Main Court Building - Entrance
       1 Is the building accessible to             Yes:                                       No:
         handicapped persons? Are ramps
         available to users?
       2 Describe the overall condition of the
         building and number of floors, stairs,
         and elevators.
       3 Is there an Information Desk?             Yes:                                       No:

       4 Is the staff helpful and providing        Yes:                                       No:
         information to court users?
       5 Is informational material about court/    Yes:                                       No:
         processes available to the public? In
         what formats?                             If yes, describe.


          Filing a Case
       1 Is e-filing provided?                     Yes:                                       No:

                                                   If yes, what options are provided to court users and lawyers?


                                                   What is required to access e-filing (of court users and lawyers)?


                                                   What is the cost for using e-filing, If any?




54   COMMERCIAL COURT AND ENFORCEMENT ASSESSMENT TOOL
2 Is there a one-stop filing?              Yes:                                     No:

                                           If no, describe.


3 Is the filing process automated          Yes:                                     No:
  or manual?
                                           If no, describe.


4 Is e-payment of court fees available?    To Lawyers:

                                           To Parties:

5 Are e-payment options available to       Yes:                                     No:
  indigent users?
                                           If yes, describe.


6 Once a case is filed, do users have      Lawyers:
  electronic access to case information?
                                           Parties:

7 Signage                                  Are signs available throughout the building?

                                           Yes:                                     No:

                                           Are the signs clear?

                                           Yes:                                     No:

                                           Are the signs easily read and understood?

                                           Yes:                                     No:

                                           What is the language of the signage:


                                           Are the signs easily found?

                                           Yes:                                     No:

8 Is there a lawyer’s lounge/waiting       Yes:                                     No:
  area?
                                           -Seating capacity:

                                           -Access to the Internet:                 Yes:              No:

                                           PC accessible to lawyers?                Yes:              No:

                                           -If yes, how many PCs?

                                           If any services are provided to the lawyers, describe:




                                                                                           Phase iII: WORK PROCESSES   55
      9 Is there a waiting room/area available   Yes:                                     No:
        for court users?
                                                 If yes, is there more than one room?


                                                 If yes, where is the waiting room located? Can users easily locate it?


                                                 Describe the room’s condition.


                                                 Are PCs available?


                                                 Is there Internet accessibility?


     10 Is typing support available for court    Yes:                                     No:
        users to complete their documents
        electronically?                          Where is the typing area located?


                                                 Can court users find it easily?


                                                 Describe the overall conditions.


                                                 Is the service free or cost-based?


                                                 Are printers available?


                                                 Are the printers in working condition?


     11 Are photocopiers available to            Yes:                                     No:
        court users?
                                                 If yes, how many are available?


                                                 Describe their condition.


                                                 Can users use them for free or are they fee-based?


     12 Are there additional court buildings/    Yes:                                     No:
        annexes that house commercial
        courts?                                  If yes, how many?


                                                 Location:




56   COMMERCIAL COURT AND ENFORCEMENT ASSESSMENT TOOL
b. Workflow: Registration
(Detail every step required of a party and court staff to successfully file/register a new commercial case.)

                              PHASE III – ON-SITE DATA COLLECTION
                                              Filing/Registration
                                         Other                                                  Duration –
                         Legally
                                       Internally    Documents      Responsible                 How long it
 Step Description       Required                                                     Location
                                       Required       Required         Staff                   does it take to
                          Steps
                                         Steps                                                complete step?
  1

  2

  3

  4

  5

  6

  7

  8

  9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25




                                                                                        Phase iII: WORK PROCESSES   57
     2.	 Notification of Parties/Service of Process

     PURPOSE
     The process of notifying/serving parties can be fraught with delays that negatively impact the overall efficiency
     of the case process. Efficiency in serving parties depends on a number of factors, including existing legal
     requirements and internally developed procedures, as well as the lack of a reliable postal/address system in
     some countries, where people must rely exclusively on the use of post office boxes, which is problematic when
     attempting notification.

     In order to fully understand how notification is carried out and its impact on the overall case process, detailed
     information that realistically and accurately reflects the way in which the judiciary is providing notification to
     litigants must be reviewed.


     METHODOLOGY: 1) personal observation; and 2) interviews with staff, judges, litigants, and lawyers.


     a. Scope of services and capacity

                                      PHASE III – ON-SITE DATA COLLECTION
      Notification
       1 Who is responsible for notification?        -Court?

                                                     -Litigants?

                                                     -Both?

                                                     Explain

       2 Is notification outsourced by the court     Yes:                                         No:
         to a private entity?
                                                     Describe.


       3 Is notification automatic after filing is
         completed or must a separate request
         be made?
       4 Is e-notification allowed?                  Yes:                                         No:

       5 Is the notification office at the courts    Yes:                                         No:
         located in close proximity to where
                                                     Describe.
         filing was completed?

       6 Does the number of notification staff       Yes:                                         No:
         appear to be sufficient?
                                                     Describe.

                                                     Please indicate the total number of staff.

       7 What are the qualifications and
         requirements for becoming a notifier?




58   COMMERCIAL COURT AND ENFORCEMENT ASSESSMENT TOOL
   Training
1 What type of training do notifiers
  receive—induction and ongoing
  training?
2 Who provides the training?
3 How are the training needs
  determined? By whom and how often?
4 Has a training plan been developed?       Yes:                                     No:
                                            If yes, describe.


   Performance
1 Has the court developed performance       Yes:                                     No:
  standards for notifiers?
                                            If yes, describe.

2 Who supervises the performance of
  notifiers?
3 How are notifiers evaluated?

4 Are notifiers evaluated regularly?
  How often?
   Notification Process
1 Are the notifiers using any IT            Yes:                                     No:
  equipment in their work (iPad, etc.)?
                                            If yes, describe.

2 How are addresses verified?

3 Has an automated system for notifiers     Yes:                                     No:
  been developed and is it being used?
                                            Describe the functions of the system.

4 Describe the notification                 Who can accept requests?
  requirements.
                                            What is the maximum number of attempts?

                                            Describe the use of alternative notifications.


5 What is the cost, if any, for
  notification?
6 What is the cost for alternative
  notification and who bears the cost?
7 Is e-payment available for paying         Yes:                                     No:
  notification fees?
8 Is the automated system linked to         Yes:                                     No:
  other court entities?
                                            If yes, describe.

9 Once notification is completed, how are
  the plaintiff and the courts notified?

                                                                                           Phase iII: WORK PROCESSES   59
     10 How are the parties notified of
        hearings and case events after the
        initial notification that a case has
        been filed?



     b. Workflow:
     (Detail every step required of a party and court staff to successfully complete the notification process.)

                                   PHASE III – ON-SITE DATA COLLECTION
                                                         Notification
                                              Other                                                  Duration –
                              Legally
                                            Internally     Documents     Responsible                 How long it
      Step Description       Required                                                     Location
                                            Required        Required        Staff                   does it take to
                               Steps
                                              Steps                                                complete step?
       1
       2
       3
       4
       5
       6
       7
       8
       9
     10
     11
     12
     13
     14
     15
     16
     17
     18
     19
     20
     21
     22
     23
     24
     25

60   COMMERCIAL COURT AND ENFORCEMENT ASSESSMENT TOOL
3.	 Pre-Judgment Attachment of Movable Property

PURPOSE
Real and movable property is often a part or the subject of a dispute in commercial cases, and its disposition
or destruction is a risk that must be guarded against. To ensure that parties do not destroy or dispose of such
property, parties request that the court attach the property pending the resolution of the lawsuit. This pre-
judgment attachment ensures that the court has control over the property throughout the case as well after a
judgment is issued and enables the court to use it to satisfy the judgment at the enforcement phase, if need be. .


METHODOLOGY: 1) observation; and 2) interviews with staff, judges and litigants, and lawyers.


a. Scope of services and capacity

                              PHASE III – ON-SITE DATA COLLECTION
     Pre-Judgment Attachment of Movable Property
  1 When can the request to attach be
    made?


  2 Where must the request be made?           Describe.
    And to whom?



  3 What documents are required?



  4 If the request is made to an “expedited
    judge,” where does this take place and
    when?

  5 Can the request be made                   Yes:                                       No:
    electronically?
                                              If yes, is it available to lawyers and parties?



  6 What costs/fees are required, if any?


  7 How are the fees assessed and by
    whom?


  8 Is e-payment of fees available?           Yes:                                       No:

  9 How is the notice of completion of
    attachment sent to the parties and
    the court?




                                                                                                Phase iII: WORK PROCESSES   61
     10 Is the notification office at the courts
        located in close proximity to where
        filing was completed?

     11 Does the judiciary have a warehouse        Yes:                                    No:
        where property is stored?
     12 If property is kept in a warehouse,
        how is it kept? Is it tagged to avoid
        loss?


     13 If property is not kept at a warehouse,    Explain:
        how is it kept safe?

                                                   a)	 If a custodian is appointed, who appoints him/her and how?



                                                   b)	 Are there any limitations on who can be appointed?



                                                   c)	 Are custodians paid a fee? If so, who determines the fee and are
                                                       there guidelines governing such fees?




     14 Is attached property tagged?               Yes:                                    No:

                                                   Explain.




     15 Does the court have guidelines/            Yes:                                    No:
        regulations governing the attachment
        process—tagging, movement, etc.?           Explain.




62   COMMERCIAL COURT AND ENFORCEMENT ASSESSMENT TOOL
b. Workflow:
(Detail every step required of a party and the court staff to successfully attach movable property at the pre-
judgment phase.)

                              PHASE III – ON-SITE DATA COLLECTION
                             Pre-Judgment Attachment of Movable Property

                                        Other                                                  Duration –
                        Legally
                                      Internally    Documents      Responsible                 How long it
 Step Description      Required                                                     Location
                                      Required       Required         Staff                   does it take to
                         Steps
                                        Steps                                                complete step?

  1

  2

  3

  4

  5

  6

  7

  8

  9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25




                                                                                      Phase iII: WORK PROCESSES   63
     4.	 ADR Services

     PURPOSE
     The need for and use of ADR in its many applications have increased around the globe for a range of reasons.
     In response, more courts are offering a suite of services to litigants, such as court-annexed mediation and
     conciliation in select case types. Regardless of the type of ADR provided or allowed, such services provide a
     range of alternative options to court users and can increase court efficiency on a practical level. The range of
     ADR services provided by a court can be broad, and a detailed assessment of each option is required.

     Note: This section is only applicable if the judiciary offers or allows the use of any type of ADR services. If no
     such services are provided or allowed, the team should make a notation to that effect in the assessment report
     and proceed with the next section of the tool.


     METHODOLOGY: 1) personal observation; and 2) interviews with staff and judges.


     a. Scope of services and capacity

                                   PHASE III – ON-SITE DATA COLLECTION
          ADR Services: Mediation/Conciliation
       1 Is mediation/conciliation offered?       Yes:                                      No:

       2 Is mediation/conciliation permissible    List the type of cases where mediation/conciliation is permissible and
         or mandatory?                            those where it is mandatory.

                                                  a)	Permissible:


                                                  b)	Mandatory:



       3 If mediation/conciliation is             Describe if the court requires it at different stages in the process for
         mandatory, when is it required in the    different case types.
         process?

       4 Is mediation/conciliation provided by    Yes:                                      No:
         the court?
                                                  a)	 If no, how are mediators selected?


                                                  b)	 Who selects the mediators?


                                                  c)	 Who bears the cost?


                                                  d)	 What is the role of the judge, if any, in the selection process?


                                                  e)	 How are the files handled? And who has access to them?




64   COMMERCIAL COURT AND ENFORCEMENT ASSESSMENT TOOL
    Court-Provided Mediation/Conciliation
 1 How are mediators hired?                 Explain.


 2 Does the court have hiring               Yes:                                      No:
   qualifications and selection criteria?
                                            a)	 If yes, are the qualifications set by a law or developed by the court?

                                            Describe the qualifications.


                                            b)	 Are the qualifications set sufficient, relevant, and detailed?

                                            Yes:                                      No:

                                            If no, explain.


 3 How many mediators are employed
   by the court?
 4 To whom do mediators report?             Technical issues:


                                            Administrative issues:


 5 How many mediators participate in a
   case?
 6 Where is mediation held?                 Describe the location (easily accessed by litigants).



                                            Describe the condition of space (sufficient and conducive to
                                            mediation).


 7 Are mediators using PCs or laptops?      Yes:                                      No:

                                            If yes, describe how they are using PCs/laptops.



 8 How is mediation/conciliation
   carried out?

 9 What type of support do mediators
   receive? What is the number of
   support staff?

10 If mediation fails, do judges have       Yes:                                      No:
   access to the mediation file?
                                            If yes, describe.




                                                                                            Phase iII: WORK PROCESSES    65
     11 Is the service provided for free?         Yes:                                    No:

                                                  If no, how is the cost assessed and by whom?


                                                  Who bears the cost?


                                                  How are the fees paid? And when?


     12 Where are closed mediation files filed?


     13 Are the files electronically archived?    Yes:                                    No:

         Training: Mediators
      1 Are mediators required to attend          Yes:                                    No:
        preparatory training?
                                                  If yes, how long is the training and what are the subjects covered?



      2 Are mediators required to attend          Yes:                                    No:
        yearly training?
      3 Do mediators receive any formal or        Yes:                                    No:
        informal on-the-job training?
                                                  If yes, explain


      4 Is training a factor that is considered   Yes:                                    No:
        in their performance evaluations?
      5 How are training needs determined,
        who determines them, and how often?

         Training: Support/Administrative Staff
      1 Are staff members required to attend
        preparatory training?

      2 Are staff members required to attend
        yearly training?

      3 Do members of staff receive any
        formal or informal on-the-job
        training?
      4 Is training a factor that is considered
        in their performance evaluations?

      5 How are training needs determined,
        who determines them, and how
        often?




66   COMMERCIAL COURT AND ENFORCEMENT ASSESSMENT TOOL
   Performance Management
1 How is the performance of mediators
  evaluated?
2 Does the court have performance
  standards for mediators?
3 How often are mediators evaluated
  and by whom?
4 Whom do mediators report to on
  technical issues?
5 How is performance of staff
  evaluated?
6 Does the court have performance
  standards?
7 How often are staff members
  evaluated and by whom?
8 To whom does staff report?


   Infrastructure
1 Is mediation held at the courthouse?      Yes:                                       No:

                                            If no, where is mediation held?


                                            Is the location in close proximity to the courthouse?


2 Describe the facilities where             1)	 At the courthouse:
  mediation is held (capacity, condition,
  etc.).
                                            2)	 Outside of the courthouse:


   Automation
1 Are mediators and staff supported in      Yes:                                       No:
  their work by automated systems?
                                            If yes, explain.


                                            Are they linked with all other entities in the court?


                                            Yes:                                       No:
                                            If no, list which entities they are linked with:


2 Is the entire mediation process fully     Yes:                                       No:
  automated?
                                            If no, describe the level of automation.


3 Who managed the development of
  the system?



                                                                                             Phase iII: WORK PROCESSES   67
      4 Were mediators and support staff          Yes:                                       No:
        involved in the development of the
        automated system?
      5 Is the automated system regularly         Yes:                                       No:
        updated?
                                                  If yes, how often? And by whom?

         Access to Information about Mediation/Conciliation Services
      1 Is information provided to the public     Yes:                                       No:
        on mediation/conciliation?
                                                  If yes, describe what is offered.

                                                  Describe the format (paper or electronic or both).

      2 Is the information provided clear         Yes:                                       No:
        and detailed?                             If no, explain.


      3 Is the information provided in            Yes:                                       No:
        multiple languages?                       If yes, list the languages:


      4 Is the information helpful to court
        users?
         ADR Services: Arbitration
      1 Is arbitration provided for/              Yes:                                       No:
        allowed by law?
      2 Is arbitration limited by case types?     Yes:                                       No:
                                                  If yes, list the case type where it is permitted.

      3 Does the law limit the way in which
        arbitrators are selected?
      4 How is cost assessed and by whom?

      5 Does the judiciary have court-            Yes:                                       No:
        annexed arbitration?
                                                  If yes, explain.

      6 If it is court annexed, how are
        arbitrators hired? What are the
        qualifications?
      7 Are the qualifications set by law or by
        the court?
      8 Are the qualifications relevant and
        sufficient?
      9 How are the arbitrators evaluated?
        And by whom?
     10 Can arbitration decisions be              Yes:                                       No:
        appealed?
                                                  If yes, explain.




68   COMMERCIAL COURT AND ENFORCEMENT ASSESSMENT TOOL
b. Workflow:
(For each type of ADR service provided, complete a separate workflow detailing what is required of parties
and court staff from start to completion.)

                             PHASE III – ON-SITE DATA COLLECTION
                                         Mediation/Conciliation
                                       Other                                                Duration –
                        Legally
                                     Internally   Documents      Responsible                How long it
 Step Description      Required                                                  Location
                                     Required      Required         Staff                  does it take to
                         Steps
                                       Steps                                              complete step?
 1

 2

 3

 4

 5

 6

 7

 8

 9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25




                                                                                   Phase iII: WORK PROCESSES   69
     5.	 Court Hearings/Experts/Continuances

     PURPOSE
     The hearing phase embodies the bulk of a case and sheds light on how efficient and effective a court may or
     may not be. Many times, the courts will have developed certain practices that do not necessarily contribute to
     enhancing efficiency but instead lead to delay (e.g., granting excessive continuances and requiring a hearing
     to submit documents to the courts). In other cases, the laws may be vague, leaving judges to interpret them
     differently and develop inconsistent practices across the various courts. Other factors that may negatively
     impact efficiency include the way in which courts handle experts in commercial cases as well as the infrastructure
     capacity and support systems in place.

     To identify inefficient practices during the hearing phase, the team must obtain detailed information on how
     hearings are organized and conducted, what is required of parties, and the current practices for granting
     continuances and dealing with experts (whether court appointed or selected by the parties).


     METHODOLOGY: 1) observation; 2) interviews with staff and judges; and 3) interviews with court users,
     including parties and lawyers.


     a. Scope of services and capacity
     (For each building housing a commercial court, complete the form below.)


                                   PHASE III – ON-SITE DATA COLLECTION
          Hearings
          Courtrooms                                                                                   (Main Building)

          Courtrooms for Major Cases
       1 Total # of courtrooms dedicated to
         major commercial cases

       2 How many judges preside over a
         major case?

       3 If more than one judge presides in
         a case, what is the role of each judge
         in preparing the case and during
         the hearing?

       4 Describe the following for each           Courtroom #1
         courtroom:
                                                   1)	Condition:
                                                   2)	 Seating capacity:
                                                   3)	Layout:
                                                   4)	Air-conditioned?
                                                   5)	Ventilated?
                                                   6)	Soundproofed?




70   COMMERCIAL COURT AND ENFORCEMENT ASSESSMENT TOOL
 4 Describe the following for each             Courtroom #2
   courtroom:
                                               1)	Condition:
   (continued)
                                               2)	 Seating capacity:
                                               3)	Layout:
                                               4)	Air-conditioned?
                                               5)	Ventilated?
                                               6)	Soundproofed

                                               Courtroom #3
                                               1)	Condition:
                                               2)	 Seating capacity:
                                               3)	Layout:
                                               4)	Air-conditioned?
                                               5)	Ventilated?
                                               6)	Soundproofed

                                               Courtroom #4
                                               1)	Condition:
                                               2)	 Seating capacity:
                                               3)	Layout:
                                               4)	Air-conditioned?
                                               5)	Ventilated?
                                               6)	Soundproofed

 5 Do judges have a separate entrance          Yes:                                   No:
   into the courtroom?
                                               If no, explain how they enter the courtroom.

 6 Is a hearing roll posted? If so, where?     Yes:                                   No:

                                               Location:

 7 Is the hearing roll visible to              Yes:                                   No:
   court users?
                                               If no, explain.

 8 Is the hearing roll typed, electronically
   generated, or handwritten?

 9 How is the hearing roll prepared if it is
   not electronically generated?

10 Are hearings provided specific              Yes:                                   No:
   time slots?


                                                                                            Phase iII: WORK PROCESSES   71
     11 Are hearings called in the same order    Yes:                                      No:
        as that in the hearing roll?
                                                 If no, explain how cases are being called in the courtroom.


     12 Do judges have access to and are         Yes:                                      No:
        they using PCs or laptops during the
        hearing?                                 Explain how the PCs/laptops are being used.


     13 Is the court clerk using a PC/laptop     Yes:                                      No:
        during the hearing?
                                                 If yes, then explain how s/he is using the PC/laptop (for what).


     14 Do the judges and clerks have access     Yes:                                      No:
        to a printer(s)?
                                                 How many printers are in the courtroom?


                                                 Describe the condition of the printers.


     15 Do judges and clerks have access to      Yes:                                      No:
        a scanner?
                                                 How many scanners are in the courtroom?


                                                 Describe the condition of the scanners.


     16 Are there screens in the courtroom       Yes:                                      No:
        displaying which case is being called
                                                 If yes, how many?
        and any other information?

                                                 Are they easily seen by litigants?


                                                 What type of information is displayed?


     17 Are lawyers and parties allowed to       Yes:                                      No:
        use laptops?
     18 How is evidence presented?

     19 Are electronic documents allowed         Yes:                                      No:
        or used?
     20 Are video hearings allowed and used      Yes:                                      No:
        (VC)?
     21 How are postponements handled?
        Who can request?
     22 How are expert hearings handled?


     23 Is a bailiff present in the courtroom?   Yes:                                      No:

                                                 If yes, what is his role?

                                                 Is he effective?




72   COMMERCIAL COURT AND ENFORCEMENT ASSESSMENT TOOL
24 Is order kept in the courtroom?             Yes:                                    No:

                                               Explain

25 Is additional security available?           Yes:                                    No:

                                               If yes, explain.

    Courtrooms for Minor Cases
 1 Total # of courtrooms dedicated to
   minor courts/panels
 2 How many judges preside over a              Courtroom #1
   minor case?
                                               1)	Condition:
    Describe the following for each            2)	 Seating capacity:
    minor courtroom:
                                               3)	Layout:
                                               4)	Air-conditioned?
                                               5)	Ventilated?
                                               6)	Soundproofed?

                                               Courtroom #2
                                               1)	Condition:
                                               2)	 Seating capacity:
                                               3)	Layout:
                                               4)	Air-conditioned?
                                               5)	Ventilated?
                                               6)	Soundproofed?

 3 Do judges have a separate entrance          Yes:                                    No:
   into the courtroom?
                                               If no, explain how they enter the courtroom.

 4 Is a hearing roll posted? If so, where?     Yes:                                    No:

                                               Location:

 5 Is the hearing roll visible to court        Yes:                                    No:
   users?
                                               If no, explain.

 6 Is the hearing roll typed, electronically
   generated, or handwritten?
 7 Are hearings provided specific              Yes:                                    No:
   time slots?
 8 Are hearings called in the same order       Yes:                                    No:
   as that in the hearing roll?
                                               If no, explain how cases are being called in the courtroom.




                                                                                             Phase iII: WORK PROCESSES   73
      9 Do judges have access and are they       Yes:                                      No:
        using PCs or laptops during the
        hearing?                                 Explain how the PC/laptops are being used.


     10 Is the court clerk using a PC/laptop     Yes:                                      No:
        during the hearing?                      If yes, explain how they are using the PC/laptop (for what).


     11 Do the judges and clerks have access     Yes:                                      No:
        to a printer(s)?                         How many printers in the courtroom?


                                                 Describe the condition of the printers.


     12 Do judges and clerks have access to      Yes:                                      No:
        a scanner?                               How many scanners are in the courtroom?


                                                 Describe the condition of the scanners.


     13 Are there screens in the courtroom       Yes:                                      No:
        displaying which case is being called
        and any other information?               If yes, how many?

                                                 Are they easily seen by litigants?

                                                 What type of information is displayed?

     14 Are lawyers and parties allowed to       Yes:                                      No:
        use laptops?
     15 How is evidence presented?

     16 Are electronic documents allowed         Yes:                                      No:
        or used?
     17 Are video hearings allowed and           Yes:                                      No:
        used (VC)?
     18 How are postponements handled?
        Who can request?

     19 How are expert hearings handled?

     20 Is a bailiff present in the courtroom?   Yes:                                      No:

                                                 If yes, what is his role? What is he doing?


     21 Is order kept in the courtroom?          Yes:                                      No:

                                                 Explain.

     22 Is additional security available?        Yes:                                      No:

                                                 If yes, explain.



74   COMMERCIAL COURT AND ENFORCEMENT ASSESSMENT TOOL
a. Workflow: Major Commercial Hearings
(Please obtain detailed information on how hearings are held, etc., in major cases, including what is required
of parties and court staff.)

                              PHASE III – ON-SITE DATA COLLECTION
                                        Major Commercial Hearings

                                        Other                                                 Duration –
                        Legally
                                      Internally    Documents      Responsible                How long it
 Step Description      Required                                                    Location
                                      Required       Required         Staff                  does it take to
                         Steps
                                        Steps                                               complete step?

  1

  2

  3

  4

  5

  6

  7

  8

  9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25




                                                                                     Phase iII: WORK PROCESSES   75
     b. Workflow: Minor Commercial Hearings
     (Please obtain detailed information on how hearings are held, etc., in minor cases, including what is required
     of parties and court staff.)

                                   PHASE III – ON-SITE DATA COLLECTION
                                             Minor Commercial Hearings

                                             Other                                                 Duration –
                             Legally
                                           Internally    Documents      Responsible                How long it
      Step Description      Required                                                    Location
                                           Required       Required         Staff                  does it take to
                              Steps
                                             Steps                                               complete step?

       1

       2

       3

       4

       5

       6

       7

       8

       9

     10

     11

     12

     13

     14

     15

     16

     17

     18

     19

     20

     21

     22

     23

     24

     25




76   COMMERCIAL COURT AND ENFORCEMENT ASSESSMENT TOOL
6.	 Issuance of Judgments

PURPOSE
The process of writing and issuing judgments may vary widely. Its range can extend from a complicated
and time-consuming process requiring that judgments be signed by all panel judges followed by a hearing
and the announcement of the judgment in open court, to a much simpler process in which judgments are
made available online with an electronic notice provided to the parties. Obtaining copies of the judgment
in some judiciaries can impact efficiency and be cumbersome and unnecessarily complicated for the parties
and the court, particularly when there is a limitation on the number of copies provided and to whom, or other
such constraints.


METHODOLOGY: 1) observation; 2) interviews with judges and court staff; and 3) interviews with court users.

a. Scope of services and capacity

                               PHASE III – ON-SITE DATA COLLECTION
     Writing of Judgments: Major Cases
 1 Does the law provide a time frame for       Yes:                                 No:
   completing the judgment?
                                               If yes, what is it?

 2 Can judges extend the time frame for        Yes:                                 No:
   writing the judgment?
                                               If yes, for how long? And how many times?

 3 If the court sits in a panel, must all      Yes:                                 No:
   judges sign the judgment?
                                               If no, how many must sign it?

 4 If the court sits in a panel, what is the
   role of each judge?
 5 How are judgments written and               a)	 By hand?
   finalized?
                                               b)	Electronically?

     Writing of Judgments: Minor Cases
 1 Does the law provide a time frame for       Yes:                                 No:
   completing the judgment?
                                               If yes, what is it?

 2 Can judges extend the time frame for        Yes:                                 No:
   writing the judgment?
                                               If yes, for how long? And how many times?

 3 If the court sits in a panel, must all      Yes:                                 No:
   judges sign the judgment?
                                               If no, how many must sign it?

 4 If the court sits in a panel, what is the
   role of each judge?
 5 How are judgments written and               By hand?
   finalized?                                  Electronically?


                                                                                           Phase iII: WORK PROCESSES   77
         Issuance of Judgments: Major Cases
      1 Does the court hold a hearing to issue   Yes:                                     No:
        the judgment?                            If yes, how is notice provided to the parties?

      2 If a hearing is held, are the parties    Yes:                                     No:
        required to attend?
                                                 a)	 If yes, what is the effect of one party not appearing?

                                                 b)	 Can the hearing be continued?

                                                 c)	 What is the maximum number of continuances that can be granted?

      3 If a hearing is required, can the        Yes:                                     No:
        court address other issues, such as
                                                 If yes, describe.
        attachment, enforcement, settlement
        options (direct payment)?
      4 If no hearing is required, how is the
        judgment issued?
      5 How are the parties notified of the
        judgment?
      6 Once the judgment is issued, is it       Yes:                                     No:
        enforceable?                             If no, what must the parties obtain in addition to the judgment to
                                                 begin the enforcement process?

      7 Can any person obtain a copy of the      Yes:                                     No:
        judgment?
         Issuance of Judgments: Minor Cases
      1 Does the court hold a hearing to issue   Yes:                                     No:
        the judgment?                            If yes, how is notice provided to the parties?

      2 If a hearing is held, are the parties    Yes:                                       No:
        required to attend?                      a)	 If yes, what is the effect of one party not appearing?

                                                 b)	 Can the hearing be continued?

                                                 c)	 What is the maximum number of continuances that can be granted?

      3 If a hearing is required, can the        Yes:                                     No:
        court address other issues, such as
        attachment, enforcement, settlement      If yes, describe.
        options (direct payment)?
      4 If no hearing is required, how is the
        judgment issued?
      5 How are the parties notified of the
        judgment?
      6 Once the judgment is issued, is it       Yes:                                     No:
        enforceable?                             If no, what must the parties obtain in addition to the judgment to
                                                 begin the enforcement process?

      7 Can any person obtain a copy of the      Yes:                                     No:
        judgment?
78   COMMERCIAL COURT AND ENFORCEMENT ASSESSMENT TOOL
b. Workflow:
(Detail every step required and carried out by the courts.)



                              PHASE III – ON-SITE DATA COLLECTION
                                    Writing and Issuance of Judgments

                                        Other                                            Duration –
                        Legally
                                      Internally    Documents   Responsible              How long it
 Step Description      Required                                               Location
                                      Required       Required      Staff                does it take to
                         Steps
                                        Steps                                          complete step?

  1

  2

  3

  4

  5

  6

  7

  8

  9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25




                                                                                Phase iII: WORK PROCESSES   79
     7.	 Execution /Enforcement of Judgments

     PURPOSE
     Enforcement mechanisms can have a significant impact on efficiency. The enforcement or execution of
     judgments differs from one court to another; for example, it may be the responsibility of another entity or may
     require the involvement and participation of law enforcement agencies. To determine how a judiciary is handling
     enforcement, the mechanisms used, and the overall capacity of the system, among other dynamics, detailed
     information about the process must be obtained and analyzed.


     METHODOLOGY: 1) personal observation; 2) interviews with staff and judges; and 3) interviews with court users.

     a. Scope of services and capacity

                                  PHASE III – ON-SITE DATA COLLECTION
          Execution/Enforcement of Judgments
       1 What entity is legally authorized to     a)	 Courts only?
         enforce judgments?
                                                  b)	 Private entities/bailiffs?

                                                  c)	 Dual system (courts & private bailiffs)?

          Public Enforcement (by the Courts/MOJ)
       1 Who is in charge of enforcement at
         the courts/MOJ?
       2 How many enforcement agents are
         employed by the courts/MOJ?
       3 What is the total number of support
         staff?
       4 What is the authority of enforcement     Explain:
         officers?
                                                  a)	 Do they have authority to negotiate settlements?

                                                  b)	 Do they have authority to accept alternative settlements?

                                                  c)	 Do they have authority to accept payments?

       5 To whom do the officers report?

       6 How is performance evaluated?

       7 Have the courts/MOJ developed
         performance standards?
       8 Do officers use an automated system?     Yes:                                     No:

                                                  -If yes, what are the functions of the system?

                                                  -Which enforcement processes are automated?




80   COMMERCIAL COURT AND ENFORCEMENT ASSESSMENT TOOL
 9 How are communications carried out      -Paper based?
   with other courts/MOJ entities?
                                           -Electronically?

                                           -If electronically, to what extent are they electronically linked with all
                                           court/MOJ entities?


10 To what extent is the system linked
   with entities/agencies outside of the
   court and MOJ?
11 How is enforcement cost determined?     Explain.
   Is it regulated by law?
12 Who bears enforcement cost?

13 When are enforcement fees paid?
   And how?
14 Is e-payment available?                 Yes:                                      No:

15 What type of training does the staff    Induction Training:         Yes:          No:
   receive?
                                           Ongoing Training:           Yes:          No:

                                           On-the-job Training:        Yes:          No:

16 How are the staff evaluated and         Yes:                                      No:
   how often?
17 Is training considered in the           Yes:                                      No:
   performance evaluation of the staff?
18 How do officers conduct an asset
   search?
19 Are there guidelines to regulate the    Yes:                                      No:
   process of asset searches?
20 Do the courts/MOJ have access to        Yes:                                      No:
   financial institutions, commercial
   registries, real property registers,    List entities allowing access and capacity to search records.
   traffic departments, stock accounts
   information, etc.?                      If no, are there plans to develop bilateral agreements allowing such
                                           access? Explain.


   Private Enforcement
 1 Is the profession regulated by law?     Yes:                                      No:

 2 Does the court/MOJ play any role in     Yes:                                      No:
   the regulation of the profession?
                                           If yes, explain the role.


 3 Is the profession regulated by a        Yes:                                      No:
   professional organization?
                                           If yes, explain the role.




                                                                                           Phase iII: WORK PROCESSES    81
       4 Can court officers work as private        Yes:                                   No:
         bailiffs?                                 If yes, what are the limitations?


       5 Are bailiffs required to be               Yes:                                   No:
         registered/licensed?                      If yes, with whom (MOJ, courts, or private professional organization)?


       6 Are bailiffs required to complete         Yes:                                   No:
         preparatory training?
       7 Are bailiffs required to complete         Yes:                                   No:
         yearly or continuing training?
       8 What type of cases can be handled         Describe.
         by private bailiffs?
         Any jurisdiction limitations?
       9 How is the cost determined?               Explain.
         Is it regulated by law?
      10 Who bears enforcement cost?

      11 When are enforcement fees paid?
         And how?
      12 Do bailiffs have access to public and     Yes:                                   No:
         financial records?
                                                   If yes, what are the limitations?


         Enforcement Process
       1 When can a party begin enforcement        1)	 Enforcement by the court/MOJ
         procedures?
                                                   2)	 Private enforcement

       2 What documents are required to            1)	 Enforcement by the court/MOJ
         begin enforcement?
                                                   2)	 Private enforcement

       3 Where does a party go to begin the        1)	 Enforcement by the court/MOJ
         process?
                                                   2)	 Private enforcement

       4 Can the request be made/                  Yes:                                   No:
         filed electronically?
       5 Is electronic payment allowed?            Yes:                                   No:

       6 Once a request is made/filed, is a        Yes:                                   No:
         hearing required?                         Explain.

       7 Can parties offer settlement at the       Yes:                                   No:
         time of the first hearing or before the
                                                   If yes, explain.
         hearing?

       8 Does the court have procedural            Yes:                                   No:
         guidelines for enforcements officers?



82   COMMERCIAL COURT AND ENFORCEMENT ASSESSMENT TOOL
b. Workflow:
(Detail every step required and carried out by the courts and the parties to successfully complete this process.)



                              PHASE III – ON-SITE DATA COLLECTION
                                   Execution/Enforcement of Judgment

                                        Other                                                  Duration –
                         Legally
                                      Internally    Documents       Responsible                How long it
 Step Description       Required                                                    Location
                                      Required       Required          Staff                  does it take to
                          Steps
                                        Steps                                                complete step?

  1

  2

  3

  4

  5

  6

  7

  8

  9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25




                                                                                       Phase iII: WORK PROCESSES    83
     8.	 Sale of Movable Property by Public Sale/Auction

     PURPOSE
     Requests for attaching movable property are utilized to avoid its sale or destruction pending a lawsuit. Once
     a judgment has been issued and enforcement proceedings have begun, the attached property may have to
     be sold in order to partially or fully satisfy the judgment. The mechanism generally used by the courts to sell
     property is public sale/auctions. The way in which public sales are carried out differs from one judiciary to
     another but the goal remains the same: satisfying the judgment amount and ensuring that creditors are paid.

     To determine how this process impacts efficiency, it is important to collect and analyze data on, among
     other issues, how property attachment is initiated, what is required, how long it takes, the legal and internal
     requirements for holding, postponing, or redoing the sale, who conducts the sale, and how the proceeds are
     distributed between the creditors.


     METHODOLOGY: 1) observation; 2) interviews with staff and judges; and 3) interviews with court users.

     a. Scope of services and capacity

                                  PHASE III – ON-SITE DATA COLLECTION
          Sale of Movable Property
       1 How does the court/MOJ seize assets?      Explain.


       2 What type of notice is required for the
         seizure of assets?
       3 What type of notice is required to
         conduct the sale?
       4 How does the enforcement agency           Explain.
         provide notice of the sale?

       5 Is notice of sale/auction published       Explain.
         in newspapers and on the court
         website? And how far in advance?

       6 How often are public auctions held?


       7 Can the court/MOJ include property        Yes:                               No:
         to be auctioned with other auction
         listings to broaden the audience of
         potential bidders?
       8 Does the court collect data on the        Yes:                               No:
         nature, frequency, and success of the
         asset liquidation processes performed
         by its officers?
       9 If the property was kept at a
         warehouse, what is the process for
         moving it?




84   COMMERCIAL COURT AND ENFORCEMENT ASSESSMENT TOOL
10 Who is responsible for moving
   property to the venue of the sale?

11 Are there guidelines regulating the
   movement of the property?

12 Is the sale conducted by the
   enforcement agency or is it
   outsourced to an auction house?
13 If the sale is outsourced, does the      Yes:                                    No:
   court have guidelines regulating the
   sale?                                    If yes, do the guidelines also apply to court-conducted auctions?



14 If the sale is conducted by the court,
   who is in charge of conducting it?


15 What is cost of holding the auction?


    How is cost assessed and by whom?


16 How are auctions held?                   a)	 Private auction house

                                            b)	 Court-conducted auction


17 Are electronic auctions allowed?         Yes:                                    No:

                                            a)	 If yes, how are they conducted?

                                            b)	 Does the court have guidelines regulating e-auctions?


18 If there are an insufficient number of   Yes:                                    No:
   bidders, is the auction rescheduled?
                                            a)	 If yes, what are the time frames for rescheduling?

                                            b)	 How many times can the auction be rescheduled?


19 If the minimum sale price is not
   reached, what happens?

20 How is notice served of the new date
   of sale?

21 Does the same process apply to all       Yes:                                    No:
   types of property?
                                            If no, explain.




                                                                                          Phase iII: WORK PROCESSES   85
     b. Workflow:
     (Detail every step required and carried out by the courts to sell the attached property by public sale/auction.)



                                   PHASE III – ON-SITE DATA COLLECTION
                                 Sale of Attached Property by Public Sale/Auction

                                             Other                                                  Duration –
                              Legally
                                           Internally     Documents      Responsible                How long it
      Step Description       Required                                                    Location
                                           Required        Required         Staff                  does it take to
                               Steps
                                             Steps                                                complete step?

       1

       2

       3

       4

       5

       6

       7

       8

       9

     10

     11

     12

     13

     14

     15

     16

     17

     18

     19

     20

     21

     22

     23

     24

     25




86   COMMERCIAL COURT AND ENFORCEMENT ASSESSMENT TOOL
B. The Process Map

PURPOSE
Process maps provide a clear picture of how the court is operating and processing cases. Developing the
maps facilitates the identification of specific areas that may be causing delay thereby allowing the assessment
team to provide the client with targeted recommendations for improving for each case process (from filing to
enforcement of judgments). Often times, the client may not be aware of the effect of certain practices on the
efficiency of the case process. Developing process maps is useful for providing the client and the team with
a visual tool that has proven very effective in pin pointing specific deficiencies and ineffective or inefficient
practices that may be causing unnecessary delay; guiding the discussions about needed improvements; and
serving as the basis for re-engineering processes, if need be.

Based on the information collected and verified during the walk-through, a process map for each process (i.e.
filing, conciliation, pre-trial attachment, etc.) is developed. Each map must reflect in great details the actions
required by both the parties and the court to complete a process.

Developing process maps is time consuming and may at times require additional verification with the client. As
such, ample time should be dedicated to developing and finalizing them..


METHODOLOGY: 1) review of all information collected and verified during the “Walk-Through”.




   An illustrative “As-Is Process Map” to provide the team with a virtual example of the documents
  that must be produced is attached in Annex 2. Also included in this Annex is a “To Be Process Map”
  reflecting the recommended changes and improvements to court processes that are provided to the
  client in the final assessment report.




                                                                                        Phase iII: WORK PROCESSES    87
     Phase IV


     DATA COLLECTION
      Phase IV focuses on obtaining court performance and case-specific data
      for all commercial cases selected for the assessment. Statistical case data
      are an integral part without which the completion of the overall analysis is
      not possible. This information enables the team to identify and verify
      bottlenecks and provides a statistical evidence base for the analysis and
      recommendations that are provided to the client.
      In addition, detailed information on how the judiciary is collecting, using, and
      reporting on case data—and the extent to which management is relying on
      such data in its decision and policy-making process—must be collected. This
      will help the team to determine the technical and automation capacity of the
      judiciary, the extent to which the case process is automated, if at all, and if
      the data are actually used and shared.
      Ideally, this phase is conducted in parallel to Phase II and as soon as
      possible to allow time for the collection and verification process, which can
      be time consuming, depending on the court’s capacity for generating the
      needed data.


     Implementation Approach

     I.	 IDENTIFYING DATA COLLECTION COUNTERPART
     Prior to conducting this data-gathering phase, it is important for the team to initially identify who or which entity
     is responsible for data collection at the judiciary, enforcement agency, MOJ, or judicial council. The following
     represent the various scenarios the team may face when collecting the required data:

     •	 Automated case management system (CMS) is fully operating. If the judiciary has developed and is
        using (partially or fully) an automated CMS, the team should be working with the entity and/or individuals
        responsible for managing the system to collect the required data.



88   COMMERCIAL COURT AND ENFORCEMENT ASSESSMENT TOOL
•	 Automated CMS is fully operational but for less than one–two years. If the CMS has not been operational
   for the period for which data is being requested (ideally three–five years minimum), the data will need to be
   a hybrid of electronically generated and manually collected data.
•	 Automated CMS is partially operational. In some cases, the judiciary will have developed a system that has
   yet to fully automate the entire process and link all case information across the entity. If the CMS is partially
   operational, the required data will have to be generated from the CMS as well as from other sources—for
   example, a statistics department that is manually collecting court data.
•	 No automated case management system is operational. If no system has been developed or one is in the
   process of being developed, the team must rely solely on manually collected data and will therefore need to
   work closely with those in charge of data collection (e.g., statistics department/division, etc.).
•	 Optional data collection. If reliable data are not available, a random case file review should be undertaken
   to collect a representative data sample that provides the needed information. Rarely is this information
   already available. This kind of additional data collection will be require added resources and time.


II.	 CLOSE COLLABORATION WITH THE COURTS
While collecting this data, it is imperative that the team work closely with the client counterparts to explain
why specific types of data are being collected, why additional data should be captured by the courts, and the
importance of collecting reliable data, as well as the importance of capturing, analyzing, and reporting on such
data to management. The level and extent of this discourse will depend in great part on the capacity of the staff,
the existence of automated systems, and the extent to which the system is capturing case processing data, as
well as the reliability and availability of the requested data. Discussions about data definitions, data use, and the
identification of data gaps (and how to address them) will need to take place.


III.	METHODOLOGY
A detailed illustrative data request form is provided in Annex 3 and should guide the completion of this
task.8 The items highlighted in yellow in the data request form represent core data without which a complete
analysis is not possible. If the core data are not available, alternative data collection options (as outlined
above) will have to take place. Although the form aims to outline the type of case data that should be
collected, it should be tailored (scaled down or up) depending on the court and agency being assessed, its
data collection practices, and the scope of the assessment.


IV.	SOURCES OF INFORMATION
As stated, depending on the level of automation and data collection capacity of the court, case data will have
to be generated from the following sources:

a.	 The CMS
b.	 Manually generated data
c.	 Other data sources, that is, court monthly and/or quarterly reports, court annual reports, and MOJ or judicial
    council annual reports
d.	 Data from a case file review (if a review is required)




8	 Data types highlighted in orange in the Data Request Form represent the core data that is required and must be collected without which
   a solid analysis is not possible. Remaining data types that are not highlighter should be collected if the court is capturing them and will
   support a deeper analysis of the data.




                                                                                                             PHASE IV: DATA COLLECTION           89
     Phase V


     DRAFTING AND FINALIZING
     THE ASSESSMENT REPORT

      Phase V focuses on reviewing all the information obtained in Phases I–IV,
      analyzing it in light of best practices from well-performing courts, and de-
      veloping targeted recommendations for improvements that reflect the local
      context (as opposed to cookie-cutter solutions).
      The findings and recommendations are presented in a draft report that is
      reviewed and discussed with the client before being finalized. This provides
      the client the opportunity to ask questions; update the team on any changes
      that have been implemented since the completion of the previous phases;
      and obtain assistance, if needed, in prioritizing the recommendations.




     Overall Assessment Approach:
     Preliminary Discussions with the Client

     In most cases, the team will be able to identify gaps and targeted recommendations before the completion of
     Phases I–IV. Guided by the overall collaborative approach for this assessment, the team is advised to discuss
     any interim recommendations and findings with the client and obtain feedback. This is beneficial for the team
     and client in that it: 1) keeps them engaged and allows the team to transfer their knowledge in a much more
     informal and effective setting; 2) allows the client to begin thinking about the changes that must be made—in
     some cases, the client will actually begin implementing the changes before the completion of the assessment;
     and 3) enables the team to build a relationship of trust with the client, which ultimately helps in successfully
     completing the assessment and implementing changes.




90   COMMERCIAL COURT AND ENFORCEMENT ASSESSMENT TOOL
Phase V Activities/Components

I.	 PRESENTATION OF THE DRAFT ASSESSMENT REPORT
The report should be clear and concise, factoring in the capacity of the client and the target audience without
compromising the analysis. An executive summary or general observations section should precede the full
report. Subsequent sections should follow the way in which the case is processed from filing to enforcement of
judgments, with a discussion of the current way the courts or enforcement agency are handling the particular
process and recommendations for improving it. The following is a sample outline of the proposed content of
the Assessment Report:

I.	 Executive Summary
II.	Introduction
III.	 Commercial Case Process Review (a section for each process from registration to completion of enforcement
      and corresponding recommendations)
IV.	 Next Steps
V.	 Annexes. This section should at a minimum include the methodology used; the case data obtained; process
      maps (both “as is” and “to be”); a list of people interviewed; a list of all laws, regulations, decrees, and orders
      obtained and reviewed; and a list of all the recommendations.

Once a draft report is completed, a copy should be provided to the client and a meeting scheduled to discuss the
report’s findings, answer questions, and provide clarifications as needed. If the report is lengthy, it is helpful to
single out and present key findings, issues, and recommendations to the client in order to focus the discussions.
The detailed discussions may be delegated to section managers in the court or enforcement agency.


II.	 Finalization of Final Draft
At the completion of the discussion of the findings with the client, which may take a substantial amount of time,
the draft should be finalized, taking into consideration the feedback received. In many cases, the final report will
need to be translated, and thus the team should be aware of the time required to complete this task. (The issue
of who is responsible for the translation of the report and other documents should be determined with the client
at the beginning of the assessment.)

III.	Dissemination of the Interim Findings and Final Report
A dissemination strategy should be developed, discussed, and agreed upon with the client at the onset of the
assessment. The strategy should identify: 1) the exact target audience that will guide the overall drafting of
the report; 2) the entities and persons within the judiciary and enforcement agency with whom the interim and
final findings will be shared; 3) how and when the findings (interim and final) may be disseminated outside the
judiciary (e.g., bar associations, chambers of commerce, and other stakeholder groups); and 4) the level of detail
in the findings that will be disseminated outside of the judiciary (i.e., summary information about some key
findings may be presented to the bar association, civil society members, etc., depending on the local context).
Having this in place will guide the team as they conduct the assessment and will also eliminate any confusion
on the part of the client as to what is expected. Oftentimes, assessment reports will include findings that the
court may be hesitant to share even internally, still less within the judiciary more widely or with others outside
the system. Identifying who will be informed about the findings and to what extent serves to reduce any anxiety
that the court or enforcement agency may have.

Generally speaking, to ensure that the analysis and recommendations are robust and to enable a frank
presentation and analysis about improvement needs, it is advisable that the dissemination of the final report be
limited to the court assessed and not the entirety of the MOJ, judicial councils, and stakeholders.




                                                           PHASE V: DRAFTING AND FINALIZING THE ASSESSMENT REPORT           91
92   COMMERCIAL COURT AND ENFORCEMENT ASSESSMENT TOOL
                                                  Legal Process Map:
         Annex 1                                  Mandatory Pre-Filing Conciliation


Party files request for conciliation – Art 34 (a)                                                                                                       Court Action

                                                                                                                                                        Party Action

                                                                                                                                 Code of Civil Procedure Articles 33–36
                                                     Documents are
                                                       incomplete;
   Conciliation department verifies                   plaintiff must            Plaintiff submits               Registration. clerk files request –
 documents and requests – Article 33 –                    return               request for referral                         Art 34 (c)
     and determines type of case


                                                                                                               Conciliation .clerk submits request
                                                                   Case is legally                                to conciliation committee
                Registration:
                                                                  exempt – Art 34
  Clerk required to register case – Art. 34 (a)

                                                                  Plaintiff refuses                             Conciliation           Conciliation            Plaintiff
                                                                conciliation – Art 34                            Committee             clerk notifies          picks up
                                                                                                               issues referral            plaintiff            referral
                                                                   Case is legally
                                                                  exempt – Art 34

                                   Notification:
Clerk proceeds to call defendant to notify him of 1st hearing date—at least 3 calls
         (must notify parties within 7 days from registration) – Art. 34 (b)                                                          Parties pick up agreement



                                                                                                                                           Conciliation clerk
                                                                                                                                       notifies parties to pick up
  Registration clerk                                                                                                                           agreement
                                 Clerk unable to reach             Clerk able to
    unable to reach
                                  defendant residing             notify defendant
defendant who resides
                                outside of city via phone           via phone
   in city via phone
                                                                                                                                          Committee drafts
                                                                                                                                        agreement and signs it
   Registration clerk           Registration clerk sends          File must be sent
drafts/ prints request for      paper file to Conciliation          to Committee
   notification letter             Committee Clerk                      clerk                                                           Settlement agreement
                                                                                                              Conciliation fails
                                                                                                                                               reached

  Registration clerk             Conciliation Committee            Conciliation clerk
                                   clerk submits file to                                                                                     Hearing held
 manually sends letter                                            calls defendant the
                                   committee to issue             day of the hearing
                                          referral

                                                                                                  Conciliation clerk presents               Hearing - all parties
   Notification Dept                Committee issues                                              case file to committee on                  present & no one
    notifies defendant                 referral                                                           hearing day                       objects; hearing held
                                                               Defendant
  via usual notification                                                      Defendant
                                                                does not
          process                                                              answers
                                                                 answer                           Defendant notified                            Hearing - all
                                 Conciliation Committee
                                                                                                     of new date                             present but a party
                                  clerk calls plaintiff to
                                                                                                                                                  objects
Notification Dept sends
proof of notification to                                      Plaintiff is given a choice              New date is set
                                     Plaintiff picks up                                                                                       Hearing - One or
 Registration Clerk via                                       to reset hearing to later                                                       both parties not
                                  referral and proceeds
         courier                                                date or get a referral                                                       present at hearing
                                          to court                                                    Plaintiff requests
                                                                                                           referral



                                                                                                                                                  ANNEXES            93
                                              Current Process:
           Annex 2                            Notification for Commercial Cases


Plaintiff completes registration of the case and leaves                                                                                             Court Action

                                                                                                                                                    Party Action

   Registration clerk generates a
 request for notification in the CMS


 Registration clerk sends request,
 petition, and the attachments via
     CMS to Notification Dept.

                                                 Person/wife/relative /legal                                                      Staff scans            Staff drafts,
                                                                                       Notice is           Notifier returns
Notification Dept. receives request             representative or manager                                                        notification         prints, and signs
                                                                                      considered              to court,
and file via CMS and/or electronic              if at place of business signs                                                    receipt into         letter addressed
                                                                                      completed            submits notice
      correspondence system                        and gets copy of notice                                                           CMS              to court, stating
                                                                                                           into electronic
                                                                                                                                                         notice was
                                                                                                               system
                                                                                                                                                          successful
       Clerk inserts case info into
           “Special System”
                                                                                                                                                   Sends letter and
                                                                                                                                                 receipt via electronic
                                                                                                                                                   correspondence
 Staff arranges requests based on
        geographic specialty

                                                   Person refuses, no one                       Address incomplete or
 Staff distributes request based on                                                                                                         Defendant has no known
                                                 found, or person found not                   defendant changed address
        geographic specialty                                                                                                                 work or home address
                                                         competent                             and didn’t inform plaintiff

                                                                           Notifier drafts minutes
Notifier receives the roster and signs                                                                                                       Notifier drafts minutes

                                                                          Notifier presents issue to
   Notifier goes to address in file                                       judge or panel president                                          Notifier presents issue to
                                                                                                                                            judge or panel president
                                                                       Judge orders pasting of notice
                 Person                                                 on Notice Board at home of
     Served at residence or place of                                  defendant or in local newspaper                                        Judge orders pasting of
  business, personally or to anyone there                                                                                                   notice on Notice Board at
                                                                                                                                            home of defendant in an
                                                                      Court clerk & judge sign minutes                                         English newspaper
               Company
    Served at headquarters of legal
  representative or, if not there, to any       Clerk fulfills order, pastes notice           Court issues letter to plaintiff
             staff member

                                                    Notification considered                   Plaintiff goes to newspaper
      Company without headquarters                         completed                            with letter and pays fee
          The notice served on its
       representative at his residence
                                                                                                       Notice published


                                                                                              Plaintiff comes back with paper clipping of
                  Foreign company                                                               notice and presents to judge at hearing

                                                           Send request to International
                                                          Cooperation Department (ICD)                  ICD process request            ICD sends letter with status of
  Person/known address outside of country                                                                with MOJ & MOFA                 case to Notification Dept.
                                                                 in paper format


 94        COMMERCIAL COURT AND ENFORCEMENT ASSESSMENT TOOL
                                             New Process:
                                             Notification Recommendation


Plaintiff completes registration of the case and leaves         •	 CMS is fully implemented. Other IT solutions used for notification              Court Action
                                                                •	 Parties are receiving electronic notification of case status
                                                                •	 Notification Department staff is allowed to make decisions on methods          Parties Action

  Registration clerk generates a                                   of notification without resorting to the judge at every attempt                         CMS
  request for notification in the                               •	 The process below is only for 1st notice in a case; follow-up notices are
 CMS. Automatic notice is sent to                                  done electronically                                                              Newspaper
        Notification Dept.



Notification Dept. receives request
                                                                                                                                     CMS generates e-form letter
and has access to file docs via CMS
                                                                                                                                   that notice was successful; staff
                                                 The person/wife/relative                                     Notifier            electronically signs and sends via
                                                                                        Notice is                                     the system to court clerk
                                                  /legal representative or                                 submits the
CMS makes automatic assignment                                                         considered
                                                   manager if at place of                                   notice and
 to geographic area & specialty                                                        completed                                    An e-mail and mobile phone
                                                 business signs and gets                                    receipt via
                                                      copy of notice                                         the CMS                notification is sent to plaintiff
                                                                                                                                 informing him that defendant has
                                                                                                                                             been served
Staff receives a notification via CMS
 that he has been assigned a case



Automatic assignment is checked
     by Notification staff                        Person refuses, no one                        Address incomplete;
                                                                                                                                           Defendant has no known
                                                found, or person found not                   defendant changed address
                                                                                                                                            work or home address
                                                        competent                             and didn’t inform plaintiff
Notifier goes to the party’s address
           that is on file
                                                                             Notifier attempts alternative service methods—3 attempts

                  Person
     Notice is served at residence or                                            If all fails, notifier generates letter through CMS and
     place of business, personally or                                                                    sends to judge
             to anyone there
                                                                                   Judge gets electronic notice of a pending letter;
                                                                                electronically signs and sends back via CMS to notifier
                Company
   Notice is served at headquarters to
 legal representative or, if not there, to
                                                                                 Plaintiff gets electronic notice via e-mail and phone
            any staff member
                                                                                     that notice must be published and the cost


   Company without headquarters                                          Plaintiff goes to newspaper
                                                                                                                Plaintiff goes to the newspaper
  Notice is served on its representative                                representative located at the
                                                                                                                 and presents the court letter;
             at his residence                                          court with court letter; pays fee
                                                                                                                  pays fee and gets a receipt
                                                                               and gets receipt

                                                                Newspaper representative sends e-mail to the court representative and party with
                                                                                   electronic copy of the published notice


                                                                                    Notice published and considered completed
               Foreign company

                                                                                                ICD processes request
                                                          Send request to ICD in                                                        ICD sends letter with status
                                                                                              with MOJ & Foreign Affairs
  Person/known address outside of country                     paper format                                                              of case to Notification Dept.
                                                                                                       Ministry


                                                                                                                                                   ANNEXES         95
     Annex 3                              Case Data Request

                                                                                            Year 11
       PROCESS BY YEAR AND
       COURT LOCATION                                                                       All               Commercial           Commercial
                                                 All cases             All civil
                                                                                         commercial             minor                major
       ADR
       # Conciliation/2
       mediation filed
       # Conciliation/
       mediation successful
       Median time from
       conciliation/med. filing to
       con./med. decision
       Case Registration
       # Cases filed in court

       # Of cases involving real
       property
       Case Disposition
       # Cases decided

       Median time from (court)
       filing to disposition
       # Cases pending by end of
       year (period)
       Median time from filing
       to disposition with cases
       involving real property
       Median time from filing to
       disposition in cases with at
       least one party or asset in
       foreign country
       Median# of hearings per
       case (overall)
       # Cases dismissed by court




     1	 The same data should be collected for three to five years and for each court being assessed.
     2	 Data types highlighted in orange represent the core data that is required and must be collected without which a solid analysis is not possible.
        Remaining data types that are not highlighted should be collected if the court is capturing them and will support a deeper analysis.




96   COMMERCIAL COURT AND ENFORCEMENT ASSESSMENT TOOL
                                                           Year 1
PROCESS BY YEAR AND
COURT LOCATION                                               All       Commercial   Commercial
                                  All cases   All civil
                                                          commercial     minor        major
Pre-trial Attachment
# Of cases in which
property (real or movable)
is attached
Median time from filing
to disposition in cases
in which any property is
attached
Experts
# Cases w. (one or more)
expert requested (FIC)

Median time from filing to
court requesting expert

Median # of hearings (per case)
in cases involving experts

Median # of hearings (per
case) in cases not involving
experts
# Of cases involving experts
dismissed by court

Median time from case
filing to dismissal in cases
involving expert
Median time from court
requesting expert to
delivery of expert report
Median time from receiving
expert report to first
hearing




                                                                                        ANNEXES   97
                                       Case Data Request (continued)

                                                                  Year 1
      PROCESS BY YEAR AND
      COURT LOCATION                                                All       Commercial   Commercial
                                         All cases   All civil
                                                                 commercial     minor        major
      Appeals
      # Of cases appealed


      Median time from 1st
      instance court decision to
      appeals hearing
      Appeals (continued)
      Median time from 1st
      instance court decision to
      appeals disposition
      # Of cases overturned (OR
      remanded) on appeal

      # Of cases overturned on
      appeal involving experts

      # Of cases appealed and
      case involving experts

      Median time from case
      filing to disposition in cases
      involving experts(appeal)
      Translation
      # Of cases requiring
      translation
      Median time from filing
      to disposition in cases
      requiring translation
      International Assistance/Cooperation
      # Of cases requiring
      international assistance

      Median time from 1st
      instance court filing
      to disposition in cases
      requiring international
      assistance



98   COMMERCIAL COURT AND ENFORCEMENT ASSESSMENT TOOL
                                                        Year 1
PROCESS BY YEAR AND
COURT LOCATION                                            All       Commercial   Commercial
                               All cases   All civil
                                                       commercial     minor        major
Enforcement
# Of enforcement cases filed

Median time from 1st
instance court decision to
start of enforcement case
Median time from appeals
decision to start of
enforcement
# Of notifications by major
case step - reconciliation,
FIC, appeal, enforcement
# Of enforcement cases
involving (real or movable)
property
# Of enforcement cases
involving property or party
in foreign country
Median time from start of
enforcement to completion

Median time from start of
enforcement to completion
in cases involving real
property
Median time from start of
enforcement to completion
of cases involving property
or party in foreign country
# Of successful
enforcements
# Of enforcement
outcomes by type (i.e.
payment of money
amount, auction, etc.)
Median time from start
of enforcement case
to completion in cases
involving auctions




                                                                                     ANNEXES   99
      Annex 4                               Small Claims Courts

      Using alternative dispute-resolution (ADR) mechanisms, such as mediation and conciliation justice, is one of
      the ways that courts have attempted to reduce their caseload while still resolving disputes fairly and providing
      access to court services. Another alternative that courts have opted to provide is the small claims court. These
      courts have been in existence in some form in several countries since as early as the 1930s and have historically
      stemmed from the recognition that simple disputes over a small amount of money may not require the same
      procedures and rules but can instead be resolved differently.1 With the understanding that the complexity of
      court processes can be prohibitive and can also discourage parties (especially those who are unrepresented and
      have limited financial means) from resorting to formal justice institutions, small claims courts provide an effective
      and efficient mechanism for ensuring access to court services for all while also freeing up the system’s resources
      to handle more complex commercial disputes. The success of small claims courts has been demonstrated across
      many countries; indeed, it was recently recognized as a good practice for courts worldwide as part of the new
      methodology used by the World Bank’s Doing Business report for assessing the contract enforcement indicator.


      WHAT IS A SMALL CLAIMS COURT?
      A small claims court is a specialized court that is created by law with specific duties and powers to adjudicate and
      resolve small-value monetary disputes.2 The jurisdiction of these courts may be limited to certain types of cases,
      and the benefits generally include reduced court costs for the parties, simplified and faster procedures, and
      specific support services, including mediation in many cases. The issue of whether the parties are required to
      represent themselves or have the option of hiring a lawyer is also determined by law and varies by jurisdiction.3

      Small claims courts are considered an ADR mechanism that provides litigants with a forum and opportunity to
      resolve their disputes in court in a simpler, quicker, and cheaper manner. The courts are premised on the use
      of straightforward procedures that are easier for litigants to follow (e.g., they apply uncomplicated rules for
      presenting evidence and notifying parties); in addition, they are less formal and often eliminate the need for
      parties to be represented by lawyers; they have streamlined processes that allow for a quicker resolution of
      disputes (e.g., limitations are set on the time it takes to serve a defendant, answer a petition, schedule a hearing,
      etc.); and they have reduced associated court costs. Many well-performing small claims courts also provide
      litigants with a mechanism for requesting a waiver of even the limited court fees, as well the choice to mediate
      their dispute at a reduced or even no cost.

      WHAT TYPES OF CASES ARE HANDLED IN A SMALL CLAIMS COURT?
      Generally, the jurisdiction of the small claims court involves minor cases in which the disputed amount is low, an
      amount that varies from one judiciary to another, depending on the threshold as determined by each country.
      For example, the threshold in the District of Columbia Small Claims Court in the United States is US$5,000; if the
      disputed amount exceeds US$5,000, the plaintiff is prohibited from using this court.4 The small claims court in
      Ontario, Canada has a threshold of $25,000 Canadian dollars, while the one in Singapore has a cap of $10,000



      1	 The small claims court in Washington, DC was established in the 1930s.
      2	 Singapore’s small claims courts were established by the Small Claims Tribunals Act, and the Washington, DC court is governed by the D.
         C. Code §§ 11-1321 and 16-3901 et seq. (1981), also known as the Superior Court Rules of Procedure for the Small Claims and Conciliation
         Branch.
      3	 The U.S. states of Michigan and California, for example, prohibit lawyers from representing parties in small claims courts.
      4	 Washington, DC’s small claims court fee structure is as follows: filing a new statement of claim is US$5.00 for claims of $500 or less, US$10.00
         for claims over US$500 and up to US$2,500, and US$45.00 for claims over US$2,500 and up to US$5,000. The plaintiff must also pay the cost
         for service on the defendant(s). See also http://www.dccourts.gov/internet/documents/SmallClaimsHandbook.pdf.




100   COMMERCIAL COURT AND ENFORCEMENT ASSESSMENT TOOL
Singapore dollars. The latter, however, provides that the small claims court may still adjudicate cases in which
the amount in dispute is up to S$20,000, if both parties consent in writing.

With regard to subject matter jurisdiction, small claims courts are generally limited to resolving simpler disputes
involving some type of debt recovery, as opposed to complicated commercial disputes. In some jurisdictions,
simple traffic fine cases may be handled in a small claims traffic fine court. In addition, small claims courts do not
generally have jurisdiction over divorce and custody cases, bankruptcy lawsuits, or libel or slander cases. These
subject matter limitations are specified by the law establishing the court.


WHAT ARE SOME OF THE MAIN FEATURES?

•	 Limited Jurisdiction
   Small claims courts do not have jurisdiction over all minor disputes but will generally be limited to simpler
   disputes usually involving some type of debt recovery.

•	 Simplified Procedures
   Small claims courts will generally have different sets of rules and procedures that outline all legal requirements
   and procedures that the court and parties must use. These rules are different from those used in other courts,
   namely codes of civil procedures, in that people who are not legal experts can easily understand and follow
   them. Although the rules are simple and do not involve many requirements, they still ensure due process and
   provide the necessary procedural safeguards to the litigants.

•	 Speedy Resolution
   In addition to having simplified procedures, small claims courts generally have specific and short time
   limitations for case processes that are undertaken by the court and required by the parties. Some courts,
   such as the Singapore small claims court, have developed even shorter time limitations for certain actions;
   there, if a claim is filed or involves a tourist, the court will set the case for mediation within 24 hours of filing,
   providing for even quicker resolution.

•	 Informality
   Court proceedings in small claims courts are more informal than those in other first-instance-level courts. This
   feature alleviates the level of apprehension on the part of self-represented parties and allows them to be
   comfortable with representing themselves without fear of undermining their case.

•	 Reduced Court Costs
   The cost of filing and processing a case in small claims court is significantly lower than in other courts. As
   stated, many courts will also provide litigants with the option of requesting and obtaining a waiver of the fees
   provided that they meet certain criteria required by the courts.

•	 Access to Mediation/Conciliation Services
   The majority of small claims courts provide litigants with the right and opportunity to mediate their disputes,
   at times even before filing the lawsuit. Flexibility in the way in which disputes are resolved is an important
   feature of a successful and well-performing court. For example, the rule of the Washington, DC small claims
   court provides the parties with the option of voluntarily appearing together and submitting their dispute to
   the judge for conciliation without having to issue any notification. In that case, the dispute is heard in an
   informal setting, and the judge will not be governed by any rules but will endeavor to reach an amicable
   settlement between the parties, who nevertheless have the right to have their lawyers present. Once an
   agreement is reached, the clerk of the court will record it in the court record, making it enforceable. One
   of the parties may also request conciliation and serve notice on the other party, after which conciliation will
   take place. In Singapore, once a party files a claim in small claims court, he/she will be required to attend a
   mediation session within a short period of time after filing.




                                                                                                               ANNEXES      101
      •	 Right to Appeal
         Like other first-instance-level courts, judgments issued by small claims courts can generally be appealed
         to higher courts in many jurisdictions. This issue is one that is determined by each country and should be
         outlined in the law establishing the court.

      •	 Access to Information
         An important feature of a successful small claims court is the availability of detailed information in paper and
         electronic formats to court users. Recognizing that the target user group may not have an understanding
         of the legal framework governing the processing of cases and may not have the means to hire a lawyer,
         successful courts ensure that users have access to detailed information about navigating the court system
         (e.g., how to file a case, what documents are required, what filing and other court fees are involved, how to
         serve a party and request a hearing, etc.). Access to simple checklists and forms as well as electronic services
         such as e-filing and e-payments also enhances access by making it even easier to interact with the court.
         In jurisdictions where the population may be diverse, the court should provide this information in multiple
         languages (e.g., the Washington, DC court provides informational brochures in 10 languages).


      WHAT ARE THE BENEFITS OF A SMALL CLAIMS COURT?

      •	 Providing an effective and efficient alternative mechanism for resolving small, less complex disputes
      •	 Eliminating or significantly reducing the financial burdens of litigating a case for parties
      •	 Freeing up court resources (financial and human) so that they may be dedicated to resolving complex disputes
      •	 Increasing access to court services and ensuring that the needs of all court users, especially those with little
         financial means, can avail themselves of the services provided by justice institutions
      •	 Providing access to ADR services at low or no cost	
      •	 Reducing the backlog


      HOW TO DETERMINE IF THERE IS A NEED FOR SMALL CLAIMS COURTS?
      Even though establishing and operating small claims courts will save court funds, creating and running them
      require some financial and human resources that need to be available. Therefore, the decision to establish
      these courts should be based on a careful study of the type of cases that could be assigned to a small claims
      court to benefit court users and increase their access to court services, as well as free up the court resources
      required to handle more complex commercial disputes. Also needed are a series of detailed reviews of: (i) the
      legal structure governing the processing of commercial cases to identify whether the establishment of a small
      claims court is permissible under the current framework; (ii) commercial caseload data for at least three–five
      years (including filing trends, causes of delays, etc.); (iii) existing ADR mechanisms and their effectiveness in
      resolving smaller cases and cases where the parties are unrepresented; and (iv) user needs. A determination of
      the required resources will also have to be made to identify the initial cost of establishing a small claims court
      as well as the projected future resources needed to maintain operations.

      Once the decision to establish a small claims court has been made, and provided that the law establishing the
      court has passed, the court should begin developing informational materials, including brochures on how to
      use the court and checklists that court users may use when filing their cases. Depending on the jurisdiction,
      these materials should be provided and made available to users online and in paper format in more than one
      language to provide greater access. The court should also explore the option of providing electronic services,
      such as simple e-filings and e-payments, to users as well. In addition, a public awareness campaign should be
      developed and implemented to apprise the public and the targeted court users of the services that will be
      provided by this new court as well as the associated benefits of using it.




102   COMMERCIAL COURT AND ENFORCEMENT ASSESSMENT TOOL
Footer
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, DC 20433, USA
