                                                                                            104217
Dissemination Note Series

Romania: Toward a Low Carbon and Climate Resilient Economy

                            Urban Sector Analysis

Sector Overview

By European standards, Romania is a low urbanized country. There exists a rising trend towards
suburbanization, however, that is not fully captured by Romania’s urban statistics.

The country’s urbanization rate of 55% has remained fairly constant over the past two decades, despite
significant population migration out of the country, and a strong suburbanization trend in areas on the
immediate outskirts of major cities.

Because central government demographers still categorize some of these regions outside of the urban
core as rural, this shift has not yet made its way into the official population statistics. If this were to happen,
the urbanization rate could rise to 65%.


 Key Findings                                               Data limitations make it difficult to assess
                                                            the contribution of cities to Romania’s overall
   A shift to a Low-Carbon development                      emission levels, and until now, regional
   strategy in the Bucharest – Ilfov region has             Integrated Urban Development Plans (IUDP)
   the potential to reduce local greenhouse                 have rarely focused explicitly on climate
   gas emissions 37% by 2050.                               change considerations,
   The Low-Carbon scenario foresees realistic
                                                            instead focusing primarily on local policy
   policies that foster dense development,
                                                            preferences and speaking in more familiar
   coordinate land use and transit, spur
                                                            terms of transportation challenges or other
   proactive local action to reduce energy
                                                            environmentally-focused infrastructure, such as
   consumption in buildings and transport
                                                            waste or water systems. There is a similar lack of
   and change local solid waste practices,
                                                            understanding about how Romanian cities will
   and assume ambitious national initiatives
                                                            be affected by climate change. Related planning
   to promote clean power and cleaner
                                                            activities have largely taken the form of local
   vehicles.
                                                            disaster plans, which are required by law, although
   Benefits are not limited to GHG emission                 the quality or breadth of these plans is unclear.
   reductions:                                              One contributing factor is that little has been
     Local air quality would also improve thanks            done to statistically “downscale” global climate
   to a 39% reduction in particulate matter                 models to provide a more granular, local picture
   (PM10) and 35% reduction in nitrous oxide                of how the climate will change in Romanian cities
   (NOx) emissions associated with reduced                  in the coming decades.
   energy use.
     Energy spending would be cut by $1.4
   billion USD/year in real terms.
     Thermal energy saving alone would
   deliver up to $632 million USD in savings,
   mostly in reduced municipal budget
   expenditures.
There is, however, a rising interest in climate change mitigation and adaptation strategies among
local governments across the country.

As of October 2015, there were 64 Romanian communities that had signed on to the European Commission’s
Covenant of Mayors program, an initiative aimed at promoting sustainable energy use in cities.

The Covenant program requires signatories to develop and implement a Sustainable Energy Action Plan
(SEAP) within a year of signing on to the program. Together, these 64 communities collectively represent a
population of roughly 5 million people, or 25% of Romania’s population.


Methodology and Findings


The objective of the urban sector analysis was to provide insights to the Romanian Ministry of
Environment, Waters and Forests (MEWF) on opportunities to change the trajectory of greenhouse
gas emissions (GHG) in Romanian cities, using the Bucharest–Ilfov metropolitan region (BIMR) as an
example.

With a population of 2.3 million, BIMR ranks 37th in size among all of the metropolitan regions in Europe,
and like many of these regions, it has seen shifts in demographic and land use trends.

For example, while Bucharest’s population has declined over the past two decades, Ilfov County—the
nearly 1600km administrative district that completely envelops Bucharest—grew by 35% from 1992 to
2011, indicating a strong trend towards suburbanization and sprawl.

The urban sector analysis sought to capture the implications of these trends, using outputs from two
models:
     the Rapid Assessment of City Emissions (RACE), a geospatial model that calculates transport and
     other energy demand based on population and land use patterns in a city;
     CURB (Climate Actions for Urban Sustainability), a scenario-planning tool that examines the impacts
     of more than 60 different discrete policy or technology interventions.


Of the three main sectors analyzed—buildings, transport and solid waste—buildings account
for the largest share of energy consumption in Romania, and heating represents 57 percent of all
energy use in buildings.


Per-capita consumption of electricity is low in
Romania—the lowest in the EU—but significant
growth is currently occurring, driven mainly by
changes in residential- and commercial- sector
thermal demand patterns as customers move away
from their reliance on district heating systems.

Urban transport represents the second-largest
source of GHG emissions in Romania.

Rising car ownership rates, although still low
compared to the rest of the EU, are creating
                                                                                                    www.flickr.com




increasing congestion problems in the BIMR region.
GHG emissions associated with municipal solid
waste disposal total approximately 2 percent of
the country’s overall emission portfolio; the majority result from Romania’s overwhelming reliance on
landfilling to dispose of organic material and other forms of solid waste. Landfills entomb this material,
and as it decomposes it produces methane, a GHG with 25 times the heat-trapping potential of carbon
dioxide.

          Figure 1 Comparison of Buildings, Transport and Solid Waste Emissions in BAU and Low Carbon Scenarios
                                        (metric tons of CO2e) [Source: World Bank]
               16 000 000


               14 000 000
                                                                                  Percentages refer
               12 000 000
                                                                                     to reduction
                                              -38%                                 from 2050 BAU
               10 000 000


                8 000 000


                6 000 000
                                                                          -23%
                4 000 000


                2 000 000                                                                         -80%


                                  Buildings                   Transport             Solid Waste

                                                     BAU         LCR




This analysis employed two scenarios: a Business-as-Usual (BAU) scenario, and a Low-Carbon
Development (LC) pathway.

Under the BAU case current trends (with minor modifications) are projected out to 2050, while in the Low
Carbon scenario the city/region takes proactive measures to promote smart urban development through
a mixture of land-use planning and action to reduce emissions from buildings, transport and solid waste.

The BAU scenario presumes continued low-density development on the periphery of Bucharest, with a
lack of integrated transport and land use planning leading to inefficient urban form.

While energy use and associated emissions continue to increase as a result, growth is fortuitously offset by
a number of encouraging trends in transport and buildings that take place even in the absence of strong
local action.

The BAU scenario assumes that the renovation rate
of existing building stock continues at its current
pace of 1% per year, with energy savings from
building retrofits assumed at a conservative 15%.

Vehicle emission levels are expected to decline
as consumers replace their old vehicles with
newer, more efficient models compliant with EU
performance standards.
The Low-Carbon Development scenario goes much further than this, prioritizing dense
development; the coordination of land use and transit; proactive local action to reduce energy
consumption in buildings and transport and change local solid waste practices; it also assumes
ambitious national initiatives to promote clean power and cleaner vehicles.

For example, although Romania has yet to achieve current EU energy efficiency targets for buildings, the
low-carbon scenario assumes all new buildings reduce energy use by 45% compared to existing building
stock. The LC Option halves the share of low-rise residential development by 2050, doubles the share of
high-rise residential development, and more than doubles the amount of very high-density development
occurring around the city.

The amount of medium-density development stays roughly the same under both scenarios. In addition
to spatial development pattern changes, the low-carbon option assumes a suite of measures to reduce
vehicle kilometers travelled, promote mode shift, and drive changes in vehicle stock and efficiency.
In the solid waste sector, an 80% reduction in emissions relative to BAU is achieved by assuming that
Bucharest-Ilfov meets all current EU targets with regards to recycling and diversion of biodegradable
waste.

Emission reductions are achieved through a combination of more aggressive composting efforts (we
assumed 65% of food and yard waste is diverted, as per EU targets) and the capture of 100% of methane
emissions from local landfills.
              Figure 2: Carbon Emission Reductions under LC Scenario Relative to BAU, 2050 [Source: World Bank]




                                                                                                   }
        21 000 000

                                                      BAU
        19 000 000


        17 000 000
                                                                                            29%
                                                                                                       37%
        15 000 000                                       LC
                                                                                             4%
        13 000 000                                                                           4%

        11 000 000


         9 000 000
                                                                                                        Building Energy
                        Percentages refer
         7 000 000
                           to reduction                                                                 Transport
                         from 2050 BAU
                                                                                                        Solid Waste
         5 000 000




Adopting a LC scenario with proactive spatial planning leads to significant improvement in energy
use, energy spending, and emissions—even though the gross building area remains the same as
under the BAU option.

Carbon emissions decline by 37% relative to a Business-as-Usual pathway, with buildings-related energy
use delivering three-quarters of that savings (Fig.2).

In the BAU scenario, overall energy use and associated emissions continue to increase out to 2050,
but less rapidly than expected.

Energy demand continues to increase between 2014 and 2050 as a result of the demographic and spatial
trends outlined above—including a 30% increase in population and building area—but carbon emissions
grow much less rapidly (9%) over the same period. This is explained by the factors above. Lower than
expected emission increases are no excuse for complacency, however.

In order to meet national and EU-wide emissions targets, more will have to be done at the local level to
promote compact development.
The case for the LC scenario is even greater given that the impacts are not limited to global climate
change.

Local air quality also improves, thanks to a 39% reduction in particulate matter (PM10) and 35% reduction
in nitrous oxide (NOx) emissions. Reduced energy use achieved under the LC scenario cuts total energy
spending by $1.4 billion USD per year in real terms.

 Moreover, there are other benefits too. In the buildings sector alone, energy savings lead to a reduction in
energy spending totaling $956 million USD per year by 2050. Significantly, thermal energy savings relative
to the BAU scenario amount to as much as $632 million USD.

Given that retail prices for heating are set by the government, it is likely that most of these savings will
accrue to the municipal budget—an important saving given the large burden of subsidizing thermal
energy use in Bucharest.
There are also many types of interventions that can be taken in the context of adaptation to climate
change.

Policies that steer new development to areas less likely to be in harm’s way are important, as are policies
or initiatives aimed at enhancing the physical robustness of vulnerable structures. Risk maps reflecting
localized concerns—and based on the best information available on future climate impacts–can be helpful
in guiding local policy-making and retrofit investments in infrastructure systems or private and public
buildings.

More generally, it is important to ensure that local or national building codes affecting new construction
represent the state-of-the-art subject to documented relevant modifications based on local flood hazard
and seismic maps, etc. To ensure coherence in policies, investments, and actions, cities around Romania
could undertake the development of risk-informed city-wide adaptation plans (including actions,
timescales and budgets).

Cities may also wish to take other steps to use public education or eco-system based approaches to lessen
the risks of climate-related hazards, including through investments in green infrastructure that can help
cool a city or provide protection or relief during extreme weather events.
Project co-financed by the European Regional Development Fund through OPTA 2007-2013




Romania:
Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth Program OPERA-CLIMA




                                          For more information and the publications of the
                                          OPERA-CLIMA Program, please visit its webpage at:
                                                       http://opera-clima.ro/en/
