                                                                   104218
Dissemination Note Series

Romania: Toward Low Carbon and Climate Resilient Economy

                             Water Sector Analysis


Sector Overview


Romania’s water resources are moderate, but sufficient with prudent resource management that
would ensure conservation and sustainability; regional and inter-annual variation is, however,
significant.

Water availability in Romania is only 2,000 cubic meters per capita per year, just above the international
threshold for water stress of 1,700 m3 and more than twice below the Europe’s average of 4,500 m3.

Water withdrawals currently stay substantially below the international benchmark for pressure on available
water resources, but climate change is pushing demand for water up, thus altering this balance. Also, a
significant inter-basin and inter-annual variation in water resources availability creates an additional
challenge for water resource management.

Romania’s water sector is vulnerable to climate change, and adaptation efforts are essential for
its continued ability to meet demand for water from the end-use sectors – households, industry,
agriculture, environment and hydropower.

The water sector in Romania is facing a dual challenge: water availability is dropping and demand for water
increasing, both due to climate change. Irrigation water supply is constrained by the inadequate irrigation
infrastructure, while irrigation availability is becoming critical for agriculture due to climate change.

                                                        Similarly, supply reliability for industrial and
                                                        domestic use is most challenged for basins with
                                                        lower water endowment, especially during
                                                        summer months.

                                                        Hydropower generation will both constrain and
                                                        be constrained by water demand in other sectors
                                                        in Romania. It is also sensitive to water scarcity
                                                        in basins during the dry seasons. In addition,
                                                        the adverse environmental impacts of climate-
                                                        induced water quantity and quality constraints
                                                        will also need to be managed.

                                                        Adaptation efforts are therefore important in all
                                                        water end-use sectors.
Methodology


The objective of the analysis was to assess the climate change impact on water availability and how
the adaptation policies and investments can offset the impact of the changing water availability on
sectoral outcomes in the water consuming sectors, with the emphasis on agriculture.

Two sets of models were used in the analysis: climate models and adaptation models.

     Climate models (General Circulation Models or GCMs) produced climate projections as a function of
     initial conditions and projected quantities of greenhouse gases emitted.

     Adaptation models projected water availability, crop yields, and hydropower impact of climate and
     assessed the effectiveness of the proposed green policies and investments.

Adaptation modeling set included three models:

     a water run-off model (CLIRUN) to estimate
     streamflow runoff,
     the AquaCrop model to assess crop yield
     and irrigation demand,
     the Water Evaluation And Planning
     (WEAP) model to evaluate the water
     storage, hydropower potential, and water
     availability.

Adaptation modeling compared the modeling
results in two green (adaptation) scenarios:

     Green (requiring a moderate adaptation
     effort),
     Super Green (entailing an ambitious
     adaptation plan) - to the outcomes in the
     Baseline scenario.

The analysis addresses several policy issues including potential adaptive measures in agriculture,
prioritization of water use in end-use sectors, and adaptation costs and benefits in the water sector.

The analysis addressed four policy-relevant issues:

         the possible adaptive responses
    1    by farmers to climate change and             4    financial implications of climate change
                                                           and green growth investments: crop
         the resulting marginal impact on                  yield and hydropower generation
         agricultural production and incomes;              modeling outcomes were analyzed to
                                                           produce projections of the cost and
         projected impacts on energy
    2    (hydropower) production under the
                                                           revenue flows and to calculate on that
                                                           basis the net present value (NPV) of the
         modelled development and climate
                                                           proposed green investment in these
         scenarios;
                                                           sectors and the benefit-cost ratio.
         trade-offs between alternative water
    3    uses (for irrigation, hydropower, and
         municipal and industrial use);
Findings


Climate change will increase water demand-supply gap, affecting mostly irrigation and industrial
sector, and less so municipal sector.

Water demand-supply gap is estimated to increase as a result of climate change. Climate change will lead to
a decreased river runoff, which in turn will negatively affect water demand-supply balance. In agriculture,
water availability will be threatened during the primary growing months, while demand for irrigation will
be higher due to rising temperature and decreasing and more variable precipitation.

Unmet municipal demands are modest but irrigation and industrial activities are estimated to suffer more
from the growing demand-supply gap. Hydropower will also be affected by the decreased river runoff.

Climate change will negatively affect yields of rainfed crops and have a positive impact on irrigated
crops, overall.

The analysis considered impact of climate
change on yields of irrigated and rainfed crops
across administrative regions of the country and
by type of crop and evaluated how to target
adaptation efforts geographically and by crop.

There are substantial crop yield benefits from
irrigation:

     if water stress is removed by irrigating, then the climate change (in particular, temperature increase)
     has a positive effect on future crop yields. By moving from rainfed to irrigated agricultural land,
     farming will become much more resilient to the effects of climate change.
     however, without irrigation, most of the crops will be harmed by climate change, especially in the
     south of the country, where some of the crops will experience up to 35 percent drop in yields.

Adaptation policies and investments will offset the significant risks that climate change presents to
water supply, agricultural production, and hydropower generation in Romania.

In the analysis, a number of green investments were evaluated for their potential yield impact, including
adopting improved drought tolerant crop varieties, converting from rainfed to irrigated agriculture,
improving soil drainage, improving soil aeration, optimizing fertilizer application and optimizing the
timing of irrigation water application.

The most promising investments for yield
improvement were:

     rehabilitating irrigation infrastructure to
     restore irrigated production to certain
     currently rainfed areas,
     optimizing agronomic inputs, including
     fertilizer inputs,
     adopting improved, drought tolerant, crop
     varieties.

While the first two measures have clearly positive outcomes across regions and crops, the third one (crop
varieties) is estimated to provide benefits in particular regions and crops.
In both Green and Super Green scenarios, revenues will exceed costs resulting in a significant
positive NPV of the overall investment (Figure 1).

The overall NPVs of the proposed adaptation measures for Romania under the Green and the Super Green
investment options are projected to be positive at $1.8 billion or 0.05 percent of GDP and $11.0 billion or
0.32 percent of GDP, respectively1.

                                                                                 With Super Green investments, the NPV is
                                                                                 dramatically higher due to the broader set of
                                                                                 investment options that are considered. The
                                                                                 schedule of investments puts a higher burden
                                                                                 on the period 2015-2030 when approximately
                                                                                 65 percent of the total required investment is
                                                                                 made.

                                                                                 The benefit-cost ratio of the investments is
                                                                                 above 1 in both scenarios, demonstrating that
                                                                                 benefits exceed costs: it equals 1.8 in the Green
                                                                                 and increases to 1.9 in the Super Green scenario.
                                                                                 While the financial outcomes are positive at
                                                                                 the scenario level, they very across the selected
                                                                                 green measures.

Two of the measures - enhanced fertilizer application and rehabilitated irrigation – have positive NPVs and
benefit-cost ratios exceeding 1 (benefits outweigh costs) in both scenarios and across regions, while with
the third measure – improved crop varieties - costs outweigh benefits in most regions.

                                   Figure 1 Super Green costs are higher than in Green, but so is return on investment
                                             Green and Super Green scenarios: cost, revenues and benefit-cost ratio



                              25 000
                                                                      costs
                                                                 exceed revenues

                              20 000                                                                           bene t-cost
       € million (PV costs)




                                                                                                                ratio: 2,3

                              15 000       bene t-cost
                                            ratio: 2,17                                                    Super
                                                                                                           Green
                              10 000                                                 revenues
                                                                                    exceed costs
                                                    Green
                              5 000
                                   0
                                       0            5 000      10 000 15 000           20 000      25 000

                                                              € million (PV revenues)
                   Source: Romania: A Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth Country Assessment, World Bank, 2015, in print.




Present value is calculated at five percent discount rate.
1
Conclusions and Recommendations


Climate change presents a substantial risk to agricultural production, irrigation, municipal and
industrial water uses, and hydropower generation in Romania. However, these risks can be addressed
by green growth investments.

The greatest investment potential exists for
rehabilitating irrigation infrastructure to restore
irrigation production to currently rainfed areas
and for optimizing agronomic inputs, including
fertilizer application.

While these two measures have clearly positive
(both in terms of sector productivity and NPV)
outcomes across regions and crops and should be
implemented at the country level, the third one
(crop varieties) is estimated to provide benefits in
particular regions and crops, to which it should be
targeted.

As a result of this assessment, a set of tools for water sector investment analyses has been developed
and transferred to local counterparts in the Ministry of Environment, as well as ANAR, INHGA, and
other local stakeholders.

These tools can be applied to further assess the irrigation and other water and agriculture investment
options, both individually and in combination with water use efficiency options. They can also be used to
assess multi-sectoral water use strategies.

The results developed in this assessment, as well as further assessments using the tools transferred to local
counterparts, can have lasting benefits for evaluation and prioritization of a broad range of water and
agriculture sector investment options.

The required investment in the Green scenario amounts to €1.8 billion (NPV) or 0.05 percent of GDP,
while a more aggressive Super Green scenario requires €11.0 billion in investment costs (NPV) or
0.32 percent of GDP2.

The Green investments would be a manageable
increase from 2013 levels of agricultural sector
support of €1 billion direct payments, and €1.3
billion of rural development expenditures.
By contrast, Super Green investments would
represent a substantial increase from current
spending and would quickly exhaust the National
Rural Development Plan (NRDP) 2014-2020
financial allocation for irrigation infrastructure,
which is over €400 million, or about €65 million
annually.




Present value is calculated at five percent discount rate.
2
Project co-financed by the European Regional Development Fund through OPTA 2007-2013




Romania:
Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth Program OPERA-CLIMA




                                          For more information and the publications of the
                                          OPERA-CLIMA Program, please visit its webpage at:
                                                       http://opera-clima.ro/en/
