                         Art and Development

                         Amidst our aspirations for a better world, art plays a particu-
                         larly important role. Art opens our minds and stimulates our cre-
                         ativity. In this sense, art is also a catalyst for development – a
                         role the World Bank and the Embassy of Switzerland in Macedonia
                         aim to play.

                         Therefore, we have joined forces with young artists and national
                         partners in setting up this exhibition. We want to communicate a
                         contemporary image of the country. And we want to connect artists
                         with the many visitors coming to our offices, connect them with a
                         broad international audience via our websites, and support them
                         in their connections with their own society.

                         Each artist has its own unique way of stimulating our imagina-
                         tion, of connecting us with our dreams. Every change starts with
                         a dream, and our common dream is a better world for all.


                              Nicole Wyrsch                           Markus Repnik
                         Ambassador of Switzerland             World Bank Country Manager




Skopje, September 2008
Ana Dimcevska                  Macedonia contemporary art exhibition
Dijana Tomic Radevska
Goce Nanevski                  The realization of this exhibition would not have been possible
Ibrahim Bedi                   without the voluntary contribution of many committed people, in-
Marijana Shijakoska            cluding:
Milena Tonevska
Mirna Arsovska                 Members of the Art Committee: Aneta Georgievska-Shine (adjunct
Nehat Beqiri                   professor University of Maryland), Evangelina Elizondo (acting
Simonida Filipova Kitanovska   curator, The World Bank Art Program), Ismet Ramicevic (professor
Slavica Janeslieva             in sculpture), and Zlatko Teodosievski (art critic)
Tanja Balac
Teuta Hodza                    Professors at the Faculty of Fine Arts, led by Dean Dimitar Mali-
Zaneta Vangeli                 danov, proposing the most encouraging “newcomers”
Zoran Tosevski
                               Colleagues at the Embassy of Switzerland and the World Bank coun-
                               try office, in particular Arthur Kuggeleyn and the “Art and De-
                               velopment” coordinator Anita Bozinovska

                               World Bank Art Program, Washington D.C., led by Marina Galvani

                               And all the artists who joined our initiative, offering to give
                               back 10 percent of their sales’ receipts to development projects
                               in Macedonia.
ANA DIMCEVSKA was born 1986 in Skopje. She is a student of the
Faculty of Fine Arts in Skopje. Ana participated in several group
exhibitions organized by the Faculty of Art, the Biennale in
Tetovo for miniature, an exhibition at the Macedonian Cultural
Center and other events.

anapolzav@yahoo.com




                                                                    Haosot na beskonecnosta, deep print, 2007 - Ana Dimcevska
DIJANA TOMIC RADEVSKA was born in Skopje, in 1961. She is a gradu-
ate from the Faculty of Fine Arts. Dijana is a member of DLUM
(Association of Artists of Macedonia) since 1985. Among many
awards, she has won a Diploma and a gold medal from Gallery “Modi-
gliani”-Milano in 1996 and is Knight of the Accademia di Greci
Marino - Italy, department Art. She has been teaching Art at the




                                                                     Family in 1909, silkscreen and flatprint, 1998 - Dijana Tomic Radevska
International High School in Skopje since 2007. She works as an
independent artist and designs and produces hand-made carpets.

d_tomic_radevska@yahoo.com
www.komradrug.com.mk
GOCE NANEVSKI was born in Skopje, in 1974. He received his MFA
from the Faculty of Fine Arts, Department of sculpture and is
teaching assistant at the Faculty. He had solo exhibitions in
Sarajevo, New York, Plovdiv, Skopje, Veles. He participated in
many group exhibitions in Macedonia, but also in Trieste, Varna,
Caldas Da Rainha (Portugal), Vienna, Los Angeles, Xanti, Gornji
Milanovac. Goce Nanevski has been awarded with “Stefan Manevski”
award for sculpture, “Ljubomir Belogaski” best exhibition in
2002, “Jordan Grabul” for sculpture.

gocenanevski@yahoo.com




                                                                   Fifty of Fifty, object, 2005 - Goce Nanevski
IBRAHIM BEDI was born in Skopje, 1959. He graduated from the Fac-
ulty of Fine Arts, and in 1999 finished post graduate studies. In
1991, under a scholarship provided by the Faculty of Fine Arts,
he attended the University Mimar Sinan in Istanbul and also the
atelier of the architect Xengis Bektash. In 1992 he was a scholar
of the Jildiz University in Istanbul and worked on research in
Cappadocia. In 1999 he was a member of the Council for culture in
the Ministry of Culture.

bedibatu@yahoo.com




                                                                    Family Tree, wood, 2005 - Ibrahim Bedi
MARIJANA SHIJAKOSKA was born in 1985 in Kavadarci. She is a stu-




                                                                    Vrakanje kon starite koreni, print, combined technique, 2008 - Marijana Shijakoska
dent at the Faculty of Fine Arts, graphics and graphic design
department. She has diploma from the XXI International Biennale
for children and youth graphics. Marijana participated in several
group exhibitions in Macedonia.

marijana_2212@yahoo.com
MILENA TONEVSKA was born in 1985 in Kumanovo. She is a student at
the Faculty of Fine Arts. Milena is a teaching assistant at the
Graphic department at the Faculty of Fine Arts. She participated
in several group exhibitions in Struga and Tetovo.

milena.tonevska@yahoo.com




                                                                    Pogled 1, computer graphic, 2008 - Milena Tonevska
MIRNA ARSOVSKA was born in 1967 in Skopje. She graduated at the
Faculty of Fine Arts, Skopje. She acquired the status of an in-
dependent artist in 2003. Mirna Arsovska participated in group
exhibitions in Tokyo, Groznjan, Skopje, Bitola, Belgrade, Yoko-
hama, Providence (USA), Manchester (UK); she had solo exhibitions
in Skopje, Bitola, Vrsac, Istanbul and participated in video fes-
tivals in Beijing, Amsterdam, Strumica, Bitola, Belgrade.

mirna.arsovska@gmail.com




                                                                    Mobile tranks, wood, 2005 - Mirna Arsovska
NEHAT BEQIRI was born in Tetovo in 1967. He graduated from the
Faculty of Arts in Pristina, where he also completed his post
graduate studies in 2001. Nehat is now teaching painting at the
Faculty of Fine Arts at State university of Tetovo, Macedonia. He
had numerous individual exhibitions in Macedonia, Kosovo, Turkey
and France and participated in collective exhibitions in Albania,
Kosovo, Skopje, Tetovo, Veles, Croatia, France and Bulgaria.

nehatbe@yahoo.co.uk
www.nehatbeqiri.com




                                                                    X-0, combined technique on canvas, 2003 - Nehat Beqiri
SIMONIDA FILIPOVA – KITANOVSKA was born in Skopje in 1965. In
1988 she graduated from the Faculty of Fine Arts in Skopje. She
is a member of DLUM since 1988. Between 1991-1997 she was living
and working in Boston, USA. Presently she is based in Skopje. The
works of Simonida Filipova- Kitanovska were exhibited at 13 solo
exhibitions and over one hundred group shows in Macedonia, Croa-
tia, Serbia, France, USA, Germany, Bulgaria, Australia, Armenia,
Greece. She is freelance artist who is also active as a book il-




                                                                    Home coming, oil on canvas, 2008 - Simonida Filipova-Kitanovska
lustrator and instructor of drawing and painting.

simonida.art@gmail.com
SLAVICA JANESLIEVA was born in Skopje in 1973. She graduated from
the Faculty of Fine Arts in Skopje in 1996, where she also com-




                                                                    Come and see! There is an angel in the room, mixed media, 2004 - Slavica Janeslieva
pleted her MFA studies. She is an assistant professor at the Fac-
ulty of Fine Arts – Skopje, Printmaking Department. Slavica had
numerous exhibitions in Skopje, the Netherlands, USA, Slovakia
and Switzerland and participated in several group exhibitions all
over the world.

slavica_jane@yahoo.com, janeslieva@flu.ukim.edu.mk
www.scca.org.mk/artists/slavica/default.html
TANJA BALAC was born in Skopje in 1968. She graduated in 1991 and
in 2008 received her MA from the Faculty of Fine Arts in Skopje,
painting department. In 2003 she was on a study visit in Paris.
She has been a member of DLUM since 1991 and became its president
in 2006. She had many solo exhibitions in Skopje, Malme, Mari-
bor, Sofia, Paris, Novi Sad, Tetovo. She had group exhibitions
in France, USA, Poland, and Bulgaria. She is winner of several
awards: painting award “Metodija Ivanovski – Mende”, “Konstantin
Mazev”etc.

tanjabalac@gmail.com




                                                                    Poveke od Emocija, oil on canvas, 2008 - Tanja Balac
TEUTA HODZA was born in 1986 in Struga. She is currently a student
at the Faculty of Fine Arts in Skopje, department of graphic and
graphic design. Teuta worked as young artist on several projects
in the Ministry of Environment, and participated in group exhibi-
tions in Macedonia and Poland. She also participated in the in-
ternational exhibition for wall paper at the Skopje City Museum,
where the theme was tolerance.

dizajngrafik@hotmail.com




                                                                     39...., print, 2007 - Teuta Hodza
ZANETA VANGELI was born in Bitola in 1963. She graduated at
the Staatliche Hochschule fur Bildende Kunste – Stadelschule in
Frankfurt/M. in 1988. Currently she teaches painting at the Fac-
ulty of Fine Arts in Skopje. She had solo exhibitions in Skopje,
Frankfurt/M., Cologne, New York, Stockholm and participated in
various group exhibitions and film festivals held in Skopje,
Buenos Aires, Berlin, Rio de Janeiro, Venice, Vienna, and Stock-
holm.




                                                                   Anamnesis (detalil), inject, print\wood, 2007 - Zaneta Vangeli
zanetavangeli@yahoo.com
ZORAN TOSEVSKI was born in 1984 in Skopje. He is a student at the
Faculty of Fine arts in Skopje. Zoran had several exhibitions in
2007 at the Youth Cultural Center, Museum of Macedonia and gal-
lery Mala Stanica. He exhibited sculpture at business space of
“T-mobile” and in the Francophone park.

toshevskizoran@yahoo.com




                                                                    Pad 1-2, tin and steel, 2008 - Zoran Tosevski
Can Swiss support to Macedonian art change the world for the bet-   The World Bank in Macedonia – working together to improve peo-
ter?                                                                ple’s lives

Arts and economics, both powerful tools for change and devel-       The World Bank is owned by 185 countries and is one of the world’s
opment, are important to the Swiss. Without economic growth,        largest sources of development funding. We provide financing,
no development can happen. Without art, outmoded concepts and       global knowledge and advice to more than 100 countries world-
old habits persist - and the world can not move on. Artists are     wide.
there not only to decorate the walls and surroundings; they are
there also to give something back to the society that is inspir-    Macedonia joined the World Bank in 1994. Since then, we supported
ing them. Free and new ideas to challenge the established world     the country with more than 1 billion US Dollars in its transition
are one part of artists’ contribution to development. Another       to market economy and in building effective institutions, im-
decisive part is made of their personal faith and concrete in-      proving education, social protection and pensions, building and
volvement in projects, which directly relate to their image of a    rehabilitating basic transport and energy infrastructure, and
better world for all.                                               preserving natural and cultural heritage.

The World Bank and the Embassy of Switzerland share the belief      The World Bank is working with other development partners to sup-
that artists can and shall be part of the so-called “development    port Macedonia’s efforts to join the EU. Together we aim at cre-
business”, in which experts fix problems, overcome obstacles and    ating conditions to improve people’s lives.
explore new paths. Keeping open eyes and minds, allowing change
to happen and fostering new developments in the interest of all:
that’s our common ground, which led us to Macedonian artists.
ktiwel7r.rlwl'll' f ..ll"'ltt\lM(ll.-11
CUflfeUul•cm wlu•
Curil •lku•h:m• hlu_.•
c_,1,!Nfuh,111 1~l1tt
