th Autnoou               egoni
Publc Epenitr I InsituinlRve
A*S
fAR      ic Educatio        npenAing
A JOINT REPORT BY
DFAT AUSTRALIA AND THE WORLD BANK
AustralianmGovemnment  THE WORLD BANK
X,  Department of I  oreign Allrairs and Trade  IERRO * IDA


﻿Cover photo courtesy of GOV.ph
http://www.gov.ph/2014/08/22/australian-govt-funded-program-turns-over-24-newly-rehabilitated-classrooms-in-sulu/


﻿PHILIPPINES:
Making Education Spending
Count for the Children of
Autonomous Muslim
Region of Mindanao
Public Expenditure & Institutional Review
for ARMM Basic Education
A JOINT REPORT BY
AUSTRALIA DFAT AND THE WORLD BANK


﻿Preface
T his ARIM Public Expenditure and Institutional Review (PEIR) resulted from a request
by the Governor Mujiv Sabbihi Hataman for assistance in improving public resource
use and basic educational outcomes in the region. We would like to thank the Governor and
his office for their openness to carry forward a frank and forward looking effort to improve
governance and performance in the region's basic education sector. In particular, Executive
Secretaries Attys. Anwar Malang and Laisa Alamia provided support and guidance during
the process. ARIM Secretary of Education Jamar Kulayan, Assistant Secretaries Noor
Mohammad Saada and Maisara Latiph, Alfadar Pajiji (Chief of Staff), Mosbicak Ibrahim
(Budget Chief), Analee Biruar (Accountant), Rosana Hassan (Cashier), Virginia Besana
(Planning), and Marjuni Maddi (SPCO Managing Director) all spent a great deal of time
assisting the team. In addition, many other officials from DepEd ARMM, school division and
district administrators and individual staff and teachers gave their time and enthusiasm during
both research and workshop activities.
In DepEd National Under-Secretary Francisco Varela, Assistant SecretaryJesse Mateo, and
Assistant Secretary Armando Ruiz participated in the project workshop on strategic budgeting
and offered their time and expertise on DepEd National policies and procedures. In DBM, special
thanks are due to Director Tina Rose Marie Canda (BMB - D), Grace de los Santos (Division
Chief in charge of ARIM), and Assistant Director Dante de Chavez (BMB-B in charge of
DepEd National) for their participation and provision of key data.
The Consortium of Bangsamoro Civil Society (CBCS) ably implemented the schools
survey under challenging circumstances. Without the efforts of Guiamel Alim, Wahab Guialal,
Tarhata Sambutuan, Amier Dodo and over 90 dedicated enumerators from all parts of the
ARIM, the study would have been impossible. We also thank all the respondents in individual
schools who gave their time during the survey.
The BE-PEIR project is overseen by Teresita Felipe (Education Specialist, Australian
Embassy Manila), Kai Kaiser, Lynnette Perez, and Matthew Stephens (WB).'The report
was produced by Hamish Nixon, Alma Mariano, Futoshi Yamauchi, Roy Tordecilla, Pinky
Esguerra, Miro Capili, Carole Belisario, and Lea Neri. The following reviewers gave helpful
comments: Samer Al-Samarrai, Elizabeth King (Sector Director, HDNED), Yongmei Zhou
(Manager, Fragile and Conflict-affected Countries Unit (OPCS)), Daan Pattinasarany (Senior
Economist, EASPI), Francisco Varela (Undersecretary for Finance, Department of Education),
Bruce Stacey (Advisor, Performance Informed Budget (PIB), DBM), Prof. Paul Hutchcroft
(Adviser, Australian Embassy Manila), Sam Chittick (Adviser, Australian Embassy Manila),
Evelyn Daplas (Portfolio Manager, Australian Embassy Manila), and Assistant Secretary Noor
Mohammad Saada (DepEd-ARMM).
Financial support for the exercise came from a joint Australia WB Philippines
Development Trust Fund and the World Bank State and Peacebuilding Fund.


﻿Table of Contents
Acronyms i
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY iii
KEY FINDINGS IV
SUMMARIZED RECOMMENDATIONS V
TOWARDS BANGSAMORO IX
CHAPTER ONE: INTRODUCTION 1
STRUCTURE OF THE BE-PEIR PROJECT 3
CHAPTERTWO: ARMM DEVELOPMENT & BASIC EDUCATION CONTEXT 5
HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF THE ARMM 5
STRUCTURE OF THE AUTONOMOUS REGION IN MUSLIM MINDANAO 7
ARMM DEVELOPMENT CONTEXT 9
WIDESPREAD CONFLICT 9
WEAK GOVERNANCE 9
ARMM EDUCATION CONTEXT 11
EDUCATION OUTCOMES 12
CHAPTERTHREE: PUBLIC EXPENDITURE MANAGEMENT IN ARMM 16
FRAGMENTED PUBLIC EXPENDITURE MANAGEMENT OF ARMM RESOURCES 17
POOR INTEGRATION OF ARMM REGIONAL AND NATIONAL BUDGET PROCESSES 22
INCONSISTENCY BETWEEN ARMM REGIONAL "DEVOLUTION"AND NATIONAL DECENTRALIZATION 25
WEAK STEWARDSHIP AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN HANDLING PUBLIC FUNDS 27
CHAPTER FOUR: BUDGETING FOR BASIC EDUCATION IN ARMM 29
AGGREGRATE BASIC EDUCATION SPENDING LEVELS IN THE ARMM 29
NON-GOVERNMENT BASIC EDUCATION SPENDING 29
GOVERNMENT SPENDING ON BASIC EDUCATION 32
COMPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT SPENDING ON BASIC EDUCATION 33
PERSONAL SERVICES  35
MOOE AND THE "ROUTINE OPERATIONS AND MAINTENANCE GAP" 37
TEXTBOOKS  42
OTHER PROGRAMS 43
CAPITAL OUTLAY 47
LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNIT CONTRIBUTIONS 49
THE ARMM PEM SYNDROME AND DISTORTIONS IN BUDGET COMPOSITION 50


﻿CHAPTER FIVE: ISSUES IN BUDGET EXECUTION AND SERVICE DELIVERY 55
BUDGET EXECUTION AND THE ARMM PEM SYNDROME 55
PERSONAL SERVICES AND PAYROLL MANAGEMENT 56
MOOE 60
EXECUTION PROCESSES OF CENTRALLY-MANAGED FUNDS 61
FRONTLINE SERVICE DELIVERY: THE SCHOOLS SURVEY 63
TEACHER ABSENCE AND GHOST TEACHERS 65
PUPIL ABSENCE  66
CHALLENGES IDENTIFIED BY SCHOOLS 71
INCONSISTENT AND INEQUITABLE LGU AND COMMUNITY CONTRIBUTIONS TO EDUCATION 72
CHAPTER SIX: CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 74
SUMMARY ASSESSMENT OF THE PEM SYSTEM FOR BASIC EDUCATION IN ARMM 74
INABILITY TO LINK POLICY PLANNING AND BUDGETING 74
LACK OF BUDGET COMPREHENSIVENESS, INTEGRATION AND PREDICTABILITY 76
SLOW AND INEFFECTIVE BUDGET EXECUTION 76
WEAK ACCOUNTABILITY AND REPORTING 77
IMPROVING PUBLIC EXPENDITURE MANAGEMENT FOR BASIC EDUCATION IN ARMM 79
ENSURING QUALIFIED TEACHERS ARE BUDGETED, PAID, AND PRESENT  80
CORRECTING THE "ROUTINE MOOE GAP" 80
INTEGRATING CENTRALLY-MANAGED PROGRAMS WITH ARMM'S EDUCATION BUDGET 81
IMPROVING ARMM PUBLIC EXPENDITURE MANAGEMENT 83
STRENGTHENING THE INTRA-ARMM BUDGET PROCESS 83
INTEGRATING REGIONAL AND NATIONAL BUDGET SYSTEMS 85
DEVELOPING A FRAMEWORK OF HORIZONTAL AND DOWNWARD ACCOUNTABILITY 86
CONSIDERATIONS FOR BANGSAMORO 89
THE IMPORTANCE OF IMPLEMENTATION 89
FISCAL MANAGEMENT AND INTER-GOVERNMENTAL FRAMEWORK 89
FISCAL FRAMEWORK FOR LGUS AND REGIONAL AUTONOMY 90
COORDINATION BETWEEN BTC, ARMM AND NATIONAL GOVERNMENT 90
PRINCIPLES FOR FUTURE ENGAGEMENT 91
REFERENCES 93


﻿Tables
Table 1: Indicative Action Plan viii
Table 2: LGUs in ARMM 8
Table 3: Principal sources of government funds to ARMM'Ihousands Pesos) 21
Table 4: PAP structures for Basic Education in National Government and ARMM 24
Table 5: Indicative key donor education sector support to ARMM (thousand Pesos) 30
Table 6: Aggregate government education expenditures in ARMM (thousand Pesos) 32
Table 7: Locus of control of government spending by economic category, FY 2013 34
Table 8: Centrally-managed fund allocations for ARMM, FY 2013 44
Table 9: Budgeting basis for education components 51
Table 10: Reasons for school closure during survey 64
Table 11: Provincial/division teacher absence rates 65
Table 12: Presence by teaching grade 66
Table 13: Absence rates (%) of students in classes in session by province, division and gender 67
Table 14: Student absence (%) by grade and gender 69
Table 15: Frequency of top challenges mentioned by school heads 71
Table 16: Summary of key weaknesses in the basic education PEM system 78
Table 17: Indicative ARMM regional budget preparation calendar (FY 2014) 84
Table 18: Indicative Action Plan 88
Figures
Figure 1: A framework for improvement x
Figure 2: ARMM Government Organization 7
Figure 3: Net enrolment rate (%), SY 2011-12 12
Figure 4: Educational Attainment of Females in ARMM and selected regions (2008) 13
Figure 5: Educational Attainment of Males in ARMM and selected regions (2008) 14
Figure 6: Funds flowing to ARMM by locus of budget control (PHP Millions) 18
Figure 7: Household Expenditure on education, 2009 (percent by region) 31
Figure 8: Nominal vs. Real government education expenditures in ARMM, 2009-12 33
Figure 9: PS per pupil by region (SY 2011-12 enrolment, FY 2013 budget) 36
Figure 10: Primary and secondary teacher-student ratios by region (SY 2011-12) 37
Figure 13: Per pupil MOOE in regular operations budgets by region (SY 2011-12 enrolment, FY 2013 budget) 40
Figure 14: Lack of operating and maintenance resources 41
Figure 15: Textbook budget comparison per pupil (SY 2011-12 enrolment, FY 2013 budget) 43
Figure 16: Total allotment for "Madrasah Education" by region, FY 2013 45
Figure 17: Planned ALS Allocation per Target Learner 2013 (PHP per Learner) 46
Figure 18: Basic Education Facilities Fund (BEFF) allotment per pupil by region, FY 2012 47
Figure 19: DepEd national and overall ARMM education expenditure composition, FY 2012 49
Figure 20: % LGU spending on education, culture & arts, and manpower development (2011) 49
Figure 21: The two main channels of ARMM education budget preparation  52


﻿Figure 22: Payroll Cheque Collection in ARMM  58
Figure 23: Prevalent pupil absence 67
Figure 24: Teacher and student presence (%) by division 69
Figure 25: Improving ARMM education 79
Figure 26: Transition to ARMM responsibility for centrally-managed education funds 82
Figure 27: Relationship between national and regional budgeting guidelines 83
Figure 28: Decentralization and the service delivery framework 86
Figure 29: A framework for improvement 91
Boxes
Box 1: Selected provisions of the Framework Agreement on Bangsamoro 6
Box 2: Selected legal provisions for ARMM's education responsibilities 10
Box 3: Selected provisions of RA 9054 17
Box 4: Expenditure norms for MOOE allocation in DepEd National 53
Box 5: Triangulation of HRIS, payroll and plantilla databases 59
Box 6: Areas for future research 92
Maps
Map 1: Provinces of ARMM 1
Map 2: ARMM Education Divisions 12
Map 3: Student and Teacher Absence Rates by School Division 70


﻿Acronyms
ABM Agency Budget Matrix
ADM Alternative Delivery Modes
ALIVE Arabic Language and Islamic Values Education
ALS    Alternative Learning Systems
ARG ARMM Regional Government
ARMM      Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
BAR Budget Accountability Report
BE Basic Education
BEIS    Basic Education Information System
BEFF Basic Education Facilities Fund
BESF Budget of Expenditures and Sources of Financing
BLGF Bureau of Local Government Finance
BTC Bangsamoro Transition Commission
CO Capital Outlay
DBM Department of Budget and Management
DILG Department of Interior and Local Government
DPWH Departments of Public Works and Highways
DSWD Department of Social Welfare and Development
EQUALLS Education Quality and Access for Learning and Livelihood Skills
FAB Framework Agreement on the Bangsamoro
GAA General Appropriations Act (National Budget Law)
GASTPE      Government Assistance to Students and Teachers in Private Education
GDP Gross Domestic Product
HDI    Human Development Index
HRIS Human Resources Information System
IRA    Internal Revenue Allotment
LGC     Local Government Code (RA 7160)
LGU     Local Government Unit
MFO     Major Final Output
MILF    Moro Islamic Liberation Front
MMA      Muslim Mindanao Autonomy (Act)
MNLF Moro National Liberation Front
MOOE Maintenance and Other Operating Expenses
NBM     National Budget Memorandum
NCA Notice of Cash Allocation
NDHS National Demographic and Household Survey
OPIF    Organizational Performance Indicator Framework


﻿Acronyms (cont'd.)
ORG Office of the Regional Governor
PEIR Public Expenditure and Institutional Review
PEM Public Expenditure Management
PHP Philippine Peso
PI   Performance Indicators
PS   Personal Services
QSDS    Quantitative Service Delivery Survey
RA Republic Act
RBMO Regional Budget and Management Office
REDPB Regional Economic Development Planning Board
RG Regional Governor
RLA Regional Legislative Assembly
SAOB    Statement of Allotments, Obligations and Balances
SARO     Special Allotment Release Order
SBM School Based Management
SBP   School Building Program
SDO School Division Office
SDS    School Division Superintendent
SEF    Special Education Fund
SY School Year


﻿EXECUTIVE                                  expenditure and education delivery and
SUMMARY                                    outcomes. It has three inter-related objectives:
To improve the quality of basic edu-
cation in ARMM by diagnosing public
expenditure management issues and sug-
gesting improvements;
Children in the Autonomous Region in              To improve public expenditure man-
Muslim Mindanao (ARMM) have long              agement processes and practices in the
suffered from the effects of underdevelop-    region;
ment, neglect, poor governance, and conflict.     To improve fiscal autonomy ar-
The proportion of impoverished families in    rangements and inform planning for the
the ARMM is the highest in the country,       proposed Bangsamoro political entity.
amounting to over twice the Philippines
average. The region is beset by multiple forms  This review is one component of a joint
of violence, has a history of weak governance  Australian Aid and World Bank supported
and corruption, and depends heavily on a   project to enhance fiscal transparency and
central government with whom it shares both  budget effectiveness in the ARMM (particu-
mutual distrust and ties of patronage politics.  larly in the basic education sector), reinforce
Since 2012, the new regional administration  the reform agenda for ARMM, and con-
has pursued a reform and anti-corruption   tribute to preparations for establishing the
agenda focused on strengthening services and  Bangsamoro. Basic education (BE) is defined
relations with the national government. Ne-  broadly to include elementary and second-
gotiations between the Moro Islamic Libera-  ary schooling as well as other programs for
tion Front (MILF) and government have also  school aged children such as Alternative
produced a "Framework Agreement" and road  Learning Systems (ALS) and Islamic educa-
map to establish the "new political entity"  tion. The project builds on prior support to
known as Bangsamoro.                       DepEd ARMM through the Australian Aid
Basic Education Assistance for Mindanao
This Basic Education Public Expenditure and  (BEAM) activity.
Institutional Review (BE-PEIR) examines
the public expenditure management (PEM)    The project was initiated at the request of
system for basic education in the ARMM. It  the ARMM regional government to enhance
describes ARMM's Public Expenditure Man-   dialogue and reduce the trust gap between
agement "Syndrome," which is characterized  ARMM government and national and
by longstanding socioeconomic and politi-  regional stakeholders, enhance efficiency and
cal issues, and assesses its impacts on public  effectiveness of spending in basic education,


﻿iv                and support institutional reforms. It has three  Grade 1 made it to grade 6 against a na-
components:                                  tional average of 73.5 percent. At secondary
level, around 45 percent of 1st Year students
*   This Public Expenditure and Institu-  continued studying until 4th year, whereas
tional analysis and report;               the national average was 78.8 percent. In
*   Technical assistance to ARMM Re-      other terms, only 1 out of every 10 students
gional Government and DepEd ARIM         who began primary education in ARMM will
on planning, budgeting, and dialogue with  graduate from high school.
national budget institutions; and
*   Technical assistance on issues includ-  Such low completion rates decrease the ef-
ing vulnerabilities in the education payroll:  ficiency of a given level of education inputs,
"ghost teachers," Human Resources Infor-  amplifying the impact of problems in the
mation and Payroll systems reform, and    public expenditure management system. Due
a facilities survey focused on teacher and  to the attrition of students leaving the system,
student absence.                         it takes 32 percent more spending and effort
to produce a single high school graduate in
Positive change is contingent on the peace   ARIM than elsewhere in the Philippines,
process, reform orientation of the regional  and twice the effort to produce a Grade Six
government, and improvements in the          graduate in ARMM as elsewhere.
relationship between ARMM and national
authorities. These opportunities can be best  In 2011-12, the average achievement test
seized by enhancing ARMM and national        score for Grade 6 students in ARMM was
institutions in the short-term, and learning  54.1 percent, whereas the national average
from the ARMM's history to inform the        was 66.8 percent. The average achievement
design of enhanced autonomy institutions for  score of 4th Year high school students was
the Bangsamoro.                              37.1 percent, more than ten points below the
national average of 48.9 percent. Literacy
Key findings                                 rates for people aged 10-64 were estimated
ARMM suffers from extremely poor edu-        to be 71.6 percent in 2010, well below the
cation outcomes (Chapter 2). Enrolment,      national average of 86.4 percent.
completion, and attainment rates for elemen-
tary education lag behind most regions in    There have been longstanding issues on the
the Philippines. These outcomes perpetuate   effectiveness and quality of education delivery,
"poverty traps" and decrease the prospects of  including ghost teachers, poor infrastructure,
children in the region to enjoy better living  and lack of teaching and operating resources
standards and attain secure employment.     in schools. The project carried out a represen-
From 2011-12, only 23 percent of students in  tative surprise survey of schools in ARIM.


﻿The survey confirmed widespread school clo-  with budgets, weak budget comprehensive-
sures and absence rates for teachers of about  ness, slow budget execution, as well as a lack
31 percent, and pupils of 29 percent. Areas  of accountability and data availability.
where teacher absence was high also generally
experienced high student absence, and these  Summarized recommendations
problems appear particularly in Lanao del Sur  For the 2014 and 2015 budget years, the
(Chapter 5).                                 ARG, DBM, and DepEd could take a num-
ber of concrete steps to improve education
After years of underfunding, the aggregate   delivery and manage public expenditure:
amount of regional funding for education
inputs (sourced almost exclusively from             Continue to strengthen payroll and
national transfers) is coming in line with      human resources.'The DepEd ARM
national levels under the Aquino adminis-       and ARG should build on substantive ac-
tration. However, the effectiveness of public  tions already initiated to clean the teacher
expenditure for ARMM is hampered by an          payroll and introduce systems to improve
ARIM Public Expenditure Management             its integrity. These include continuing to
"Syndrome," discussed in detail in Chapter 3.   integrate and cross-reference payroll and
This is characterized by:                       Human Resources Information Systems
(HRIS), develop internal structures and
*   Fragmentation of planning, budget-       procedures for human resource manage-
ing, and execution processes across a range  ment, streamline merit-based recruitment
of national, regional, and local actors and  processes through appointment boards, and
systems;                                     communicate these achievements to both
*   Poor integration between regional        ARMM citizens and the national govern-
government and national budgeting sys-       ment. An additional priority would be to
tems including the OPIF framework;           introduce incentives to improve teacher
*   Inconsistencies between autonomy         attendance, which appears to influence
arrangements for ARMM and national           pupil attendance as well. A start would be
decentralization under the local govern-     utilizing attendance records during payroll
ment code;                                   processing through the URIS.
*   Weak stewardship and accountability          Tackle a routine MOOE gap in the
for public funds.                            region. As a result of budget fragmenta-
tion, the level of operational "routine"
These problems go beyond typical public         MOOE available to schools is significant-
expenditure challenges found throughout        ly smaller in ARNM than elsewhere, and
the Philippines, because of the exceptional     elementary schools do not receive regular
burdens they cause for poor linkage of plans    MOE funds. DBM, ARG, and DepEds


﻿vi                  ARMM and National should negoti-            tance to ARMM could be included in the
ate an arrangement by which operating       ARG budget appropriation for direct ex-
MOOE levels can be based on a similar       ecution in the region, taking into account
norm to the national level, taking into     accountability demands. Madrasah educa-
account concerns about enrolment data       tion is a good candidate, as almost half of
quality. This will require increased budget  its national appropriation is dedicated to
allocations from the national government,   ARMM at this time. In the medium-term
as well as clearer policies on the alloca-  (2016 budget), the ARMM or Bangsam-
tion, delivery, and use of the MOOE and     oro could begin making allocations among
improved reporting by school divisions      programs according to its priorities.
and districts. Until a more permanent
policy is in place, an interim measure such  In addition to these short-term steps in
as a capitation grant similar to School  the education sector the ARMM Regional
Based Management could be considered.    Government and its partners can address
Given ARMM's history, special empha-     public expenditure management more broadly
sis must be placed on governance and     through the following initiatives:
monitoring. Renewed MOOE payments
could be linked to a grass-roots informa-       Strengthen the intra-ARMM bud-
tion campaign to encourage bottom-up        get process. A more effective process of
accountability through citizen report cards  budgeting within the ARMM Regional
or mobile reporting.                        Government is needed to shift the ORG
*   Plan and implement a transition of      budget team's role away from preparing
centrally managed education programs to    the budget submission towards ensuring
the region. DBM, ARG, and both DepEd        the inputs of the ARMM sectoral agen-
ARMM and National should commit to          cies support regional plans and national
the overall objective of eventually mov-    requirements. To do so, the ORG should
ing all or most funds for use in the region  supplement the National Budget call with
onto the ARG budget appropriation.'The      guidelines setting out the responsibilities
first step (already underway) is informa-   of ARMM agencies, building in time for
tion sharing between DepEd ARMM             agencies to collate Budget Accountability
and National about the basis for the al-    Reports (BARs), and guiding preparation
location of centrally-managed funds. For    of ARMM agency spending proposals by
the preparation of the 2015 budget the      specifying data requirements and aiding
DepEd National and DepEd ARMM               integration with a regional performance
should participate jointly in preparing the  informed budgeting framework (see
program budgets. At the same time, by       below). Like a national budget call, these
mutual agreement, a few funds of impor-     guidelines can include: indication of prior-


﻿ity areas of government activity, programs   accountability mechanisms to improve                  Vii
and projects; general and specific guide-    the efficiency and effectiveness of public
lines for agency budget proposals; and       services in ARVM.'These tools could in-
calendar of budget preparation activities    dude: increased budget transparency and
within the region.                           publication of sector budgets or ARMM's
Develop a regional performance           overall budget (for example, increased
budgeting framework that works for the       MOOE funding could be publicized so
region and is acceptable to national gov-    that schools and communities know their
ernment. The ARG budget currently has        entitlement); feedback mechanisms such
to conform to the national performance-      as citizen report cards and community
based budgeting framework which is           score-cards, hotlines, and websites; pen-
ill-adapted for the region. Performance      odic survey and monitoring by civil society
accountability needs to be balanced with     organizations to identify key issues and
the need for financial control, and adapted  locations for attention. A second civil so-
to the region's unique conditions - its      ciety implemented school survey is already
cross-sectoral responsibilities, and its par-  being planned under this project, and will
tial control over its resources. The DepEd   be used to pilot CSO monitoring tools. In
ARMM, ORG, and DBM could agree               doing so, it is important to consider the
to modify the national OPIF framework        challenges for demand side interventions
for ARIM to promote a simple and            in the region. Teacher appointments have
limited results-based program budget-        been at the mercy of entrenched political
ing framework that integrates activities     patronage; parents and children have been
budgeted through the ARG and national        displaced; education stakeholders such
agencies and relates them to an agreed set   as parents, civil society, and government
of objectives and results indicators. The    reformers are subject to intimidation and
current ARMNIM HELPs framework of the        violence; and popular expectations of what
ARIM regional government should form        constitutes acceptable basic education
the basis for elaborating this framework. The  have been undermined by years of poor
need for a regional performance manage-      governance and performance.
ment framework will only become greater
as more fiscal control is shifted to ARMM,  Table 1, explained in more detail in Chapter
and subsequently the Bangsamoro.          Six, summarizes these recommendations ac-
*   Include civil society and communi-    cording to the Public Expenditure Manage-
ties. Effective public services depend    ment problems they are intended to confront,
on both top-down and bottom-up ac-        and potential indicators for improvement.
countability.anhere is potential for social


﻿Vii
Table 1:
Indicative Action Plan
Problem                            Actions                            Indicators/Milestones
Improving ARMM Basic Education Public Expenditure Management
Weak payroll integrity (ghost teachers,  9 Continue data clean-up on HRIS and  e Completeness of HRIS &
unqualified teachers, leakage of personal  payroll                    HRIS-payroll congruence
services)                          * Complete and institutionalize payroll and  e Organizational restructure complete,
HR manual                          establishment of personnel boards
* Enhance HRIS-payroll integration  * National integration of HRIS-payroll
system
Teacher & pupil absence            * Incentivize teacher attendance and preven- * Absence rates
tion of early dropouts
* Include communities & civil society in
monitoring
Routine MOOE gap                   * Provide additional MOOE operational funds * Operational MOOE availability
& agree a norm-based budgeting approach  * Reporting on MOOE utilization
with DBM/DepEd National
* Introduce policy for distribution to ARMM
schools
* Establish reporting system to region &
regional budget reporting to DBM
* Include communities & civil society in
monitoring
CMF budgets unconnected to policy or  * Increase ARMM involvement in budgeting  * ARMM/DepEd National liaison activities
regional conditions                Centrally-Managed Programs, beginning with
enhanced liaison capacity, participation in
budget process
CMF execution slow                 * Move key centrally-managed programs  * Proportion of program budget appropriated
to ARMM appropriation for direct release  directly to ORG
(Madrasah, ALS)                    * Reporting on program fund utilization
* Agreed reporting benchmarks
* Capacity support & staffing for program
implementation (temporary & long-term)
Low or unknown completion of classrooms  * Clarify monitoring responsibilities for BEFF/ * School construction projects completed
SBP
* Involve communities & civil society in
monitoring
LGU education spending             * Integrate LGUs into regional planning &  * Level of LGU spending on education
inconsistent & inequitable         budgeting, agree regional LGU expenditure  increased
responsibilities for education     * Increased information on LGU spending to
region
Improving ARMM Regional Public Expenditure Management
Budgets unconnected to policy      * Revise OPIF framework for ARMM   * Develop framework of key indicators for
& planning for region              * Establish sectoral budget working groups  HELPs, agree with national agencies
and/or joint national/regional program-bud- * Pilot ARMM open data initiative
get based on HELPs framework with results
indicators
* Improve budget transparency & include
civil society & communities in monitoring
ARG budget proposal weak           * Strengthen intra-ARMM budget process  * Issuance of ARMM budget circular with
prior to ORG submission (calendar, guide-  calendar & guidelines
lines, hearings)                   * Timely submission of ARMM agencies
* Increase RBMO role


﻿Towards Bangsamoro                               lishment of effective regional budget and               ix
management institutions. A key concern
International experience suggests that auto-     for the negotiators of the Bangsamoro
nomy in itself is no guarantee of better gov-    institutions should therefore be asking
ernance and public services. The above short     how should implementation be measured,
term steps need to be buttressed by a strategy   monitored and enforced, and by whom?
for Bangsamoro to avoid the pitfalls of the          Fiscal management capacity and
ARd\M PEM syndrome by addressing each           framework. As a subnational govern-
of its dimensions:                               ment the ARMM has not had to produce
macro-fiscal estimates of revenue or ex-
1.  Planning and budgeting for the            penditure over the medium-term, nor has
fragmented sources of funds for the region    it had any opportunity to make strategic
need to be unified as far as possible, along-  cross-sectoral allocation decisions. Un-
side improved revenues;                       der Bangsamoro these two functions will
2.   Regional budget processes need to        likely become much more important due
connect effectively with national systems;    to an increase in the amount and flexibil-
3.   LGUs need a clearer framework           ity of revenue under regional control. So
of responsibilities and reporting to the      the institutionalization of regional macro-
region;                                       fiscal and cross-sectoral strategic planning
4.  Monitoring and accounting of public       capacity should be a key priority.
funds need to be strengthened both within         LGU fiscal framework. ARMM
government and with communities, citi-        LGUs exist in a kind of limbo, having
zens, and children.                           revenues that derive from the national de-
centralization framework, but few respon-
Some lessons from ARMM's experience              sibilities or accountability to the region.
are relevant to the work of the Bangsamoro       The relationship between the LGUs and
Transition Commission (BTC) and others           the region needs elaborating. In return for
involved in negotiating the Basic Law and        this increased accountability to the region,
public finance provisions for the Bangsamoro:    LGUs should be given a role in planning
and budgeting. In short, there is a need
 The importance of implementation.       for a fiscal decentralization framework
The failure of fiscal autonomy in ARIM       between the region and its LGUs. A key
is not simply the result of insufficient au-  question is whether reform of the IRA is
tonomy or poor governance. The ARMM           more feasible nationally or through the
PEM syndrome is also the result of            regional peace process.
incomplete implementation of the Ex-              BTC-ARMM-GPH coordination.
panded Organic Act, such as the estab-        The historical experience of AR1\4M


﻿x                       shows that autonomy in the context of             tion should also be established between
continued central support increases the           ARMM authorities and the negotiating
need for all actors to share information          teams to consider the transition of existing
and influence, and enable capacity build-         institutions - particularly for large depart-
ing. When these processes are not in place,       ments such as DepEd ARMM.
negative cycles of weak accountability,
mistrust, and blame will harm citizens and     Figure 1 summarizes these recommendations
in the case of education, children. Empha-     in relation to the objectives of improving
sis should be given to establishing prob-      basic education public expenditure man-
lem-solving, coordination and monitoring       agement, strengthening the region's PEM
institutions between the Bangsamoro            systems overall, and informing preparations
and the national government. Coordina-         for Bangsamoro institutions.
Figure 1:
A framework for improvement
Improving ARMM Basic Education           Improving ARMM Regional
Public Expenditure Management            Public Expenditure Management
* Continue Payroll & HRIS reform &       * Strengthen intra-ARMM budget process
reduce absences                                           F Revise OPIF to joint regional/national results
" Tackle routine MOiE gap               framework based on HELPs to connect policy and
SPhasing in greater AReMM involvement    budgeting
in program buageting & execution         * Involve civil society & communities
sContext sensitive social accountabilyty  * Address inconcistencies with LGUs
Co the nations for Bangs                  i    ro
Mprvn ARM       Bai EdctoJmrvn                      RMRgoa
*       (si  igrae A      involvement
in prgrambudgting  exeutio


﻿CHAPTER            ONE:                          ity to learn, and the poor economic climate                   01
INTRODUCTION                                     keeps emerging graduates from employment,
reducing returns to household investment and
commitment to education.2 Historically low
investment and institutionalized corruption
further deepened these problems.3
Children in the Autonomous Region in             The current institutional form of the Au-
Muslim Mindanao (ARMM) have long                 tonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
suffered from the effects of underdevelop-       (ARMM) dates back to the 1996 "Final
ment, neglect, and conflict. The proportion of   Peace Agreement" between the Government
families in poverty in ARMM   is the highest     of the Philippines and the Moro National
in the country, and at 47 percent is over twice  Liberation Front (MNLF).4 Its creation was
the Philippines average.' Disruption due to      an attempt to satisfy longstanding aspirations
insurgent and clan-based conflict has been       of Moro political actors for greater autonomy,
periodic but severe - in 2008 some 750,000       while correcting years of actual and perceived
people were displaced during confrontations.     neglect of the region's development needs.
Such levels of poverty, violence, and disrup-    Unfortunately, the record of the ARVM has
tion affect childhood opportunities and abil-    been poor on both counts. The Moro Islamic
Map 1:
Provinces of ARMM
LMM E SURE         Source:
Wikipedia
(pending official
NAMRIA maps)
NAMIA                   aps
AASILAN
SULU
>    TAWI-TAWL
Government of Philippines 2012 National Poverty Statistics. (http://www.nscb.gov.ph: accessed 4 April 2013). The national average family
incidence of poverty is 22.3%. ARMM's incidence is almost 10 percentage points higher than the next poorest region, neighboring Region XII.
2World Bank (2003), pp 19-21.
3 In 2003 per capita spending on education in the ARMM was about three quarters the national average: World Bank (2003), p 31.
4 In 1977 two new administrative regions (IX and XII) were created in Mindanao, and the ARMM was actually formed in 1989 via Republic Act
6734.
HDN/UNDP (2013).


﻿02                Liberation Front (MILF), a breakaway group,   In response, the national government in-
did not accept the terms of the agreement,    stalled a caretaker administration in the
and there was a return to armed conflict.     ARMM in early 2012. Regional Governor
Over the same period, indicators of human     in Charge Mujiv Hataman (subsequently
development in the region stagnated or wors-  elected in May 2013) has pursued a reform
ened until they were at or among the worst in  and anti-corruption agenda, and sought
the Philippines. In the most recent Human     to strengthen services and relations with
Development Index compiled for 2009, all      National Government. At the same time,
provinces of ARMM except Basilan were in      negotiations between the MILF and the
the bottom ten provinces. Tawi-Tawi, Magu-    Government progressed from an April 2012
indanao, and Sulu were the three provinces    statement of principles to the signing of a
with the lowest human development index       "Framework Agreement on the Bangsamoro"
scores in the country.s                       (FAB) in October 2012.1The FAB lays out a
road map for a "new political entity" with a
The national government has increased fund-   ministerial form of government, its own basic
ing for ARMM in order to correct historic     law, and an "asymmetric" relationship with
imbalances and support the peace process      the Philippine national government.' Should
between the national government and the       the FAB be implemented on schedule, the
MILF. Both the regional budget and national   new entity, to be known as the Bangsamoro,
agency budgets intended for the region have   will replace ARM\4M in 2015.
grown dramatically: in one estimate, these
combined allocations to ARMM grew by          One point of view is that reform or insti-
37.9 percent in 2011 and 72.4 percent in      tutional learning in ARMM are irrelevant
2012.6 However, while budgets for ARMM        because the end goal of the peace process is to
may be growing, service delivery and develop-  replace the regional administration with the
ment outcomes have continued to fall behind   Bangsamoro. This study's premise is that new
because of public expenditure management      institutions of autonomy can be improved
problems.1These include low regional rev-     through the analysis of previous attempts, and
enues and extreme dependence on national      the capacity to provide public services in the
government, limited control over the budget,  future can be influenced by improved systems
and limited program and financial manage-     and processes now, particularly as there will
ment capacity, combined with vulnerabilities  inevitably need to be some migration of larger
in budget execution and accountability.7      institutions such as education systems to
These issues have contributed to trust deficits  the new entity. In the words of one ARMM
between regional and national government,     public servant:
citizens, and international donors.
6 Antonio and Habito (2012), para 22.
INCITEGov (2007), pp 55-59 and World Bank (2003), pp 36-39.
8 GPH-MILF, Framework Agreement on the Bangsamoro (October 2012), Art. 1.2-4.
DepEd ARMM staff, personal communication (January 2013).
0 World Bank (2004), pp. 34-39 and 181-185.


﻿Ifthe establishment ofthe Bangsamoro       Structure of the BE-PEIR project                          03
is like the act ofprayer, then what we do until  The project was initiated at the request of
then is equivalent to the ablutions. The ablutions  the ARMM regional government to en-
are as necessary as the act ofprayer itself.  hance dialogue and reduce the trust gap
between ARMM government and national
In this sense, this review is also addressing the  and regional stakeholders, enhance efficiency
question "What factors have prevented the     of spending in basic education, and support
ARIM from creating a successful form of au-  institutional reformsincluding through the
tonomy?" Public expenditure management for    peace process. It has three components:
basic education is an important window into
understanding both failing services and trun-    1. This Public Expenditure and
cated autonomy. It is public expenditure man-    Institutional Review;
agement institutions that determine if budget    2. Technical assistance to ARIM Re-
composition, execution, delivery, and incentives  gional Government and DepEd ARMM
allow services to be delivered effectively.10 At  on planning, budgeting, and dialogue with
the same time, the subnational fiscal system is  national budget institutions;
the backbone of any effective territorial decen-  3. Technical assistance on issues including
tralization or autonomy relationship.            vulnerabilities in the education payroll (e.g.
"ghost teachers," Human Resources Infor-
Improving education outcomes is among            mation and Payroll systems reform, and a
the top priorities of the regional govern-       March 2013 representative facilities survey
ment, forming a key component of its stra-       focused on teacher and student absence).
tegic ARMM HELPs (Health, Education,
Livelihoods and Peace Support) framework.     The project builds on support to DepEd
Education is by far the largest single category  ARNIM through the Australian Aid Basic
of expenditure for the ARNIM, yet it has      Education Assistance for Mindanao (BEAM)
been beset with widely publicized problems    activity, and further initiatives by the World
with "ghost teachers", inadequate resourcing,  Bank and partners.
and poor education outcomes.'The Depart-
ment of Education in ARIM accounts for       Chapter Two of this report proceeds with
57 percent of the regional government budget  an introduction to ARMM's development
in 2013, and when regional, national, and lo-  context, including the evolution of regional
cal expenditures on education in ARIM are    institutions and the basic education system.
combined they amounted to about 8.5 billion   Chapter Three describes the unique ARIM
pesos in 2012 (See Chapter Four).             Public Expenditure Management "syndrome"
that contributes to the weaknesses analyzed in
this report, and in turn informs its policy


﻿04                 recommendations. Chapter Four analyzes pub-     vey. Chapter Six summarizes the findings on
lic expenditures for basic education in terms   public expenditure management for education
of aggregate spending, expenditure composi-    in ARMUM    and derives recommendations both
tion, and specific challenges that the ARMM     for reforms to ARMM institutions and for
PEM   syndrome poses for budgeting. Chapter     consideration by the Transition Commission
Five assesses budget execution and frontline    and other stakeholders in the preparations for
delivery aspects of basic education resources,  a new Bangsamoro political entity.
incorporating findings from the facilities sur-


﻿CHAPTER TWO:                              Liberation Front (MNLF) and the Philip-               05
ARMM       DEVELOPMENT                    pine Armed Forces. In 1975, the Western and
&BASI  EDUC   TIONCentral Mindanao administrative regions were
&  BASIC     EDUCATIONestablished, and in December 1976 in Tripoli,
CONTEXT                                   the Government and the MNLF agreed in
principle to an autonomous region in South-
ern Philippines. However when the Marcos
government established this in March 1977 it
was viewed by the MNLF as a unilateral step
Historical development of the ARMVM       and armed struggle continued.
The Autonomous Region in Muslim Min-
danao (ARMVM) traces its roots to the long  After assuming power in 1986, Corazon
history of the quest for self-determination by  Aquino revived peace talks with the MNLF
the Muslims of Mindanao. The first Muslim  and enshrined the creation of an Autono-
settlements in the Philippines were recorded  mous Region in Muslim Mindanao in the
in the 1200s. By the 14th Century, the Sulu  1987 Philippine Constitution. In August
Sultanate was well established, long be-  1989 the Organic Act of the Autonomous
fore the Spanish arrived in Manila in 1571.  Region in Muslim Mindanao was passed
Muslims in Mindanao repelled attempts at  into law, and in November a plebiscite on
colonization throughout Spanish rule, and  membership in the autonomous region was
this resistance continued through the Ameri-  conducted. Four provinces - Maguindanao,
can occupation.                           Lanao del Sur, Tawi-Tawi and Sulu - decided
to join. In September 1996, the MNLF and
After the establishment of the Republic of  the Government signed a peace agreement
the Philippines there was large-scale migra-  that led to MNLF Chairman Nur Misuari
tion of Christians to Mindanao, and the   becoming ARMM Regional Governor. Presi-
proportion of Muslims in Mindanao has     dent Gloria Macapagal Arroyo supported a
dropped from 76 percent in 1903 to less than  September 2001 plebiscite ratifying Republic
twenty percent today. Settlement was pre-  Act 9054 (the "Expanded Organic Act"),
ceded by the establishment of military camps  which further defined the powers and respon-
to clear the entry of the settlers, driving Moro  sibilities of the regional administration, and
and Lumad communities on to less produc-  expanded the autonomous region to include
tive land, and formal land ownership arrange-  Basilan province and Marawi City.12
ments generally favoured settlers."
A breakaway group known as the Moro Is-
In February 1973, the revolt escalated into an  lamic Liberation Front (MILF) surfaced after
armed conflict between the Moro National  1984 and continued armed struggle through-
Lumad is the common term used to describe indigenous peoples in Mindanao as distinct rom both Muslim and Christian settlers.


﻿06               out the 1990s. In 2000, clashes between the  parties signed the Framework Agreement on
military and the MILF escalated to so-called  Bangsamoro (FAB), which created a Transi-
"all-out war," displacing hundreds of thou-  tion Commission to draft a Basic Law for
sands of people. President Arroyo initiated  the Bangsamoro and established security
peace talks with the MILF in January 2001.  arrangements (called "normalization"), wealth,
A major breakthrough seemed imminent in   and power sharing. Announcing the FAB,
August 2008 when the parties were set to  President Aquino emphasized the need for
sign a Memorandum of Agreement on An-     structural reform and referred to the ARd\UM
cestral Domain (MOA-AD).The MOA-AD       as an experiment that had "tightened the
was declared unconstitutional by the Supreme  shackles of poverty."14
Court in response to cases raised by local and
national politicians, and renewed fighting  The Basic Law will provide for a MILF-led
displaced some 600,000 people.            Bangsamoro Transition Authority until a duly
elected Bangsamoro government is installed
Peace talks were revived after the election  in 2016. The implication is that if the new
of President Benigno Aquino III in 2010.  transitional authority is installed prior to the
In April 2012, a set of "Decision Points on  2016 elections, it will take over from the cur-
Principles" were agreed upon in Kuala Lum-  rent ARNIM administration, elected in May
pur to guide the negotiations towards "the  2013. However, the degree to which ARM
creation of a new political entity in place of  institutions will continue in force during the
the ARNIM."'3 On October 15,2012, the     transitional period is still unclear.
Box1:   .1  he artes gre tht te satuqparetie snd the      Frngamork Agvrement o
Selected ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~   ~   ~~agsmr (FA- i ncepal n h Bnsmr hllb   V3 Te B),saor wilhareate athrani-y
sion ofthe   stalised t relactheAutnomusRgioin tion rcomivgrnsiond tonaftiaoBsi Lam forti
e B.angnsor                                  and estblished surity
Agremnton   .2 Th gvermet f he ansaorshll   disarrang eentale "ornmaliztio",welh
Band pwer sha ng annoingve                                                          a th  F
1.3 Theprvines,ciies muicpaltie, a-  apresien baquinoempased  threreentaeed f
rangys ad gograhicarea wihin ts estrucytu alreform and efCerred tovethen RM
shall~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~   ~~a an tecnttetuisothBagar. odexpodemren e hataha ce tgtnd fth -
Theautoriy o rgulte n ts wn espnsbilty isackleina ofiacl poverty."14enue
1TheBaic aw wi poide forangsmL-l
mentwiththe angamorGovrnmntsalle Bansaoursof Travn,it Auheoitye untladly
reserlecte Bangsamor govrnen isgamr                           installeddnor
shtanitina authrit iss installed priors tod theewllb
c26 p        r s                               ec tos it will t  o    fo  t
Provinces ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~   ~   ~   ~~~inttuin wilvtdaanticuininteANMete n19r01aeCtbt,Dvodl c,Lnotine Nore  duriwng Sothe
KornaalIign,Paadathert  rM."13aOn Octbobera 15 2012,meno the  trasitiona pthemriodu s stlAnclesta.omi
BMO1:D          1.1ne   Th20ndanled Parties agpree that he stts qncuson yfa  sm  rahthdtievtdaanticuin
SelectheAsoed pv  thse aceale ad  te  iBangsamoro shal e
sionsIoF, hecso  esitashe to rncplsace te Autonomous(Apil202) Regint n
Framewrk  Mus0m Minanao..
Agreemoe esdet n f I.2  hebi gov ternmipns ul eto hpecftePeient of the Bangsamoro shallt ih h ML
Bangsaobroaeamnstra.om
the  ffars  f te cnsttuet u0tsis.uarntedS.
I..Te.tosi of 0h Central Govern
~ Prvincs tat vtedalains  is excluse pow iter ind19 ohre 2001 are Ctbt,DvodlSr aa e ot,Plwnot
Cotaato,Sulan Kdart, Zmbonga el orteandZambang delSur   and the teofCaBaoDpansamoo, GernelSntos
Kornadllign,Pagdia, Pero Pincsaad ambang. Ake elmen IVfth opsTintthe Meanamo wiAcetal Doatity
(MOA~D) sgnedin 208 ad anulle by he Sprem Cout wa itsincluionvyefitrofsomearea thanhadtwicsvotdraginstimelticn
Undr te FB sme f hes aras illhod apleiscte n mmbrshp i BagVa.r shulhe% fresident eques intoenetlfs
13GPH-MILF DecisionPoints onolinciplesad comAprle122012r(prils2012,tpointo2
~ Ofie f te reidet f heRepblc f te hiippne, ul Tet f he pechofthe Preidntsaoh ramework Aea ement thMIF
(rert Octsorvebeira).e adf cta


﻿Structure of the Autonomous Region in         three members from each national congressio-               07
Muslim Mindanao                                nal district. The ARMM Government also has
As the only nominally autonomous region        a cabinet of regional secretaries and corre-
among seventeen administrative regions in the  sponding line ministries. While RA 9054 itself
Philippines, ARVIM has a regional govern-     authorizes "no more" than ten cabinet secretar-
ment headed by a Regional Governor and its    ies, in practice there is a regional counterpart
own Regional Legislative Assembly (RLA). As   office for nearly every national government
depicted in Figure 2 below, the Governor and  agency. Currently there are four bureaus, 20
Vice Regional Governor head the ARMM           departments, and nine locally created offices
Regional Government, supported by an Ex-      beyond the Office of the Regional Governor
ecutive Office and an Executive Secretary. The  and the RLA.
ARMM RLA is unicameral and comprises
Figure 2: ARMM Government Organization
REGIONAL GOVERNOR
REGIONAL VICE GOVERNOR
..................  EXECUTIVE COUNCIL
Regional Economic and Dev't.                                                Office of the
Planning Board                                                 DEPUTY REGIONAL GOVERNOR
Office of the                                                         Office of the
EXECUTIVE SECRETARY                                                    ATTORNEY GENERAL
Office of the
THE CABINET CHIEF OF STAFF
-Line Departments
Cabinet          ARMM Liaison Office in Metro Manila
Devolved Agencies/Offices     Secretariat        ARMM Satellite Coordinating Office
Attached Offices/Bureaus/
CommissionsI
L     Locally Created Offices                          AMS           TMS          FBMS           ISS
Provinces                 Cities
Municipalities            Barangays
Source:                             Barangays
www.ARMM.gov.ph


﻿08                 A Regional Economic and Development            ARNM     also has ambiguous relationships
Planning Board (REDPB) is chaired by the       with the other Local Government Units
Regional Governor and includes the region's    within the region. Provinces, cities, mu-
provincial governors and mayors, the RLA       nicipalities and barangays appear formally
Speaker and two additional RLA members,        subordinate to the Regional Government
and five private sector representatives. In    (Figure 2). In reality as pre-existing entities
practice the REDPB deals with the limited      with their own elected local governments,
resources raised in the region and the re-     and guaranteed resources under the national
gional share of the Internal Revenue Allot-    decentralization provisions of the Local Gov-
ment (IRA). Of much greater significance,      ement Code, the LGUs within the ARM
the regional government receives an appro-     are themselves effectively "autonomous" from
priation from the national government, and     ART\4M control. This situation has compli-
national line agencies allot funds from their  cated the efforts of the regional government
own budgets for the ARMM, although until       to assert its own autonomy, and is a key struc-
recently these were often neglected or chan-   tural issue for the proposed Bangsamoro.
neled through neighboring regions.
Table 2: LGUs in ARGiMt
No. of LGUs
Population              city              Municipalities         Barangays
ARMM                 3,256,140                                     116                  2439
Basilan              293,322              Lamitan City             11                    209
(excluding Isabela City)
Lanan del Sur           933,260             Marawi City               39                   1155
Maguindanao             944,718             Shariff Agualk            36                   462
Sulu                718,290                 Jo10                  19                   410
Tawi-Tawi             366,550               Bongao                  11                    203
Source: 2010 Population Census, NSCBG


﻿ARMM development context                        highly vulnerable, losing long periods of time              09
ARMd\M   is the poorest region in the country,  in school and ending up twice as far from
with poverty incidence among families of        available schooling, even after returning to
47 percent, about double the national aver-    their home areas".
age. Although the Philippines has enjoyed
a decade of economic growth, poverty levels     In addition to insurgency-related violence,
are higher in ARMM   now than in 2003.          rido conflicts may be as "pertinent to the
The region suffers a relative lack of economic  daily lives of the people - and cause them
integration even with growth centers in         more concern."9 Rido are localized but can
Mindanao itself, and this effect is worsened    continue for long periods and trigger wider
by conflict and related displacement and        violence.'Ihe Quantitative Service Delivery
disruption." Weak governance is a persistent    Survey carried out in March 2013 found two
factor undermining the delivery of services,    schools closed due to ongoing rido violence -
dampening investment, and further driving       in one case, killings had taken place inside the
continued poverty.                              school. Banditry and violence associated with
groups such as the Abu Sayyaf are also found
Widespread conflict                            primarily in coastal areas.
Multiple inter-related forms of violence affect
ARMM and neighboring provinces. Insurgen-       Weak governance
cy and counter-insurgency, clan feuds locally   The early years of ARMM were colored by
known as rido, and pseudo-ideological criminal  a number of high profile corruption scan-
banditry affect different parts of the region.'"  dals, and to this day much of the region's
The consequent lack of security is a major      governance is characterized by clientelistic
disincentive to the private sector investment   practices, elite capture, and weak technical
necessary for job creation.                     capacity. Governance in ARMM has been
further undermined by a vicious circle of ex-
Mass displacement is a defining characteris-    treme dependence on a national government,
tic of violence in ARMM. Nearly a million       resulting in a distorted and limited version of
people have been displaced in each of the       the intended autonomy. At the same time, the
2000 and 2008 conflicts, and a 2011 survey      region has been linked to important dimen-
determined that 41 percent of households        sions of national politics through patronage
in central Mindanao had been displaced         in return for the provision of votes by local
between 2000 and 2010, rising as high as 82     leaders in national elections. Many national
percent in Maguindanao province.'7 Dis-         government agencies implemented programs
placed people lose crops and livelihood and     for the region through their regional offices
often sell assets, locking them into debt and   surrounding ARMM, or simply did not make
long-term poverty. Displaced children are       allocations for the region. ARMM  effectively
a World Bank/Australian Aid (2010), pp 12-27.
1 Torres (2007).
1 World Bank/WFP (2011).
a World Bank/WFP (2011),
"World Bank/Australian Aid (2010), p 13.


﻿10               was "less autonomous than local government  entrenched political clans with private armies
such as cities, towns, and provinces and more  who operate with impunity from the law.
subservient and dependent on the national
government than any other political sub-  An important implication of endemic poor
division in the country."20               governance in AR  M is poor data. Indica-
tors such as population and enrolment rates
In this situation, the regional government,  have been problematic, making per capita
soundly re-elected in May 2013, has had   and per pupil analyses difficult. Population
limited traction against poor LGU governance.  numbers were manipulated22, as both voter
Accounts of absent local officials, non-existent  numbers and the population-based share
development plans and programs, and personal  of the IRA could be increased this way.'The
use of LGU budgets abound, a record reflected  2010 census was more carefully verified, and
in national good governance measures: two of  indicated an apparent slowdown in popula-
five provinces, no cities and 29 municipalities  tion growth from a suspiciously high 5.4 per-
out of 113 in ARIM received the Depart-  cent in 2007 to a more realistic level of 1.51.21
ment of Interior and Local Government's   The total population in 2010 was measured
(DILG) Seal of Good Housekeeping in 2011,  at 3,256,140 million. During 2011-12 there
as against a national average of 78 percent of  were estimated to be 914,991 children of el-
LGUs.21 Many LGUs lack a rating altogether  ementary school age (6-11 years) in ARNIM,
due to a lack of information, and are run by  and 478,522 of secondary (11-15) age .24
Selcte leal  undng or oca eucaionproram shll e te  GvAnmotnt impllicsatliohaan of andmicport
fgvenac nIR                                               po qdta. Idca-
eductionMMA ct N. 27 onasicEductionThetiona rsuasewpopulation mandnf renrlmevnt raes
respnsiiliies RegonalGovrnmnt hal esablih,ainain resha sve ee probematics, mdaki n peapitaoso
and uppot asa to prorit a cmplee aandh perpl neAlysems dficut.opulaetion56
integrated snumber we rel mnut2 RS bot voter
annmbr andaioa theeor population-basedgshar
relevant, ~ ~ ~ ~ ~  ~      ~   o the IRAoniv totenesdasad MgaCfou lde inrae this wMAy.AIh
6@  6                                       20100 census was00   m6orecaefll veriied an
aspratonsofthepeolein heeginSecion2 iNdica2)Te neapartent ow duon in opla
Art 1).                                               Autnoou Reio in Mulm Mindana shal
tinrth fro edctal pcously thaigh 5.4tuper
GAD CoMA                  Ac N. 280) Th Reioa As     sestv and reeatt heesadeitn
sct sit                                        n 200 omue a m e reistic levlu  1.
alTh totalm pouato ine 2010oou wasio measured10
atcani,                                    3,256,140 m    . D  n 2
ementary**..0               .0     schoo ag (-1ar)iAR        M
21~~u toL a21).h    lack of gohuskeinfratiLGon anarency byonailt,prtpto and 47,22o efodaye (11-15)arl age.24
Bicor ox2Reulici  n  omsino Act 54d(Art.I,Sc2,pr(g)supr()ChpeII;TeAtomusRina
2Slecte  lpie ial g und no RM loal e uation  proig rm side. hllpbe Cter  overnmatietoushalsm st blis htata/pi.and/suport,
proveais louaio  rsonslty of the Regona Gov1.0 ermenRVMste  aslkeylwe to irty,e coplete andm integrat7esse
edctinMA AtN.29oBaiEdcto:Teinl frmeor that ismainfl relvan an
fres Piilities  Rgional  GsisOvernen  shall C estls h, mou atinaidHsn g  responw w.ss .gvepht onthenneeds,-ieal n spiats- o
pouainadhuigrasuphiprtnseapopulpriority2a4cmle andtepolinheAoomuRgon(cin56
DepEdNational,E n teted  s ystm  Iofq ai y e  a ) a o  A2  Xli)e.
a edcaioa fameor tha is meanigful,               *-       .--.       .
21DIL(2012aTheisalio hoekepn ratpeL ontrginSencactontability 162)TheDeatmntopEuation anefrac,pricual thei
dicoue oiisArt Comisio AutnomusRegoninusimaMinanogsal
sharp~sundertakeaan educational programiothatbis-culture
2TentioalopuAtio grodae inMMA1 At No.920) ee.AM Reioate s- sie nsiterive an eatto the orcinfonflaeds 2007 eisusn
figresPhlipinesNaionly Saisic Ofeact0 eains ofophusrngh- station anofsn: tp/wwcesshcontie n terennudin
pouainadhuingvand dlielopentio the Mdaai duain  idgnuscmuite Sctoo9nAt )
24 DILGd (202)Tion al nhanced Baicukeeiong IfrmatLG on ytransparenc, accounabili,  prticiainadnefraeeatclal.hi


﻿ARMM education context                      tion is divided into twelve divisions across           11
Education is a regional responsibility. The  the five provinces and two cities: one each
first ARMM Organic Act specified that the   in Lamitan and Marawi cities; one each in
regional government would operate a "sub-   Basilan and Tawi-Tawi provinces; two in each
system" of the national education system, and  of Sulu and Maguindanao; and four divisions
devolution of "control and supervision over  in Lanao del Sur (Map 2).
[DepEd] offices in the region" took place in
September 1991 by Executive Order 459. The  Lanao del Sur subdivided its original two
expanded Organic Act also stipulates that the  school divisions into four, though DepEd
regional government is responsible for fund-  National does not officially recognize these
ing education (Box 2).                      additional divisions. In general, there appears
to be a greater problem of additional staff and
The ARMM public basic education system      facilities being attributed to Lanao del Sur
includes 2,173 primary schools and 298      than the other provinces. For example, Lanao
secondary schools.25 These physical and     del Sur accounts for 43 percent of the region's
human resources are spread across a varied  secondary schools, despite having only 29
landscape on the Mindanao mainland as well  percent of its population.2' DepEd ARM
as the island provinces of Sulu, Tawi Tawi,  has attempted to reassert a more streamlined
and Basilan at the southern tip of the Philip-  administration in the province, but with lim-
pine archipelago. Limited access, particularly  ited results so far.
to these "island divisions", makes supervision
particularly challenging, a problem deepened  Basic Education echoes the national format:
by historic understaffing of supervisors for the  six years of elementary schooling followed
regional DepEd. Basic education administra-  by four secondary, with the phased introduc-
Lignmd                                                                         Map 2:
m7 ARMM Regork                                                                 ARMM Education
ARMM EdSuutian DiMiaiog                          d                         Divisions
PhiippinesM.niipaity
Source:
DepEd, NARMIA
Mindanao
TAVVWAWI
SDpEdNaionl,Enhncd BsicEdcatonInfrmtio Sstemo divEisioninto four,2thughDepE
2Nationalnalestaotstfciciallyerecognizenlhese
than th ote prvne.PoWxmpe                      aa
secondaryschoosmepte                     hvngoly2
2'DpEdNatona, nhacedBascEuctioInormti haSs atem tE toraSser a2moe1sreamine
11Bsi Education echoesic thce nationa format:


﻿12                tion of a K-12 program underway. Due to the     is also addressing these conditions through,
remoteness and displacement already dis-       for example, the construction of community
cussed, there is a higher than normal demand   learning centers (e.g. the ARMM Social
for Alternative Learning Systems to provide    Fund) or community-based schools (under
education services to out of school youth and/  the BEAM-ARMM project).
or displaced populations. Private alternatives,
primarily madaris, have been an important      Education outcomes
part of the system, and in recent years efforts  The triple challenge of limited autonomy,
to register and regulate their curricula have  violent conflict, and weak technical capac-
been introduced. Development assistance        ity and governance are starkly reflected in
Figure 3: Net enrolment rate (%), SY 2011-12
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
a)                                                                               EG     W
CL    I    2     0                .20                         .2   .0    0
Il                     ll          ll                    lIIl
CM                                       .00 a                             "
Source:
Primary/Elementary   * Secondary                             EBEIS online (SY 2011-12)
17 EBEIS Net Enrolment ratio nationwide was recalculated before publication, hence at time of publication national figures do not match regional
figures reported on August 13, 2013 and reflected in Figure 2.


﻿the region's education outcomes. The net        serve out of school youth is thus greater in                13
enrolment rate is 64.4 percent for primary      ARMM    and similar regions than elsewhere.
education and 26.1 percent for secondary
education (SY2011-2012). While these rates      High early dropout rates contribute to this
are improving, they remain the lowest in the    low cohort survival.'Ihe dropout rate in
country by a large margin, and well below       Grade One is the highest in the country as of
the average national net enrolment rates of     2011. Lack of interest among students, dif-
91.2 percent and 62.0 percent for primary      ficulty of travel between home and school due
and secondary education, respectively.27 to geographic isolation of some communities
and the poor condition of infrastructure, and
Even worse than the problems with low           conflict and disruption hinder the quality of
enrollment, staying in school, completing sec-  teaching and attendance of students. During
ondary education and having opportunities       the school survey two schools were closed
for further study and/or employment is an       due to ongoing Rido or local conflict, and
extreme challenge. In SY 2011-12 only 23.1     four more indicated peace and order or local
percent of students in Grade 1 had made it      conflict were the number one challenge they
to grade 6, against a national average of 73.5  faced.21 The situation is the same for second-
percent.'Ihe situation is similar at second-    ary, where the drop-out rate of 5.6 percent
ary level, with only about 45.1 percent of the  is higher than the achievement score of high
Year 1 students staying on to year 4 (national  school Year 4 in ARIM is only 37.1 percent,
average is 78.8 percent). When considered       more than ten points below the national aver-
together, this means that only one out of ev-   age of 48.9 percent. 29
ery 10 students who begin primary education
will graduate from secondary school. Given      Those who graduate from high school find it
net enrolment rates, fewer than six percent     difficult to continue in tertiary education, due
of children will graduate high school in        to a combination of factors including poverty.
ARMM.'Ihe need for Alternative Learning         Only 11.5 percent of females and 9.2 percent
Systems (ALS), incentives and scholarships,     of males in ARNIM are likely to have some
and Alternative Delivery Modes (ADM) to         college education, compared with the national
100                                                    Figure 4:
90                                                     Educational Attainment of Females
80                                                    in ARMM and selected regions (2008)
70
60
50
40                                                     U College or higher
30                                                     U Completed high school
20                                                     U Some high school
10                                                    U Completed elementary
Source:                0                                                    U Some elementary
NDHS 2008                   ARMM      Region IX     NCR      Philippines       No education
28 BE-PEIR School Survey Data.
29 DepEd NETRC Directorate Presentation (May 2012).


﻿14
Figure 5:            100
Educational Attain-   90
ment of Males in
ARMM and selected     80
regions (2008)        70                                                   U College or higher
60                                                    U Completed high school
50                                                    N Some high school
40                                                    U Completed elementary
30                                                    N Some elementary
20                                                       No education
10
Source:                0
NDHS 2008                   ARMM      Region IX     NCR      Philippines
averages of 22.4 percent for females            cally been able to meet the needs of the sector.
and 19.0 percent for males.                     As recently as 2009 ARMM had the highest
classroom and teachers shortages among all
These poor education outcomes result in         regions, yet the Department of Education was
graduates with reduced opportunities for train-  only able to allocate resources to 10 percent of
ing or employment. Low investment means         the schools that needed new classrooms and
few jobs, but people in ARMM  are also ill      21 percent of those with teacher shortages.
equipped for the few employment opportu-        While some have protrayed resource shortages
nities that are available in the formal sector.  in the past as symptomatic of central govern-
Limited labor force participation rates and     ment neglect, at the same time governance
a reliance on agriculture reduces returns on    concerns limited national support for addi-
education, limiting its relevance to youth in  tional budgets for the Region. Well-founded
ARMM who are required to work to sustain        concerns over "ghost teachers," "ghost schools,"
their families. Taken together these reinforcing  and "ghost pupils" and the lack of regular stra-
dynamics threaten to keep more than half of     tegic communication between the national and
the families in ARMd\M trapped in poverty for   regional governments were central factors in
another generation.                             the chronic under-resourcing of the sector.
Past underinvestment by government has rein-    More recently the national government has
forced the poor performance of the education    dramatically boosted education budgets as a
sector in ARMIM.o he allocation of national     whole, increasing them by 18 percent in 2011,
government funds for school buildings, fuarni-  15 percent in 2012 and 23 percent in 2013.
ture, textbooks, and teachers has not histori-  Since 2011 the DepEd National has priori-


﻿tized ARMM divisions for program funding,    modes to respond to the specific needs of the           15
and in many areas the region is now relatively  learners in the formal school system. Efforts
advantaged in terms of available program bud-  are also underway to expand the coverage of
gets, as discussed in Chapter Four.          the Alternative Learning System Program to
reach more learners in areas that are exposed
As with the increased prioritization of      to the problems identified above and sup-
ARIM by national government, the re-        port them with better accreditation and
gional government has also actively introduced  equivalency testing. Recently, through the
measures to address these problems. The      BEAM-ARMM project, an Alternative De-
government has supported efforts to make the  livery Model has been introduced using the
standard curriculum culturally relevant to the  BRAC education model developed initially in
Muslim population through the integration of  Bangladesh. At the time of writing, BRAC
Arabic Language and Islamic Values (ALIVE)   (an international NGO) has established over
in public schools and the development of     1,000 Community Learning Centers (CLCs)
madrasah curriculum for private schools. The  in the five provinces of ARMM. These are
DepEd ARMM has continued implemen-           located in communities with no govern-
tation of the Region-wide Assessment for     ment school or difficulty in access, and have
Maths, Science, English, and Arabic Language  targeted out of school children as enrolees.
(RAMSEA) introduced by the BEAM proj-        The CLCs are operated by BRAC and 11
ect. The results of the RAMSEA can inform    Local NGOs.'Ihe BRAC model is an alter-
targeted interventions such as teacher deploy-  native to government financed public schools
ment, supervision and continuing training.   and could be an option under the Education
Service Contracting Scheme, subject to the
The Department of Education in ARMM          development of an appropriate policy.
is also aiming to expand alternative delivery


﻿16               CHAPTER THREE:                            region with the fiduciary requirements of
PUBLIC      EXPENDITURE                   national government and principles of sound
MANAGEMENT                                budget accountability.
IN  ARMM                                  At the same time, there has been a tension
between the nationwide decentralization pro-
cess under the Local Government Code (RA
7160 of 1991) and regional devolution under
RA 9054 (Box 3). These two frameworks have
Weak public expenditure management insti-  not been resolved coherently, resulting in am-
tutions and practices have been central to the  biguity over the relationships and responsibil-
failure of ARMM to perform effectively as an  ities ofthe ARMM regional government and
autonomous regional administration. These  other Local Government Units. In this sense
problems derive from poorly developed fiscal  ARNM has been doubly trapped between a
arrangements to manage the unique relation-  truncated devolution process from above and
ship and dependence between ARIM and     a lack of integration with the system of Local
national government, contradictions between  Government Units below.
these arrangements and the wider decentral-
ization process in the country, and a lack of  The resulting ARMM public expenditure
sound internal governance institutions in the  management "syndrome" has four interre-
region itself. While some problems are similar  lated dimensions, discussed in the rest of this
to those found elsewhere in the Philippines,  chapter:
the unique nature of the relationship between
ARMM and national government adds par-           Fragmentation of public expenditure
ticular challenges.                          management processes for budgeting and
budget execution between local, regional
Delays and partial implementation of the     and national agencies;
regional autonomy granted first by the 1989      Poor integration of regional budget-
creation of the ARMM, and revised via the    ing processes with national systems;
"Final Peace Accord" and resulting "Expand-      Ambiguity between regional and na-
ed Organic Act" of 2001, have undermined     tional decentralization processes resulting
the coherence of public expenditure manage-  in weak application of LGU resources to
ment institutions. This incomplete devolution  devolved services;
stems from both a failure to establish neces-    Weak accountability and reporting on
sary legal codes and functional institutions  public funds within the region, poor data
to support the provisions of the Organic Act  availability and mistrust between national
and a lack of capacity and compliance by the  and regional stakeholders.


﻿17
Box 3:           Art. Ill, Sec. 3: "The regional government shall  Art. VII, Sec. 21: "The form, content, and manner
Selected          adopt policy on local autonomy whereby regional  of preparation of the budget shall be prescribed
provisions        powers shall be devolved to local government  by law enacted by the Regional Assembly. Pend-
of RA9054         units particularly in the areas of education, health,  ing the enactment of such law, the budgeting pro-
human resource, science and technology and  cess shall be governed by existing laws and rules
peoples empowerment. Until a law implementing  and regulations prescribed by the Department of
this provision is enacted by the Regional Assem-  Budget and Management."
bly, Republic Act No. 7160, the Local Government
Code of 1991, shall continue to apply..."    Art. IX, Sec. 2: "The Regional Government shall
enjoy fiscal autonomy in generating and budget-
Art. Ill1, Sec. 11: "The Regional Government shall  ing its own sources of revenue, its share of the
provide, maintain, and ensure the delivery of,  internal revenue taxes and block grants and
among other things, basic and responsive health  subsidies remitted to it by the central government
programs, quality education..."             or national government or any donor."
Art. IV, Sec. 1: "The powers and functions already
vested upon and the shares of the national taxes ciyfonaoalntrlrenutxs,esad
provided by...the Local Government Code ... to
provinces, cities, municipalities, and barangay... shlbed tr ueda foow :()T iy-vep -
shall not be reduced."cet(5)tthprvneociy(bTit-fe
Art. VI, Sec. 20: "The annual budget of the Re-
gional Government shall be enacted by Regional  ntoa oenet
000e     0. e d    T0                       0   IXiSec 9        0leto  of aoprovinceror
Acharges, and taxe sesou                                    0moe    0n na00 resources,
cen (35%)y to the4 province ore ciy;()Nhit-fv
prt5                                                    ttregional government; wt a ams  0 1  A  Re  an (c
nThirty percent (30%)                                          00 thecenra govenmen oro
clea natona powrs uch s freig afairs2.  ongrssinatioaly govement.
Fragmented public expenditureTe are si main t                ypes ogernment rev-
management of ARMVM resourcesenetaflwioARVM
In theory, RA 9054 provides the ARMM
regional government with an almost "pie-       1     RVMRgoa
nary authority"over the region's develop-       ernm   ens      a
ment and welfare, excepting a negative list of wihnteaiolbug;
clear national powers such as foreign affairs  2.  Conresional Priort Development
and defense.32 T regional government islAssistane Fndsa
granted fiscal autonomy including controlunespcaproefndschste
over the budgeting of the revenues that come   scolbidnfu;
to it, whether locally raised or remitted by the  3  ud   amre      rsbalte      o
central government (though these are subject   uei h      R   Mb    te   ainlgv
to audit).3  However, in reality the major-emntagcis
ity of funds for the region are not under the4.tergosowsuceevnefm
cotrlfhereioalgoermet,loa aes man tyeso            oenetrv
32 RA 9054, Art. IV, Sec. 3. See also LGSPA/InciteGOV (2007), p 25.
33 RA 9054, Art. IX, Sec. 2.


﻿18                    5.  the Internal Revenue Allotment          level, and in Local Government Units below
(IRA) share reserved for ARIM  as a        the region level.
region;
6.   and the IRA allotted to the other      First, consider resources that can be budgeted
various LGU levels.                         autonomously by the regional government as
opposed to those budgeted by other entities.
This "regional fund" comprises locally raised
While these funds are all resources intended   taxes and fees and the regional administra-
for use in the ARMM, they are each bud-        tion's share of the IRA, but excludes the
geted, appropriated, and executed in different  shares for other LGU tiers. The regional
ways and by different actors. This fragmenta-  government has powers to raise revenue from
tion is partly explained by parts of the Organic  an open list of taxes and fees and can enact
Act that remain unimplemented, as well as      a regional tax code. The regional share of the
fiduciary requirements for funds originating   IRA is set at 35 percent, with 35 percent
from national government. The Organic Act      distributed among the other LGUs, and 30
calls for the creation of a regional Depart-   percent remaining with national govern-
ment of Budget and Management and the          ment.36 This regional fund is under the full
passage of a regional budget law, neither of   budgetary control of the ARMM Regional
which has occurred.34 Without these, central   Government within audit limits set by the
government funds remain under the "rules and   Organic Act, and in practice forms a de-
regulations of the Department of Budget and    volved regional budget. This regional budget
Management of the central government".3s       is programmed by the Regional Economic
This means they must be budgeted through       and Development Planning Board (REDPB)
the standard national budget process, or be    described in Chapter Two, approved by the
appropriated by other national agencies under  Regional Legislative Assembly and managed
their own procedures. At the same time, the    by a Regional Budget and Management Of-
provisions of the Local Government Code        fice (RBMO).37
regarding the use of IRA funds for local gov-
ernment remain in force in ARMM, leaving       A second group of resources could be termed
these funds outside the public expenditure     the "national fund" and includes support to
management systems of the region as well.      the ARMM    Regional Government in the
national budget, the Congressional Prior-
These six resource flows can be notionally     ity Development Assistance Funds (PDAF),
divided into three broad "funds" based on      and funds appropriated by other government
where primary control over programming and     agencies for use in the ARMM. In the case of
budgeting them takes place. These correspond   the Regional Government budget, the ARG
to the national budgeting level, the regional  negotiates with the national government via
3 There is a Regional Budget and Management Office but it deals only with locally raised finances.
3RA 9054, Art. VII, Sec. 21.
3 RA 9054, Art. IX, Sec. 9. From 2003 to 2007 the 30 percent national share of ARMM-derived IRA was directed to the ARG as well, pursuant to
RA 9054 Art. IX, Sec. 15.
37Sevilla (2008), pp 2-3.


﻿the national budget process. In practice, this    will be seen in Chapters Four and Five.                         19
appropriation-at least for education-has          A last component of the "national" funds are
only covered the recurrent components of the      the appropriations according to congressio-
budget: Personal Services (PS) and Main-          nal district for priority projects identified by
tenance, Operations and Other Expenses            national representatives, known as the Prior-
(MOOE). It has been budgeted incremen-            ity Development Assistance Funds (PDAF).
tally, with periodic percentage increases set by  These funds have grown substantially for
the Department of Budget and Management.          Mindanao as a whole in relation to other
In practical terms, the ARG is treated as a       island groups since 2010, and contribute to
primary budget unit just like any other, not a    a significant improvement in potential fiscal
devolved political entity with the political and  flows to Mindanao during that period. They
fiscal autonomy set out by RA 9054.               have been appropriated at PHP 70 million
per district across the eight AR1\4IM congres-
Beyond the ARG budget, many other national        sional districts as in the rest of the country,
agencies also budget or later sub-allot funds     but this appropriation is not fiLly utilized as
for use in the ARMM, but fiduciary, politi-       payouts for PDAF projects vary among leg-
cal or administrative barriers have prevented     islators.'9 Over the two fiscal years 2010 and
the devolution of these resources to regional     2011 only Tawi-Tawi used its fill appropria-
government control. These funds include larger    tion, and the region as a whole had a utiiza-
Capital Outlays (CO) and various special          tion rate of 57 percent.
program or purpose funds. In addition, many
funds are still centrally managed, and therefore  Thirdly, one can consider the funds avail-
not devolved to the agency offices in any of the  able to and programmed by local govern-
regions, ARMM    included.38 A significant ex-    ment units below the regional level. As noted
ample from the education sector is the financ-    above, while the regional government receives
ing of textbooks, which are procured centrally    an IRA allotment of 35 percent of national
and distributed in kind to the different admin-   revenue from the region, the other local gov-
istrative regions of the country. Before 2012     ement levels share an additional 35 percent
few national agencies identified their budget     that is used at the discretion of the local
allocations for the ARMM   in the National        government units in question.'This portion is
Expenditure Plan or GAA, and others as-           divided among the LGU tiers as follows: in
sumed either that the ARG appropriation was       provinces 45 percent goes to the province, 35
to cover their sector's activities within ARM    percent to municipalities, and 20 percent to
or implemented their activities via neighbor-     barangays, while in cities it is evenly divided
ing regions. It is therefore difficult to account  between the city and barangays.
completely for funds budgeted for the region,
and harder still to measure find utilization, as  A comparison of these sources of finds
"9Antonio and Habito (2012), para. 3. Senators also receive a larger PDAF allocation of 200 million PHR. While PDAF is budgeted at a flat rate, its
disbursement requires executive and DBI involvement and approval, which explains the varying utilization of the entitlement.
4t Antonio and Habito (2012), para. 26. According to the expanded Organic Act, separate Public Works funds were also appropriated for regional
infrastructure projects approved by the Regional Legislative Assembly for the first six years of the Act being in force. In practice some funds were
earmarked for regional projects, and some were a kind of regional PDAF for Regional Assembly representatives.


﻿20                  forcefully demonstrates the limited scope of      The consequences of this fragmentation is il-
ARMM     fiscal autonomy (Table 3). Region-       lustrated by analyzing the "locus of control" of
ally raised revenue has been very limited and     these resources by quantity and whom is able
comprises only 25 percent of the regional         to budget them (Figure 6). As discussed in
fund; when these revenues are added to the        the introduction, there is indeed a significant
regional share of IRA, the resulting total re-    upward trajectory in the aggregate resources
gional fund is a mere 2.2 percent of the total    available to the ARNIM. However, it is also
resources intended for use in the ARMM, a         clear that a small and even declining share of
proportion that has actually been falling. By     those resources are truly under the purview of
contrast, the national government appropri-       ARMM'S own public expenditure manage-
ates 38 percent of the funds for ARIM   di-      ment systems.'The resultant scenario is of a
rectly to the ARG budget, while an additional     regional government squeezed between much
nine percent is earmarked to the ARNIM            larger flows of resources controlled from
in other agencies'budgets.41 Surprisingly,        above and below. Another way to look at this
the "local budget" is the largest of the three    domination of local resources by national
components. In fact, the local level IRA al-      and LGU flows is through the lens of weak
locations comprise the largest single source of   revenue generation in the region, a central
revenue flowing into the ARMM, accounting         concern for a future Bangsamoro.
for about half.
In millions
350
300
250
200                                                          Total "Local Fund"
150                                                  b      Total "ARMM Regional Fund"
100                               E        e           u    Total "National Fund"
2009        2010        2011        2012
Figure 6:                                                          Source:
Funds flowing to ARMM by locus                                     GAA, NEP
of budget control (PHP Millions)                                   (various years)
This earmarking understates the true quantity at resources due to the implementation ot some AMM programming via neighboring regions.


﻿21
Table 3: Principal sources of government funds to ARMM (Thousands Pesos)*
Source of Funds        2009      % of total     2010      % of total     2011      % of total     2012      % of total
Total ARG            9,448,957     38.6%      9,285,089     35.7%      11,179,638    37.8%     11,717,707    40.0%
Appropriation
PDAF                  121,000      0.5%        133,500      0.5%        538,800      1.8%       576,700       2.0%
NGA sub-Allotments   1,327,784     5.4%       1,806,160     6.9%       2,691,332     9.1%       2,138,129     7.3%
for ARMM
Total "National Fund"  10,897,741  44.5%      11,224,749    43.2%      14,409,770    48.8%     14,432,536    49.3%
Regional Own Source   216,920      0.9%        300,320      1.2%        139,950      0.5%        190,050      0.6%
Revenue
ARG IRA Share         660,000      2.7%        660,000      2.5%        462,000      1.6%        462,000      1.6%
Total "ARMM Regional  876,920      3.6%        960,320      3.7%        601,950      2.0%        652,050      2.2%
Fund"
Provinces IRA        3,609,289     14.7%      4,014,094     15.4%      4,352,476     14.7%      4,141,669    14.2%
Cities IRA            470,336      1.9%        432,584      1.7%        465,022      1.6%       605,008       2.1%
Municipalities IRA   5,942,938     24.3%      6,311,312     24.3%      6,840,396    23.1%       6,630,169    22.7%
Barangays IRA        2,705,485     11.0%      3,069,806     11.8%      2,886,879     9.8%       2,802,080     9.6%
Total "Local Fund"   12,728,048    51.9%      13,827,796    53.2%     14,544,773     49.2%     14,178,926    48.5%
GRANDTOTAL           24,502,709    100%       26,012,865    100%       29,556,493    100%      29,263,512    100%
*Totals may not be 100% due to rounding error. Figures are nominal.                        Sources: GAA, NEP (various years)
Fragmentation of the public expenditure            in deciding the level and allocation offunds
management institutions for the ARMM                intendedfor itspolitically distinct mandate
has two important consequences. First, the         than other non-autonomous administrative
amount of ARMM     resources whose budget-          agencies ofthe National Government. 42
ary control is shared or rests entirely with na-
tional institutions is vastly greater than those  The ability to prioritize spending according to
under regional control. This situation was      local conditions - particularly across sectors
summed up well by the World Bank's 2003         - is one of the key advantages of decentraliza-
review of Human Development in ARMM,            tion, and one of the key mechanisms by which
which describes ARMM     as                     it may help address socio-economic causes of
intra-state conflicts.43 The lack of genuine fis-
a legally autonomous regional government     cal decentralization embodied in the ARMM's
that has no more real orpractical autonomy   fragmented public expenditure framework
iiWorld Bank (2003), p 29.
oSiegle and OoMahony (2006), pp 37-40.


﻿22                 therefore represents a fundamental flaw in the  actual resource flows difficult, as illustrated
strategy of using autonomy in the ARMUM to     in the discussion of basic education budget
promote either peace or socioeconomic devel-   execution in Chapter Five.
opment through self-determination.
Poor integration ofARMM regional and
A second, related consequence of this frag-    national budget processes
mentation is that no single budget document    The second dimension of ARMM's public
or process comes close to including the bulk   expenditure management "syndrome" involves
of resources to be used in the ARMM. It is     challenges in budgeting the ARG appropria-
therefore very difficult to promote a coherent  tion itself. The national process led by the
set of policy goals through budgetary alloca-  DBM is essentially designed for national
tions. This is both because no coordinated     sectoral agencies, while the ARG budget
budget process effectively captures all the    submission represents all its constituent
available resources, and because there is a lack  sub-agency budgets across multiple sectors.
of connection between key dimensions of the    The Office of the Regional Governor (ORG),
budget - particularly the link between recur-  which leads the budget process for ARMM,
rent and capital expenditures which helps to   must both present and defend the budget
ensure investments are properly sustained.     requests of some 17 departments and agen-
This lack of "comprehensiveness and integra-   cies that have line items in the ARG budget,
tion"is widely recognized as a major impedi-   as well as the budget of the Office of the
ment to effectively connecting policy with     Regional Governor and Regional Legislative
planning and budgeting. 44                     Assembly. As an "autonomous" regional gov-
ernment with unique cross-sectoral respon-
A final point about fragmented public expen-   sibilities its budgetary requirements do not
diture management is that these weaknesses     always fit neatly into the national process.
apply equally to budget execution arrange-
ments as to budget planning. When the flow     This situation places considerable demands
of funds depends on different release arrange-  in terms of timing, preparation and presenta-
ments the coordination of input purchase be-   tion on budget management institutions in
comes more difficult, as the timing and quan-  the ARMM. The allotted time in the national
tity of different resources becoming available  budget calendar for an agency to report on
depends on different conditions being met. In  the previous year's budget and submit the new
addition, information and reporting on these   request is the same for a single national sector
resources is more difficult to manage. The     agency as it is for the entire ARMM  Region-
demands of fragmented budget execution on      al Government. For the 2014 budget that was
an already stretched regional administration   two months to submit past budget reports
make active monitoring and coordination of     and three months to provide the new budget
"World Bank (1998), p 1; DFID (2001), pp 27-28.


﻿submission.45 The ARMM    ORG submis-          as both a national agency and a regional                    23
sion requires collecting and collating both    government is most clear is adherence to the
the budget accountability reporting from the   OPIE The OPIF is a results-based logical
past year from among the regional agencies,    framework linking agency budgets to perfor-
and their submissions for the coming year.     mance as defined by a clear set of Major Final
This process is made more difficult by the     Outputs (MFO) each with a suggested maxi-
challenge of receiving accurate reports from   mum of two Performance Indicators (PI). An
LGUs and other sub-regional offices that       MFO is defined as a "good or service that a
are not clearly subordinated to the ARMM.      department/agency is mandated to deliver
As will be seen in Chapter Five, in practice   to external clients through the implementa-
,'47
these reports are not collected for education,  tion of programs, activities and projects".
meaning the budget accountability reporting    DBM's guidelines for the preparation of the
provided to DBM is not credible and fails to   budget submission in these terms are rigidly
support new budget requests.                   structured and require submission via Budget
Preparation Forms A and B which respec-
While this period may seem adequate, the       tively detail the MFOs and PIs - failure to
demands of budget preparation have been        submit according to these matrices requires
intensified in recent years, with each addi-   that appropriations will be limited to the
tional requirement having to be duplicated     previous year's actual levels.48
among the constituent ARMM    agencies.
The Budget Call for preparation of the 2014    There is much to recommend moving towards
budget includes expanded or new provisions     a performance-based budgeting system such
on consultations with civil society and the    as this one. However, international experience
private sector, submission according to Major  suggests that such a transition should "respect
Final Outputs (MFO) of the relevant Orga-      institutional differences among agencies and
nizational Performance Indicator Framework     help them to develop approaches suitable for
(OPIF), periodic Zero-Based Budgeting,         their own situations and contexts", and be
Program Budgeting, and Bottom-up Budget-       accompanied by consultation, support and
ing.46 While not all of these immediately      updating of accounting systems.49 The ap-
affect every ARMM agencies'preparation         plication of a rigid results-based framework
process, they complicate the budget prepara-   onto a cross-sectoral regional agency such
tion requirements in the region and place      as ARG, rather than a sector agency with a
demands on the Office of the Regional Gov-     clear mission and mandate, results in program
ernor's constrained budget preparation team.   budgeting that is both complex and vague.
One area where the mismatch between the        The OPIF framework for the ARG as a
requirements of the "dual" faces of the ARG    whole has to encompass the regions overall
"NBM 115 (December 28, 2012), Annex D.
NBM 115 (December 28, 2012), Sec. 3.3.2-5,
NBM 155 (December 28, 2012), Sec. 3.3.2.
4 NBM 115 (December 28, 2012), Sec. 5.1.3.
* Shah and Shen (2007), p. 173-4.


﻿24                   objectives, but also all those of its constitu-      tral Office framework involves 12 programs
ent agencies. In the ARG budget, the newly           under the basic education MFO, itself one
revised Program/Activity/Project (PAP)               of three education MFOs.'This result reflects
structure involves only one program for basic        a common failing in program budgeting
education among 20 operational programs              reforms worldwide, in which the new budget
across the other sectors. A comparison of the        classification simply echoes former line item
PAP structures for basic education proposed          categories, usually in order to remain mapped
in November 2012 for the DepEd National             to an unchanged organizational structure.
with that of the ARMM      Regional Govern-          The ARMM      submission includes similar
ment is illustrative of these very different         structures for all its departments and agen-
program budget structures (Table 4).                 cies, diluting the detailed objectives that the
adoption of a results-based framework aims
The ARMM      PAP entails only one program           to bring to the budget process, while retain-
for "implementation of basic education               ing all the additional demands of preparing
services" subdivided by regional office and         the budget to this format.
schools divisions, while the DepEd Cen-
Table 4: PAP structures for Basic Education in National Government and ARMM
DepEd National                                         ARMM Regional Government
MFO                           P/A/P                          MFO                           P/A/P
Curricular programs and learning
management
Curricular and special learning
support
Alternative learning and delivery                            Regional Office
modes including distance edu-
cation
Learning systems for special
needs
IVIF1 Basic          School health and nutrition        MFO12 Implementation   ti
Education Services       16 Regional Operations at kin-  of basic education services
dergarten, elementary, second-
ary, and learning center levels
(excludes ARMM)
Assistance to private education
(GASTPE)                                                     9 Division operations at
Acquisition, procurement and                                 elementary, secondary and
equitable distribution of learning                          technicalvocational levels
resources
Facilities and teaching and
learning-conducive environments
lCT enabled solutions
Assessment systems
Sources
DBM, Authors


﻿As this framework is increasingly used by   Naturally, the impact of this mismatch                 25
the Department of Budget and Management     depends largely on how it is interpreted
to justify new spending requests, the lack of  in practice, particularly at the level of the
elaboration in the ARMM OPIF may - if       national budget institutions. However, even if
due consideration is not applied - undermine  the worst effects of poor integration between
the ability of the ARIM Regional Gov-      regional and national budget processes are
ernment to articulate its needs effectively.  mitigated through dialogue and compromise,
ARMM is left in a Catch-22, in which it     this remains uninstitutionalized and vulner-
cannot meaningfully adopt the performance   able. At the very least it undermines regional
budgeting framework as is, yet failing to  fiscal autonomy by increasing dependence
adhere to the framework can affect its bud-  and reducing the bargaining power of the
getary outcomes,                           regional government.
Results-based budgeting systems are a kind of Besides the mismatch in the ARvIM Re-
program budgeting - an approach that aims   gional Government linkage to central gov-
to group together as a single "Program" all ex-  ernent budgeting, there is a lack of sound
penditure activities that serve a coherent aim,  budgeting processes among the AR IM
operation, output, or outcome.10 A meaning-  institutions. In addition to the lack of a
ful performance or program budget needs to  regional budget law or regional DBM, few if
include and relate all budget components or  any ARMVM-specific budget procedures are
activities contributing to this goal - in this  in place to help AR aM's sectoral agencies
case defined as an MFO. In the ARNVIM       support the ORG preparation process in the
Regional Government budget this is simply  time available. These shortcomings involve
not possible, because the fragmentation of  both budgeting and reporting, and undermine
public expenditure systems described above  the ability of the region to represent its bud-
means that significant resources contributing  getary performance and future requirements
to any given MFO lie outside that budget.   effectively to the national government.
In this sense, the idea of program or results-
based budgeting in such a fragmented public  Inconsistency between ARM\'M regional
expenditure environment is nearly meaning-  "devolutionamand national decentralization
less. The paradox was astutely expressed by  The third dimension of the ARMM PEM
one ARMM      civil servant:                syndrome is that, in addition to the lack of
budgetary control over many centrally derived
How can we be expected to submit a program  resources, the regional government is disad-
budget, when our budget does not cover most  vantaged with respect to the resources flowing
governmentprograms?                     to other levels of local government nominally
within its jurisdiction. Tcis situation is the re-
FInscher (2007), p 119-20.
ARMM BEcEIR interview, AMM Regional Government Staff (March 2013).


﻿26                 sult of contradictions or tensions between the  Autonomy Act (MMA) 25, the regional
two distinct decentralization processes in the  version of the local government code adopted
region: the nationwide process embodied by     nationwide. This regional act did not specify
the 1991 Local Government Code, and the        that local government units are responsible to
unique regional devolution under RA 9054.     discharge devolved responsibilities, so these
services, including education, remained a
The absence of the regional policy and         regional function. When RA 9054 superseded
legislation on "local autonomy" called for in  this act, it specified once more that the LGC
the Expanded Organic Act means that IRA        applies until a regional local government code
funds are distributed to LGUs in the ARNIM    is adopted.The situation remains the same
according to the provisions of the 1991 Lo-   until now:
cal Government Code. This law provides
that LGUs "discharge the functions and           Asymmetry exists between,ARMM-LGUs
responsibilities of national agencies and of-     and non-ARAMLGUs in terms ofthe
fices devolved to them".52 At the time of the    penditure responsibilities that are assigned to
Philippines-wide decentralization instituted      them because the regionalgovernment ofthe
under the LGC, these functions and respon-       ARMM has not devolved any of theirfunc-
sibilities included a wide range of public ser-   tions to the LGUs within theirjurisdiction
vices, though notably not education excepting     even  fRA 6734 allows them to do so. 7hus,
some construction and maintenance of school      ARMM-LGUs did not receive any of the
buildings.53 IRA shares are meant to support      devolved activities that have been transferred
provision of those services. In terms of their   to non-ARMMILGUs underR- 716. 5
expenditure assignments,
ARMVM LGUs continue to receive the full
non-ARMM LGUs are treated on an almost     IRA allocation as per the stipulation of RA
equalfooting as the regional government    9054 that the shares of national taxes due to
ofARMM ... although thefunctions and       LGUs may not be reduced, regardless of the
responsibilities assigned to the regional gov-  expenditure responsibilities of the region or
ernment ofARIM are slightly broader than  the LGUs.5' As noted above, this share of
those given to non-ARMMLGUs.54            resources is about half of all public resources
flowing to the region, more than the ARG
But this devolution is not implemented in the  budget itself. In short, LGUs have substan-
ARIM, where the responsibility for services   tial external resources but reduced expendi-
lies primarily with the regional government    tures due to the responsibilities given to the
under the regional autonomy provisions.       ARMM regional level through the Expanded
In 1994 the ARMM Regional Legislative          Organic Act. This has the effect of reducing
Assembly (RLA) passed Muslim Mindanao          the incentives for LGUs to raise own source
R2 A 7160, Sec. 17.
ve Asian Development Bank/World Bank (2005), p 4.
SWorld Bank (2003), p. 22.
Asian Development Bank/World Bank (2005), p. 5.
HA 9054, Art. IV, Sec. 1


﻿revenues. In addition, when LGU resources in  will be seen in the next Chapter in relation to           27
other regions are directed to social spending  budgeting for Alternative Learning Systems.
even if not directly to education, it increases  The result is an ongoing cycle of incomplete
the fiscal space in those areas to allocate other  budget proposals and centrally-determined
funds to education. In the ARMM by con-       incremental budgets.
trast, the IRA available in ARMM are widely
reported as used for personal slush funds by  The lack of sound information on the use of
local LGU heads, or diverted to settle rido-  government funds in the ARMM plays into
type conflicts.17                             and increases the mistrust in the relationship
between the ARMM Regional Government
Weak stewardship and accountability           and the national authorities, particularly the
in handling public funds                      DBM. At the same time, the ambiguity has
The fourth dimension of ARMM's public         served the purposes of some national political
expenditure management syndrome is the        forces, as relatively unaccountable support to
history of poor governance as expressed in    ARMM has been part of a system of inter-
weak budget accountability and reporting.     dependence in patronage politics, in which
A 2010 review of ARMM's education budget      support and autonomy are given in return
control institutions found that there are     for the provision of electoral support.'Ihese
"[w]eak internal control systems" and "no     problems are exacerbated by some national
clear guidelines for reporting on budget      agencies dismissing the need for improve-
utilization by the implementing units, and    ments to reporting systems, audit, and ac-
more importantly a report correlating budget  counting as a regional responsibility due to
spent with achievement of physical outputs or  the supposed "autonomy" granted under the
performance targets is non-existent"."        Expanded Organic Act. There is therefore a
lack of systematic capacity support in meeting
At least until the 2013 budget, the typical   national fiduciary and budget accountability
education budget reporting practices within   requirements compared to other regions. That
ARMM have consisted of schools, districts,    being said, as awareness and communication
and divisions failing to provide proper report-  of needs between ARMM and the national
ing to the regional office on budgets they    government improve, there is increased will-
received or used, while the regional office   ingness to provide training and support from
has responded by submitted budget account-    national agencies, particularly the DBM and
ability reporting on those funds to the DBM   DepEd National. More concerted support is
that it completed without corresponding data.  needed to offset the deficits in this area.
Without data on actual spending, central in-
stitutions cannot budget additional resources  A lack of qualified or appropriate staffing
for ARMM even when they are needed, as        for the important functions of budget
* Torres (2007), p. 109.
" Tribal Helm (2010), p 32-34.


﻿28                  accountability has also developed in the           manipulating existing flows of resources rather
ARMM. This is in part due to a historical         than accounting for those used and planning
politicization of appointments resulting in       for those needed in the future.
inappropriate skills and the emergence of
vested interests in the continuation of the       Finally, there is little or no provision for pub-
system. But it can also be traced to the lack of  lic or civil society scrutiny and accountability
attention to requirements of a fully-fledged      for public expenditure or service quality. In
planning and budgeting function                   some respects, the lack of accountability has
at regional level, leaving the ARMM               been deepened by the diversion of electoral
somewhere between being a true local              processes towards patronage politics, and few
government with the necessary staffing for        incentives yet exist for active "horizontal" or
public expenditure management, and an             "downward" accountability to citizens. While
administrative tier with minimal capacities       some of these accountability issues can be
to implement budgets given from above. In         found throughout the Philippines, they are
general, the continuation of these practices      more severe in the ARIM, and compounded
and entrenchment of clientelistic hiring          by the lack of clear responsibility for proper
has resulted in various kinds of productivity     reporting created by the ambiguous nature of
damaging forms of corruption, such as the         the autonomy arrangements.
introduction of ghost workers, and a focus on
R RA 7160, Sec. 17.
5 Asian Development Bank/World Bank (2005), p 4.
* World Bank (2003), p. 22.
Asian Development Bank/World Bank (2005), p. 5.
RA 9054, Art. IV, Sec. 1


﻿CHAPTER FOUR:                              Whether measured as a proportion of GDP               29
BUDGETING            FOR                   or real expenditures per pupil, government
BASICeducation spending fell significantly after the
BASICEDUC  TIONfinancial crisis of the late 1990s until about
IN  ARiniM                                 2006, and in 2008 real per pupil expenditures
had still not regained 1998 levels. Spending
also fell considerably short of that required
by the DepEd's Education for All (EFA) re-
source estimates and was only about half the
the relationship between expenditure and   predicted GDP shares for countries of similar
good education outcomes is complex. Levels of  income levels.60
spending do matter, but as or more important
is the composition of that spending in relation  A 2011 Philippines-wide public expenditure
to strategic goals and the input mix required  review concluded that "[in education, trends
for quality education services.'The budget is  in public spending and key sector outcomes are
the concrete expression of a government's  closely related" and a 2012 education public
goals, and if budgeting is poorly connected to  expenditure review showed "compelling evi-
policy and plans these goals have little chance  dence that deterioration in outcome indicators
of being realized. Indeed, it is broadly accepted  has coincided with the weakening of govern-
that the "[f]ailure to link policy, planning and  ment support at the level of public spending
budgeting may be the single most important  on the education sector".61 More recently, real
factor contributing to poor budgeting out-  education budgets have been on the increase,
comes at the macro, strategic and operational  and it can be expected that this renewed re-
levels in developing countries."p9 sourcing of the sector will bring benefits.
This chapter outlines the size and composi-  Non-government basic education spending
tion of public budgets for basic education  Education spending in ARMM   - as in most
in ARMM. It then traces the impact of the  developing contexts - involves a combination
public expenditure management syndrome     of government spending, donor contribu-
outlined in the previous chapter on budget  tions, and private expenditure by households.
preparation and composition.               However, compiling comparable aggregate
measures of spending on basic education
Aggregrate basic education spending levels  in AR  tM is complicated by three factors:
in the ARhMM                               the fragmentation of government spending
A low level of aggregate education spending  among multiple budget channels, the lack of
in recent years has been a key contributor  accurate donor information broken down by
to poor education outcomes countrywide.    region or by yeart and incomplete reporting
axWorpd Bank (1998), p 31.
6 World Bank/Australian Aid (2012), pp 22-27
61 World Bank (2011), p6; World Bank/Australian Aid (2012), p 21.


﻿30                on Local Government Unit supplementary       Donor spending on education in ARMM can
spending on education. Due to the impos-     be traced primarily to Australian Aid through
sibility of generating strictly comparable  its BEAM project, UNICEF, and USAID.
spending figures that include all government  BEAM-ARMM is the continuation of the
and non-government sources for ARMM,         Mindanao-wide BEAM project, providing a
and the public expenditure management        range of capacity development, community-
focus of this study, this analysis focuses on  based schooling and other services. USAID's
government spending on basic education.      EQUALS II program is aimed at enhancing
Nevertheless, before focusing on government  community participation, improving teaching
spending it is worth reviewing the contribu-  capacity, access for out of school youth, and
tion of non-government sources.              support grants to secondary schools.
Table 5: Indicative key donor education sector support to ARMM (thousand Pesos)
Source                         Program Budget                    Annualized Budget
BEAM - ARMM (2012-2017)                  3,927,000                          785,400
USAID (EQUALS II) (2006-11)               1,239,000                          246,000
ARMM Social Fund                        N/A                              658,140
Source: BEAM-ARMM Program Design Document (2011); ARMM BE-PEIR Interview, USAID (February 2013).
Note: The annualized EQUALS II budget is based on US $60 million over a five year period.
UNICEF is also a major donor to educa-       focuses on development activity in conflict-
tion, but available data is nationwide. For  affected areas and is administered by the
2012-15 US $21.2 million is budgeted for     World Bank.
the Philippines as a whole. In addition, two
major multisector and multidonor projects,   While these amounts are estimated, the cur-
the Mindanao Trust Fund and the ARMM         rent donor spending specifically earmarked
Social Fund make contributions to the educa-  for education in ARMM would amount to
tion sector.'Ihe Social Fund is a government  about 1.7 to 2 billion PHP annually. This
project with World Bank and JICA lending     represents about a quarter of the amount of
that contributes to the sector primarily via  government spending. It is worth considering
construction of mixed-use community learn-  the sustainability implications of this figure.
ing centers and earlier through support to the  In general, donor spending on education in
madrasah sector.'The Mindanao Trust Fund     ARtM is geared towards capital invest-


﻿ment in the form of infrastructure, with some     On the other hand, as these facilities are in                   31
resources for alternative delivery modes or the   many cases planned for areas where regular
Alternative Learning System Program. Since        primary or secondary schools are not planned -
these donor contributions are not considered      as in mixed use or community learning centers
in the annual budgeting process the long term     - the distortionary impact of donor spending on
recurrent implications of the new infrastruc-     facilities planning may be less important.
ture are not necessarily being considered.
Figure 7:                                                   Source:
Household Expenditure on education, 2009 (percent by region)  NSO, 2009 Family Income and Expenditure Survey Final Results
7.0%
6.0%
5.0%
4.0%
3.0%
2.0%
1.0%
0.0%
I            e     d       n     >               >     >          .
2     0               .0    0            0       .2
rM 00                                             .0    0          0
CL
Information on household expenditure on           tures on education is even greater in absolute
education in the Philippines as a whole is        terms: ARVIM    families spend about 1,567
available from household level expenditure        Pesos on education, against a national average
surveys, but is not disaggregated by the type     of 8,071 Pesos. 61 Private expenditure is thus
of schools (private or public) that children      small, and donors tend to support needs of a
attend, nor by grades. It is therefore difficult  particular type, addressing education sys-
to make robust comparisons between public         tem issues and infrastructure in particularly
and private expenditures on education.62 As       remote or conflict-affected areas that may be
a relatively impoverished region, the impact      less integrated to the public education sector.
of the low percentage of household expendi-
62See also World Bank/Australian Aid (2012), p 31.
63 2009 Family Expenditure and Income Survey Final Results.


﻿32                 Government spending on basic education                  DepEd ARMM budget in the ARG
Basic education in ARMM    is heavily de-          appropriation of the national budget;
pendent on public sector resources, with the            DepEd National allotments for
majority of these flowing through the ARG          ARMM, including program funds such
budget in the form of Personal Services            as textbooks, School-based Management
expenditures for salaries and other compen-        grants, and others;
sation. Capital outlay and various program              Spending on education via other
expenditures form a smaller portion of the         Ministries such as education facilities built
total funds, and are primarily budgeted via        by the Department of Public Works and
DepEd National's programs. These resources         Highways (DPWH) through the School
have been growing steadily, in both nominal        Building Program, and the cost of the
and real terms (Table 6 and Figure 8).             Conditional Cash Transfer grants under
the DSWD, which provides support to
Government spending on education can be            families on the basis of both health and
divided into four main categories:                 education conditions;
Local Government Unit spending in-
cluding the earmarked Special Education
Fund (SEF).
Table 6: Aggregate government education expenditures in ARMM (thousand Pesos)
Source       2009          %          2010         %          2011          %          2012         %
DepEd      4,644,785     89%        4,846,119     96%       5,818,269     84%        6,370,646     75%
ARMM
DepEd Na-    454,122        9%        203,449       4%        1,096,447     16%       2,086,615      25%
tional
SPF-SBP      77,709        1%          N/A         N/A          N/A         N/A         N/A         N/A
(DPWH)
LGU        17,690        0%         16,797        0%        42,868        1%         20,675        0%
Total      5,194,306    100%       5,066,365     100%       6,957,584    100%       8,477,936     100%
Source: BESF for DepEd ARMM, BLGF for LGUs, SAOB for DepEd National 2008-11.
*Note: DepEd National ARMM allotments for 2009-2011 are obligations and not budgeted amounts due to the absence of regional allotment
information in the national budget prior to 2012.


﻿Figure 8:                                                                                                   33
Nominal vs. Real government education expenditures in ARMM, 2009-12
9,000,000
8,500,000
8,000,000
7,500,000
7,000,000
6,500,000                                                     -      Nominal
6,000,000                                                     -      Real (2009 Pesos)
5,500,000
5,000,000
4,500,000
Source:
4,000,000                                                            BESF for DepEd ARMM, BLGF for LGUs, SAOB
2010            2011            2012                for DepEd National 2008-11; Philippines IPIN deflator
Direct comparison of the ratio of education    While underspending in social sectors has
spending in ARMM to total spending are          occurred in the ARMM historically, more
complicated by the fragmentation of education   recently the primary issue for basic education
budgets between regional and national agen-     delivery is no longer the level of aggregate re-
cies described in Chapter Three.'The ARIM     sources, at least in comparison to other regions
DepEd budget has grown from 49 percent of       in the Philippines. Instead, the problems cen-
the ARG appropriation in 2009 to about 57       ter on issues of composition (what is bought
percent in 2013. However, this represents only  with the available funds), execution (how effi-
spending that is appropriated to the ARG, and   ciently funds are spent), and delivery (whether
excludes national agency spending in ARNIM     the purchased inputs are available at the point
for both education and non-education purpos-    of service delivery). The next section discusses
es. However, the aggregate spending on educa-  budget composition and its relationship to
tion from all government sources also grew as   fragmented public expenditure management
a proportion of aggregate public expenditure    in the ARIM, and the following Chapter ad-
from all sources.'Ihis proportion went from     dresses issues of execution and delivery.
21 percent of the aggregate public expenditure
for ARMM in 2009 to 29 percent in 2012,         Composition of government spending on
indicating growing prioritization of education  basic education
by both regional and national government.s4 The fragmentation of the public expendi-
1t Authors calculation based on data in Tables 3 and 6.


﻿34                  ture system between national, regional, and     within the national purview, though it is itself
local institutions outlined in Chapter 'Three    divided among different programs and special
has an important influence on how budget         purpose funds. Finally, some capital construc-
composition evolves in ARMM     generally,       tion does come through the PDAF congres-
and for education in particular.'The bulk of     sional allocations and LGU allocations.
the recurrent budget is held by the ARMM
regional government, with existing staff         This kind of "dual" or divided budgeting
benefits under Personal Services (PS), and       in which recurrent and capital budgets are
routine Maintenance and Other Operat-            prepared separately and remain unintegrated
ing Expenditures (MOOE) falling with             is common in many countries and minis-
the ARG appropriation. However, there are        tries. Recurrent budgets are often prepared
significant exceptions. Many of the funds for    by finance departments within line minis-
specific education programs and textbooks are    tries or finance ministries, while planning
classed as MOOE but budgeted by DepEd            departments or ministries handle capital
National. In addition, some expenditures are     expenditure." However, the ARMM      edu-
slightly misleadingly categorized: for example   cation case is extreme in three respects: the
budgets for new staff and for Arabic and         recurrent budget and capital budget proposals
Islamic Education (ALIVE) teachers are with      for education are split between two entirely
DepEd National and managed through a             separate government line agencies (the ARG
cash allowance classed as MOOE despite its       and DepEd National); they are prepared at
actual use for salaries and benefits.            different levels of government (the regional
and the national); and the MOOE budget is
Capital outlay, particularly for school build-   spread across the two agencies and two levels
ings and furnishings, is virtually entirely      (Table 7).
Table 7: Locus of control of government spending by economic category, FY 2013
DepEd ARMM                            DepEd National              a        Total
PS                 7,114,906          100%               3,118              0.04%             7,118,024
MOOE               359,222            36%                647,636            64%                1,006,858
co                 -                                     58,475             100%              58,475
Source: TFY 2012 NEP Appropriations/GAA. Note: Excludes LGU spending. MOE for "New Teacher Items"
in DepEd National budget has been reclassified here as PS.
65 Schiavo-Campo (2007), pp 246-8.


﻿An analysis of composition of expenditure     Personal Services                                          35
therefore involves estimating from dispa-     As Personal Services are included in the
rate sources of funds. The main components    ARG budget, comparison with equivalent
of government education expenditures in       spending elsewhere is relatively straightfor-
ARMM are:                                     ward. For the SY 2011-12 the Philippines
average regional operations spending on
*   Personal services expenditures (wages  Personal Services was just over 8,500 PHP
and benefits) for existing staff, budgeted  per pUpil.66 ARMM had the lowest per pupil
in the GAA under the ARMM Regional         spending at 7,104 PHP, but this was close
Government appropriation, and managed      to the level of several other regions. Given
via the ARMM regional government;           concerns about enrolment figures, with enrol-
*   "Regular" MOOE under the regional      ment discounted by 10 percent, the figure in
government appropriation and managed       ARMM would be 7,900, slightly below the
by DepEd ARMM;                              national average. An alternative measure of
*   Cash allowance for new staff posi-     equity in PS allocations could be operational
tions, budgeted under the DepEd Na-        PS per head of current population (based on
tional appropriation as MOOE;              the much improved 2010 census and popu-
*   A range of centrally-managed           lation growth figures). This measure shows
program funds including key operating      that the 2013 budget ARMM    allocations
expenditures such as textbooks, key capital  are about equivalent to the national average,
expenditures through the Basic Educa-      actually coming in at 2,070 PHP per capita,
tion Facilities fund, as well as a range   very slightly higher than the national aver-
of programmatic activities budgeted by     age of 1,980 PHP.67 In sum, the level of PS
DepEd National and categorized variously   spending in ARMM may be slightly low on
as MOOE and Capital Outlay (CO);           a per pupil basis, but not far out of line with
*   Congressional allocations via the      levels elsewhere in the country
PDAF and contributions to educational
facilities from the infrastructure alloca-
tion, also programmed by legislators and
classed as CO; and
* LGU spending on education from
the internal revenue allotment and the
SEF budgeted and managed through the
LGUs themselves.
This is in order to compare regions: the PS for each region is used, and PS at DepEd Central Office is excluded. Includes all public school
enrollees, both elementary and secondary.
67 Population is trom 2010 Census with reported regional growth rate to 2013; 2013 GANER


﻿36
Figure 9:                                                   Source:
PS per pupil by region (SY 2011-12 enrolment, FY 2013 budget)  EBEIS online; 2013 GAA/NEP
12,000
10,000
8,000
6,000
4,000
2,000
C    0     C                     >                     - >
** m    .2    0000
a) ~    .2   .2     '    m    .
Note:
Note: This and the per pupil analyses that follow rely on SY 2011-12 enrolment figures, the latest full set available, against the FY 2013 General Appro-
priations Act. They are not therefore a strictly accurate per capita figure for either year
However, current allocations are not them-        9 of the 13 divisions in the region have severe
selves an indicator of adequate provision, par-   secondary teaching shortages, and every divi-
ticularly if past spending has been deficient.    sion registers some shortage." Even if dis-
In both elementary and secondary grades for       counted by 10 percent, these ratios would still
the 2011-12 SY, the reported pupil-teacher        be higher than anywhere else, What these
ratios are the highest in the country by a        figures show is that while efforts are generally
significant margin. In Elementary education,      being made to adequately resource teachers
ARIM    education divisions account for 7 of     for ARMM, there are still barriers to this
the 11 with the highest "severe" need clas-       budget being converted into actual teachers
sification (50 students per teacher as against a  in classrooms - these barriers are discussed in
standard of 40-45 depending on grade).            the next chapter.
soaEBEIS Online, SY 201s1-12.


﻿37
Figure 10:                                              Source:
Primary and secondary teacher-student ratios by region (SY 2011-12)  EBEIS online, SY 2011-12
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
M            >                   X    X    R               2    M
C    0         a    _   _          a
p c l   tha .2  0         of.2
ful  studen         .2   .2 is.n
t   Elementary Pupil-Teacher Ratio             Secondary Pupil-Teacher Ratio
However, officials in ARMVM have recently sources available for teaching materials and
publicly claimed that with the elimination of  the operation and maintenance of facilities.
fraudulent student enrolments, it is no longer  These "non-salary recurrent" expenditures
the number of teachers or the PS budget        are squeezed in many budget settings due
allocation that is the primary constraint to  to the relative difficulty of reducing staffing
education performance, at least in terms of   expenses and the separation of the recurrent
national policy guidelines on teacher-pupil   and the capital budgeting processes alluded to
ratios or comparison with other parts of the   above. In the Philippines such a dynamic was
Philippines.69 Such a rebalancing of figures dramatic during the 1990s, when aggregate
onto a more accurate footing represents a     MOOE spending per pupil fell by half to a
significant and important achievement for     paltry 422 PHP per pUpil.70
ARMM governance.
MOOE allocations for ARMM education
MOOE and the" "rutineo oprtin
MOQ  ad te routn operations                consist of both an "ordinary" component
and maintenance gap"                          budgeted in the ARG education budget for
The quality of education services is not just  operations, and several programmatic alloca-
a function of teachers, but also of the re-   tions in the DepEd National Budget. The
ThSeease (2013).
ehoWorld Bank/Australian Aid (2012), p 46.


﻿38                former operating MOOE is for distribu-       allocation per pupil, about 1170 PHP against
tion among schools to meet their routine     a national average ofjust over 1400 PHP.
maintenance and operating needs. The latter,
nationally programmed expenditures include   Figure 11 examines the allocations of
key inputs for basic education institutions  MOOE per pupil by region, taking into
such as textbook allocations and school-based  account both ARG and DepEd National pro-
management grants, as well as many signifi-  gram budgets for all regions.71 ARNM was
cant special program costs that are gener-   again the region with the lowest allocation
ally, though not entirely, classed as MOOE.  per pupil, about 1170 PHP against a national
ARNIM was again the region with the lowest   average of just over 1400 PHP.
Figure 11:                                            Source:
MOME (operations and programs combined) budget per pupil by region  EBEIS Online; 2013 GAA.
(SY 2011-12 enrolment, FY 2013 budget)
2,500
2,000
1,500
1,000
500
M                       X    X                        W         a
.>                         >                       X
o~~                          ~ .2 ox         0
.2 .2                     o   .2.
Given ~ ~ ~ ~   ~   ~   ~      ~   e pupil,ern  about  1170men  PHPer  aihcnitnccosrgins ANnationa
aRM     w as againthepreion  wiothe thmeastveae of   justnll aover 1400 PHPnavraeof1.
MOOEbuge oroperations andprgascmie)bdtpr pibrgions. BEis  Onlie 013 aton GAAha  ot Sn
(s 2011-12 eolethe21 budget)rP  n  OEintentoa n
2,5000
2,000
Given the concerns about enrolment numbers   hg   ossec      cosrgos       RVMi
as a basis for comparison, another measure of magnlyboeteainlavreof1.
aggregate MOOE provision by region could     pecnwih1.pretoftspraos
be to express it as a proportion of the overall  adpormbde       ossigo       OE
budget for operations and programs.'IhisThimlctosaehtbthPan
can be thought of as the amount of MOOE      M   OEmybloagisrertdno-
available per unit of spending on personnel  metanbysilrmot.
and programs.aOnbthistmeasure,iwhich shows
7This measure excludes the budget for PS and MOOE in the national and
regional education headquarters as these are not allocated to regions.


﻿However, using the aggregate MOOE alloca-   in ARMM relative to other regons. Figure                 39
tion for ARMM overestimates the MOOE         12 illustrates this "routine operations and
available for ongoing or routine maintenance  maintenance budget gap" by comparing the
and operations activities. Most programs'    regional MOOE budget as a proportion of
MOOE expenditures are linked to specific     the regional operating budgets including
activities and are therefore not available for  programs, with MOOE as a proportion of
more routine activities. As such, including all  the regular operating budget (the DepEd
MOOE allocations for programs obscures       ARMM appropriation available to fund rou-
significant underfunding of regular opera-   tine school operations and maintenance).
tions and maintenance for education services
Figure 12:                                            Source:
MOtE as % of operating & program budget               2013 GAAiNEP
vs. % of operating budget, FY 2013
14%
12%
10%
8%
6%
4%
2%
0%
cc               4       .        >.                  X    X
.2   0    .2   o              .2-  0             0    .2   0C
S02             .20
.'  2  .2   a)        0    .                  .2   0 5
.2
z
I MOOEIRegional Operations & Program Budget  I MOOEIRegional Operations Budget


﻿40                 The difference in the two measures is striking.  ters of the national average, and 81 percent of
When program specific MOOE allocations          that in the next lowest region, Region I.
are included, regional MOOE allocations
range from 10.5 percent to 13.6 percent of      This "gap", which is invisible if MOOE for
the combined operating and program bud-         both programs and operations is lumped
gets. As just noted, ARMM's proportion          together, is even more striking if calculated as
is slightly over the national average of 12.1   a per pupil amount (Figure 13). ARMM again
percent with an MOOE allocation of 12.3         has the lowest allocation in the country, 417
percent. However, separate analysis of the      PHP per pupil. The national average is 715
operations budget reveals a different picture:  PHP. The next worst off region (the National
ARMM's MOOE allocation is only 4.8              Capital Region, which also enjoys the highest
percent of the regular operating budget, well   availability of Special Education Funds) still
below 6.0 percent in the next worst off region  has over 600 PHP per pupil. In short, ARMM
and the national average of 6.5 percent. In     enjoys only 58 percent of the national average
short, the MOOE available for routine oper-    in per pupil MOOE allocations for routine
ations and maintenance as a proportion of the   operations, a significant disadvantage in terms
operations budget is only about three-quar-     of the provision of basic education services.
Figure 13:                                               Source:
Per pupil MOOE in regular operations budgets by region   EBEIS Online; 2013 GAA/NEP
(SY 2011-12 enrolment, FY 2013 budget)
1,200
1,000
800
600
400
200
0
>                    > -                            U
.2    .2
0
.02
z


﻿This low routine operating and maintenance    compensation of ALIVE teachers.                           41
budget allocation within the ARG budget       This "routine operations and maintenance
is hidden by larger MOOE allocations for      gap" has very significant real-world implica-
ARMM within program funds budgeted            tions. In the ARMM the operating MOOE
and executed by DepEd National. In par-       budget for primary and elementary schools
ticular, the ARMM allocation for just one     is entirely utilized by Division and School
centrally-managed program accounts for        District offices, with none being distributed
almost all the difference between the two     to primary or elementary schools.'This situ-
measures: Madrasah education was allocated    ation has until recently been considered by
209 million pesos in 2013, about eight times  ARMM local education staff as an accepted
the national average of 26 million. This high  matter of policy, despite no such policy in the
allocation makes sense contextually and is    remainder of the Philippines.'This is worth
without doubt welcome for its contribution to  emphasizing: in part due to a shortage of
Arabic Language and Islamic Values Educa-     regular MOOE budget in the ARG ap-
tion (ALIVE) programming in the ARMM          propriation, primary and elementary schools
region. However, despite its size it cannot   in the ARMM receive no regular operating
compensate for the low MOOE availability      budget from the DepEd ARMM and must
for routine maintenance since it is used for  fund any routine operations and maintenance
different purposes: primarily the training and  expenditures from other sources.72
Figure 14
Lack of operating
and maintenance
resources
ARMM BE-PEIR Interviews with DepEd ARMM and district staff, confirmed by eSiDS survey
results in which no primary or elementary schools reported receiving a regular MO.E allotment.


﻿42                Within DepEd National's program budget       one quarter of that found nationwide, and
there is one item that arguably can contribute  argued that lack of maintenance and opera-
to routine operation and maintenance and     tions spending was a "critical" supply factor
might therefore provide a remedy for the gap:  explaining low performance." The overall
School-based Management (SBM) fund-          picture of MOOE for education in ARMM
ing. School-based Management grants are      has therefore improved a great deal as ag-
intended to assist schools to face identified  gregate allocations have been brought in line
challenges, and is to be merged with MOOE    with national averages. But when examined
funds for schools in future budgets.         more closely these numbers obscure a con-
tinuing and crucial "routine operating and
Unfortunately, as yet budgets for SBM        maintenance expenditure gap", and this gap
are both small when compared to regular      has an ongoing impact on frontline service
MOOE allocations, and they are distributed   delivery, especially at primary and elementary
unevenly, with ARMM at a small disadvan-     level.
tage as a proportion of its operating budget.
Including the SBM budget as part of the      Textbooks
MOOE budget available for routine main-      In addition to the ability to regularly maintain
tenance increases the proportion of MOOE     and fund operations in schools, MOOE also
in the operating budget nationwide from 6.5  is a key source of educational materials, chiefly
percent to 7.0 percent, but the correspond-  in the form of textbooks. A comparison of re-
ing rise in ARMM is from 4.8 percent to 5.1  gional textbook allocations reveals no system-
percent, which leaves the ARMM alloca-       atic disadvantage to ARMM, though of course
tion at effectively the same relative level: 74  the impact of any allocation also depends on
percent of the national level. SBM allocations  existing textbook stocks. ARMM is currently
therefore provide some increase in the overall  budgeted for more textbooks than the national
funds available for school improvements      average, and this likely is needed to overcome
everywhere, but do not compensate for the    historically lower stocks (Figure 15).
disparity in routine operations and main-
tenance funding between the ARMM and         Beyond the question of budget allocations,
other regions of the Philippines.            the most important concerns regarding text-
books relate to the execution of the budget:
Distorted expenditure composition with re-   how many books are bought and delivered,
spect to MOOE is not a new phenomenon in     when and on what basis are they distributed?
the ARMM, and not limited to education. A    Textbooks are budgeted by DepEd National,
review of education, health and social protec-  procured centrally and delivered directly to
tion in ARMM published in 2003 found the     school divisions and districts. Even though
proportion of MOOE spending to be about      the DepEd National maintains records of
" World Bank (2003), pp 28, 47


﻿textbook allocations, poor data provision    about what books they might receive, how                  43
from ARIM division and district offices to  many, and when. In the next chapter the
inform national textbook distribution, and   budget execution data shows low and variable
limited dissemination of the information     rates of budget utilization, and the data from
available at national level on the distribu-  the BE-PEIR schools survey also discussed
tion within ARIM means that schools in      in Chapter Five suggests uneven delivery of
ARMMI generally have little information      books to school level.
Figure 15:                                            Source:
Textbook budget comparison per pupil                   EBEIS Online; 2013 GAA/NEP
(SY 2011-12 enrolment, FY 2013 budget)
120
100
80
60
40
20
.2T                                                            -    -  M- W-      2  E -
buge                                        0 
~~~ ..2~
00
.2 .2
Z
Other programs
A large part of the government education     regions. These programs have different objec-
budget consists of about 20 programs bud-    tives, from the provision of key inputs such
geted and managed by DepEd central, of        as classroom construction to programmatic
which most now (since 2012) have earmarked    activities such as support to special schools,
appropriations by region, ARMM included.     Islamic education, or Alternative Learning
As noted earlier, previously these regional al-  Systems. The main programs are listed in
locations were sub-allotted to regions during  Table 8 with the corresponding allocation for
the yearI or administered from neighbouring  ARMir in 2013.


﻿44
Table 8: Centrally-managed fund allocations for ARMM, FY 2013
Program                                     Amount for ARMM (PHP thousands)
Cash Allowance for Newly Created Teaching Positions                       3,118
Purchase of Textbooks and Instructional Materials                       73,284
Support to Private Education - GASTPE                              184,587
Financial Assistance for Regional Science High Schools                     1,634
Support to Special Programs for the Arts and Sports                      1,000
Support to Special Education Centers/Schools                           2,140
Support to ESEP High Schools                                       -
Support to Special Elementary Science Schools
Support to tech-Voc High school Programs                               -
Human Resource Training and Development                               62,140
Purchase of Office and IT equipment                                5,693
Basic Education Facilities                                      N/A
Support for MultiGrade Schools                                   5,775
Computerization Program                                       46,414
Basic Education Madrasah                                      209,700
SBM Installation and Support                                    25,924
Kindergarten Education for All                                  52,110
Mass Production of Math and Science Equipment                           27,692
Alternative Learning Systems                                    7,699
Alternative Delivery Mode Programs                                 4,900
Source: 2013 GAA/NEP; ALS is the allocated amount planned by DepEd Bureau of Alternative Learning Systems,
and may not reflect actual appropriation.
An analysis of the equity in spending across   ing, and execution rules of the programs have
regions for these programs shows variations     been a barrier to transparency between the
whether on a per pupil or per capita basis,     regional education authorities and the national
as would be expected of programs meeting        level making these decisions. A more regular
varying needs and applying varying planning     dialogue has been developing and regional
criteria and processes. Support to special arts  input can be integrated into these programs as
and sports programs has been given as an equal  recommended in Chapter Six.
share (1 million PHP) to all regions. Support
to multigrade schools varies widely per pupil,  One of these programs, Madrasah education
with ARMM below the national average of         (which in fact does not primarily fund ma-
about 9 PHP per student at 6.7 PHP per stu-     drasahs but rather ALIVE subject teachers)
dent. In the past the varying planning, budget-  is a key component of the national education


﻿authorities'spending plans for ARMM. About    ing and execution of this program, which is               45
46 percent of national spending on the pro-   so heavily weighted to the ARMM, may be
gram is allotted for the region, far more than  a good potential candidate for more regional
any other part of the Philippines. The budget-  planning and expenditure management input.
Figure 16:                                             Source:
Total allotment for "Madrasah Education" by region, FY 2013  2013 GAA/NEP
250,000
200,000
150,000
100,000
50,000
0         -    -    02                            0         z
.0o                        .2               .20
..        .2.l
0
.o
z
A second program that is of particular impor-  rated according to these proportions across
tance to the ARMM is Alternative Learning     regions.74
Systems (ALS), as it targets the out of school
youth of which there are disproportion-       The regions and school divisions are required
ate numbers in the region. ALS budgeting      to provide reporting on the number and
provides a good illustration of the problems  identity of the mobile teachers and coordi-
created by the ARMM's public expenditure      nators, and the learners attached to each, to
management syndrome. ALS needs are cal-       verify their inclusion in the budget calcula-
culated by the Bureau of Alternative Learn-   tion. Due to the weaknesses in accountability
ing Services in DepEd National, based on the  and the unclear responsibilities for reporting
numbers of mobile teachers and coordinators   described in Chapter Three, the reporting on
in each region's divisions. The appropriation  ALS needs is very problematic. Despite the
approved in the national budget is then pro-  purported needs, in 2012 ARoM registered
1tBE-PEIR interviews, BALS and DepEd National Budget Department.


﻿46                   the lowest number of ALS enrolees of any            out of 58 mobile teachers were disbursed in
region (10,073), and as of May 2013, only           ARMM, though this latter issue appears to
230 enrolees are in the records held at DepEd       be a problem common to many regions.71
National for that year, and only four of twelve
ARMM      divisions have provided any report-       In this respect, planning for ALS spending is
ing at all for the 2013 year.                      largely driven by the completeness of admin-
istrative reporting and current provision levels,
These weaknesses have a double impact. First,       rather than needs. An analysis of the alloca-
they influence the budget allocation given to       tion of operational budget for mobile teachers
ARMM     by underestimating needs. The lack         and coordinators against the potential learner
of involvement of ARMM      in the budget-          population reveals that allocations vary widely
ing process may weaken the regional office's        between regions from just over 4 PHP per
ability to gather the adequate reporting from       learner to 25 PHP (Figure 17) - all seemingly
its divisions. Second, and perhaps worse,          low allocations.76 ARMM     is not particularly
even the money that is allocated cannot be          disadvantaged, with 9.9 PHP per learner
disbursed without verification that there           against a national average ofjust over 10 PHP,
are both learners on hand, and teachers to          so it would appear budgeting issues for ALS
teach them. In 2012, allowances for only 11         are shared in other parts of the Philippines.
Figure 17:                                                    Source:
Planned ALS Allocation per Target Learner 2013 (PHP per Learner)  Learner estimates from Koyama and Yamauchi, 2013, based on data
from the Functional Literacy, Education and Mass Media Survey 2008;
Allocation data from DepEd BALS planning allocations CY 2013.
30
25
20
15
0
00
a DepEd National BALS documentation.
7Bse on estimated learner populations as determined from FLEMM 2008 household survey by Koyama and Yamauchi (2008),
and BALS allocation planning data.


﻿Capital Outlay                                    has not typically been presented in the na-                     47
Capital expenditure on basic education consists   tional budget, so allocations for the BEFF are
primarily of money for construction and repair    available for 2012 only from year-end report-
of school facilities, as well as smaller amounts  ing. The BEFF is to be allocated according
for programs such as technical and vocational     to color-coded lists of schools with facilities
education or computerization. The provision of    shortages assembled from the EBEIS.77 The
funds for construction and repair are primar-     BEFF for 2012 reveals a strong intention to
ily driven by two sources: the Basic Education    improve ARMM's educational infrastructure,
Facilities Fund (BEFF) within the DepEd           with the region being allotted 928 PHP per
National appropriation, and the School Build-     pupil, against a national average of 387 PHP
ing Program, a national special purpose fund      (Figure 18). ARMM     is thus the most favored
channeled to the Department of Public Works       region in the country for the construction
and Highways for implementation.                  and repair of classrooms, with the National
Capital Region close behind. However, as
The BEFF is by far the larger of the two          discussed in the next Chapter, there are ques-
sources, with about ten times the allocation      tions regarding the efficiency of the execution
nationally of the special purpose fund. The       of these funds and little information on the
regional sub-allotment of both these funds        completion of projects.
Figure 18:                                                  Source:
Basic Education Facilities Fund (BEFF) allotment            2013 NEP (2012 Actual Expenditures)
per pupil by region, FY 2012
1,000
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
M                     X    X                     cc
>  >                       X     C
pupil, ai            0          o 38   PH
0
.0
Z
7 DepEd Order 94/2011 "Guidelines on the Implementation of the Basic Education Facilities Fund' (November 29, 2011).


﻿48                BEFF regional allotments do appear to       the program implemented from ARMM's
respond effectively to differing levels of   neighboring regions. 2009 data, the last avail-
classroom stock and the high allotment for   able, shows about 90 PHP per pupil allocated
ARMM appears amply justified. Indeed, the    to ARMM, about 10 percent below the
records show both NCR and ARMM as            national average of 102 PHP.'9 The School
areas of high priority for classroom shortages.  Building Program appears therefore to be
Seven of ARMMs 13 divisions are in "severe"  allocated based on criteria other than class-
shortage of elementary classrooms and there  room shortages, although the other region of
are over 62 pupils per classroom in the region.  extreme shortage - the NCR - did in 2009
This is compared to a national average of 40  receive the highest per pupil allotment of
pupils, and a national minimum service stan-  this fund. A key question for the linkage of
dard of 45 pupils for single shift schooling. planning needs with composition of budgeted
The NCR appears even worse situated, with    expenditure is therefore how planning for
over 77 students per classroom in 2012.      these two flows can be better integrated to
address classroom needs as a whole.
Secondary classroom shortages are more
evenly distributed around the country than   Overall, government expenditure composi-
those in elementary schools. However, they   tion for ARMM education is broadly in line
are extremely severe in ARMM. In 2012        with national proportions when taking into
the region had 82 enrolled pupils on record  account both DepEd National and DepEd
per classroom against a national average of  ARMM budgets, but excluding LGU and
52, and a policy standard of 45 (55 for high  SPF data. About three quarters of the budget
school). In eleven of twelve ARMM school    is expended on PS, 11 percent on MOOE,
divisions, there is no way to meet the national  and the remainder on CO. As noted above,
standard even under double shifting. NCR is  for 2012, the last year for which the BEFF
again the second worst provided region for   allocation by region is available, the share
secondary school facilities. At the same time  of ARMM expenditure for capital outlay
as efforts to close these gaps are ongoing, in-  has grown to 18 percent, as compared to 10
vestment in ALS and ADM canhelp address      percent across the country. Given increasing
classroom shortages by continuing to provide  emphasis on school building and the lack of
learning opportunities outside the classroom.  routine MOOE already discussed, the ratio
suggests increased attention will be needed to
Determining the regional allotments within   the recurrent operations and maintenance im-
the School Building Program Special Purpose  plications of the new infrastructure, perhaps
Fund is more difficult, both as allotments to  through continued provision of school repair
regions are not made in advance, and because  and maintenance grants.
there has been some school building through
" All classroom gap data from EBEIS Online (SY 2011-12)
"Source on SBP


﻿Figure 19:                                                                                                           49
DepEd national and overall ARMM education
expenditure composition, FY 2012
DepEd National                                       ARMM
Education
Source:
2013 GAA/NEP (2012 Actual expenditures)
Localgovernmentunit contributions                   other regions in the Philippines (Figure 20).
LGU expenditures on education, culture and          ARMM     LGUs barely register any education
arts, and manpower development show that            spending, while other regions devote between
ARMMIV    LGUs spend little of their own re-        about one and a half to 15 percent to these
sources on supporting education compared to         activities.
Figur 20:                                                     Source:
% LGU spending on education, culture & arts,                  2011 Statement of Revenue and Expenditures, Department of Interior
and manpower development (2011)                               and Local Government (Updated 2013).
16%
14%
12%
10%
8%
6%
4%
2%
0%/e
F,   .2     0                 ~    ~    .  0          .            0
.2 o)                            0    c2    0


﻿50                One key source of education-specific resourc-  In summary, beyond the aggregate allocations
es through LGUs is the Special Education     for basic education in ARNIM, this closer
Fund (SEF).'Ihe SEF is levied as one percent  look at the composition of expenditures in
of the real property tax collected by the LGU  terms of their economic classification and
intended for specific support to finance public  distribution across different programs reveals
education.so The problem is, as with other el-  several important concerns with respect to
ements of LGU financing, the collections and  education budgets. Chief among these are
therefore expenditures through the SEF vary  low routine MOOE spending, large and un-
widely across the country and are generally  even variations in program spending between
higher in more prosperous localities. Across  the ARNM and other regions of the Philip-
the country, "LGUs account for roughly half  pines in part driven by poor reporting and
of capital expenditures in basic education   lack of budget participation by ARNIM, a
through the SEF financed through real estate  growing emphasis on capital outlay that may
taxes"."' The lack of such funds in AR1\4M   not be matched by adequate recurrent spend-
can be assumed to stem from a combination    ing, and the regressive effect of LGU spend-
of very low rates of LGU collections, low    ing on education.
property values and the ambiguity over devo-
lution of education responsibilities outlined  The ARMM PEM syndrome and distortions
in Chapter Three.                            in budget composition
It is important to understand that these ex-
This means that LGU financing of education,  penditure composition issues arise out of the
to the degree it exists, is highly unequal. These  ARIM Public Expenditure Management
variations do not compensate for variations in  Syndrome described in Chapter1Tree. As with
national spending, and national government   public expenditure as a whole in the ARNIM,
spending on education is not designed to     the fundamental issue facing basic education
offset LGU-level inequalities in fiscal capac-  is that the government "budget" for educating
ity: there is "no evidence of such a pattern  children is made up of different components
of vertical coordination".82 In fact, LGU    each planned, budgeted and subsequently
spending tends to reinforce existing resource  managed by different institutions across three
inequalities, accentuating regional differences  levels of budgeting - national sector agencies
in human capital accumulation with serious   (the DepEd National), the regional govern-
implications for regional income distribution:  ment (in the ARG appropriation), and other
"LGU spending is strongly regressive and has  local government units (Table 9).
become more so, especially in education".Ia
80 Republic Act 2447 (1968).
fWorod Bank (2011), p. 74.
drWorid Bank/Australian Aid (2012), p 31.
s3Wored Bank (2011), p 10.


﻿Table 9: Budgeting basis for education components                                                       51
Budget Component                   Budget Relationship                 Budget Basis
PS for existing staff              ORG-DBM Bureau D                    Incremental
New teachers                       DepEd CO-DBM Bureau B               Teacher-Student Gaps
MOOE                               ORG-DBM Bureau D                    Incremental/Negotiated
Centrally Managed Funds             DepEd CO-DBM Bureau B              Various Criteria, more or less transparent
School Building
Textbooks
GASTPE
Madrasah
Alternative Learning
Etc...
Special Purpose Fund - School Building  DepEd CO-DBM-DPWH              Executive Political Priorities
PDAF                               Congress-President                  Legislative Priorities
LGU Education Spending             LGU                                 Local Priorities& Fiscal Capacity
Donor/NGO spending                 Donor-Partner                       Various
Source: Authors
By far the largest of the budgeting "chan-    For this ARG channel, it is crucial that the
nels" for basic education in the ARM\4M is the  planning and budgeting relationships be-
education budget within the ARG appropria-    tween the constituent agencies of the ARMM
tion and the ARMM allocation within the       regional government and the ORG function
centrally managed funds budgeted by DepEd     well in order for the ORG to aggregate their
National. As noted above, the former covers   submissions into a single budget proposal un-
the vast majority of PS and MOOE expenses     der national guidelines. In past years, a lack of
including the budget for routine operations   information on DepEd ARMM performance
and maintenance.'Ihis "ARG channel" is        and final budget for the previous year have
budgeted and negotiated with the DBM as       meant that the ORG began budget prepara-
part of the aggregated ARMM Regional          tion without filfilling basic Budget Account-
Government Appropriation by the Office of     ability Reporting (BAR) requirements, and
the Regional Governor, not by the DepEd       was therefore at a significant disadvantage in
ARMM. It is therefore determined by criteria  its relationship to DBM. At the same time, the
negotiated between ORG and DBM, and not       relationship between the DepEd ARMM and
directly based on education planning guide-   ORG did not support the development of a
lines. In practice this means it has tended to  strong evidence-base for spending proposals in
be determined incrementally                  education, a problem that also affected other
departments. In this sense, the "intra-ARMM


﻿52                budgeting process is as important as the rela-  The second "DepEd National" channel,
tionship with national government.           budgeted or later divided as sub-allotments
to the region within the DepEd National
Frequent leadership and policy turnover in   budget, covers the majority of capital outlay,
the ARMM have worsened this situation.       as well as operating expenditures for many
Between 2006 and 2010 the region had five    programs that bear on the effectiveness of
education secretaries and experienced two    basic education spending.'These programs
"management takeovers" in which accounting,  each have their own planning and budgeting
budgeting and cash functions were taken on   criteria, set by DepEd National - in some
by the ORG in response to irregularities. A  cases with input from its subordinate of-
review in 2010 concluded there would "not    fices - but without any direct input from the
be one member of staff that has institutional  ARMM authorities due to their "autonomous
memory with regard to budget preparation", a  status". In this sense, the ARA4M education
striking illustration of the potential need for  authorities have little or no direct input into
capacity support from national institutions."  the two main budgeting processes that affect
their resources.
Figure 21:
The two main channels of ARMM education budget preparation
Congress                                  ctaey          p    N   o-National GovernmenttDBM
SBF
ARMM ORG                         DepEd
National          DW
PS an MOOECentrally Managed
Funds (CM F)
ARMM DepEd
Divisions, Districs      t                       Budget Influence
and Schools two mi                             Weakinfluence
dFunds Flowelease
84 Tribal Helm (2010), p 22.


﻿The fragmentation of budget preparation in  regular MOOE allocations (Box 4), the ARG            53
this way helps explain the skewed composi-  has received incremental budget increases
tion of expenditure described in the previous  from DBM. Furthermore, while the educa-
section. The operating MOOE allocations    tion budget for the rest of the Philippines is
for ARMM are budgeted as part of the ARG   prepared in cooperation with Bureau B of the
appropriation, while the DepEd National's  DBM, that of the ARMM is with Bureau D.
planning and budgeting process determine   Even inside the DBM, ARMM education
those for the rest of the Philippines. While  budgeting is fragmented and isolated from its
DepEd National applies a needs-based       own education budgeting specialists.
planning norm that has recently increased
Box 4:The NtionalDeparment o Eduction budge forlteretos the hlines isdalitotrfr
Expeditue   inrodced  sysem fneds-bsprepedin cooperatoned it Brau Ber cof teude
norms ~ ~  ~     ~    ~    ~    DM    that fO thee ARMMs isr within  Burea D.oaino MOrcie
aEven in        r    c    00     0 budge       isd the     M  AM     e
beu e                   f   r fo w     dt i s fragenfte   nated fm D       i
avaiabl, i lie wih god owe n  uationtc 1  hs mrvmns budgeting specialists.
planin nomta  aecently increase cretpann   om     DpdAIIMwsecuermtepoesa
Boxs 4: The NOEaloationa Deatethtiesu of Edcaio has rcrrn bde allocations are increasted grdalaitotrfr
normslowng fort MOO ture normsl for panning theoritin aloainoAMOsrcie
aloato in00 reouce intebde. Thoorla is basedt onMMMO                   otnustebdee
3-...             - 20   0HI 0e      0.pi             inreetal bewe ORG -a-   d DBIM 00miish
DepEd Ntn  00r w0ch0 data i l      U   rtniatly wle Nuationa intoded
3,06      .0HP pe clsro               th plnnn prces In 2~014 impovddalgu
avalabe, n lneithgooinerntioalracice bteen DmproEmeNtnts dgeting fdMOOEafor
For elemeta     schools the cr  pn  nor     DepEd AR e lderfr   th pros as
calmslateandMOOE allocatinntha the s um the  ther raeurnt budetca ibes  ngotrid
anefolwig                                 parfcorhsned-aeapoc t tof the oeverllpen ARG budgetaprpiain. Aors
*i  40,00 PH per school              0ao  rlA      M   E o  ci  to b bud
*    2cre000 PHPdern pupil            inree     l b  e   OG a      D , d
Tbis gap is therefore not the result of conscious  routine maintenance and operations require-
neglect, and national government has even  ments as described earlier in the Chapter.
compensated in a sense with greater alloca-
tions in other portions of its own education  just as the DepEd AR dM is separated from
budget. Nevertheless, because those budgets   the preparation of the recurrent budget and
are for specific programs, this effort does not  therefore MOOE, they are also isolated from
balance the shortage of routine MOgE down-  the preparation of the program allocations for
loads to schools through the ARG and DepEd  ARM within the DepEd National appro-
ARNIc. As a result, ARIvm schools become  priation. As seen earlie DepEd National has
significantly disadvantaged when it comes to  in fact made generous allocations for ARM
i ARMM BE-PEIR interview, DepEd National Planning Department Staff (November 2012).


﻿54                to overcome historical neglect in many areas,  maintenance expenditure or to staff them
such as the construction of new education fa-  may be compromised by the lack of integra-
cilities and the provision for ALIVE education  tion between capital and recurrent budgets.
services. However, in other lower profile
areas that are important for the quality of ser-  In sum, the ARMM PEM syndrome re-
vice delivery, the needs of ARMd\M can easily  sults in a basic education budgeting process
remain unconsidered since ARMM authorities    that is very fragmented, not comprehensive,
are excluded from the process. Weak report-   and with limited participation by the main
ing by districts and divisions within ARMM    education provider in ARMM.'Ihe result-
as with the Alternative Learning Systems or   ing expenditure allocations are distorted, and
textbooks exacerbates this problem, undermin-  lack transparency and predictability for the
ing even sound planning processes.            ARMM government and the region's citizens.
This makes the formation of strategic linkages
Similarly, the planning process of DepEd Na-  between regional education policy and plans
tional determines allocations for the capital  and the budget very difficult. In this sense,
budget. As seen above, national government    adjusting budget composition cannot simply
has prioritized increased capital expendi-    be a matter of reallocating available resources
ture for ARMM to close the classroom gap.     to new priorities. Instead, problems in budget
However, this spending remains unconnected    composition are a function of deeper struc-
to the recurrent budget, meaning linking      tural features of the ARAM PEM system,
MOOE spending or increases in staff to the    and need to be addressed in that light. Before
new facilities is difficult or impossible. As  looking at how to do so in Chapter Six, the
new facilities become available due to gener-  next chapter introduces some issue of budget
ous construction budgets, the ability of the  execution and service delivery.
DepEd ARMM to provide operating and


﻿CHAPTER          FIVE:                       efficiency and effectiveness of budget ex-              55
ISSUES IN        BUDGET                      ecution, because institutions and processes
for releasing budgeted funds vary between
the different components of the education
SERVICE        DELIVERY                      system. This divided system can reinforce the
disconnect that already exists at the planning
and budgeting stage by causing slow, uneven,
or inconsistent release of funds.
While the process of budgeting is central to  Unfortunately, the ARMM PEM syndrome
public services, equally important is the ques-  also makes it more difficult to accurately
tion how effectively does the budget reach   assess budget execution due to the gaps
the frontline? Analysis of budget allocations  between local, regional and national systems,
and composition such as that presented in    and poor accountability and reporting in the
Chapter Four is only part of the picture.    region. As the 2012 Basic Education Pub-
Equally significant in determining outcomes  lic Expenditure Review for the Philippines
is technical or operational efficiency. This  notes, "[t]racking actual execution against the
chapter looks at the institutions that execute  original authorization is a complicated task"
the ARMM education budgets already dis-     that "dilutes accountability for expenditure
cussed, and the transformation of those funds  management" even in those areas of the Phil-
at school level into essential education inputs  ippines outside ARMM.16
including teachers, textbooks, operating
expenditures and classrooms. It also presents  Budget execution procedures in the Philip-
selected results from a school level survey of  pines are complex and changing, and this is
163 ARMM primary, elementary and sec-        doubly so for the ARMM. Allotment by the
ondary schools, which provides a window      DBM of funds appropriated to a given agency
into the reality that these problems create for  takes place through two main means: Agency
students in the region.                      Budget Matrix (ABMs) for "standing" recur-
rent or regular payments such as Personal Ser-
Budget execution and the                     vices, and Special Allotment Release Orders
ARMM PEM syndrome                            (SAROs) for specific programs or items that
Chapter Three described the fragmentation    require clearance. Once expenditure is ap-
of public expenditure management in the      proved, DBM releases a Notice of Cash Allo-
ARMM, and Chapter Four spelled out the       cation (NCA) that informs the agency that the
implications of these divided institutions for  money can be liquidated. As in many systems
education budgets. Fragmentation of public   worldwide, these budget execution steps are
expenditure management also threatens the    intended to control expenditure by checking
reWored Bank (2012), p 56.


﻿56                it is being used for the intended purposes and  funds. The national DBM has in recent years
that it conforms to agency and national cash  taken the curious position of both requiring
planning and availability.                   this reporting to be completed, while consider-
ing it to be spurious and therefore not a valid
Just as budgeting is divided, the channels    basis for future new spending requests."
and procedures for executing basic education
funds are also divided between the com-      The execution rates of the Personal Services
ponents executed by the ARMM Regional        budget to the level of the region may be
Government - PS and regular or "routine"     presumed to be quite high (though not 100
MOOE - and the programs managed by           percent), but the execution of salaries and
DepEd National. In the case of the majority  other compensation, and their distribution to
of the recurrent budget, managed by DepEd    teachers presents a number of major issues.
ARMM and the ORG, funds are down-            First, the processing of the payroll by DepEd
loaded to the regional office for distribution  ARMM has not been institutionalized and
as salaries or school and district level MOOE  experiences delays. Second, the integrity of
payments. For the other programs, a range of  the data in the payroll has long been suspect,
different policies and procedures determine  and ongoing efforts are needed to cleanse it
how these funds are obligated and disbursed  of spurious entries and introduce processes
depending on the program.                    to prevent future problems.'The loose control
of payroll and the resulting inaccuracies has
Personal services andpayroll management      also played into the historical role of ARM
The execution of the Personal services budget  institutions in providing a patronage vehicle
is relatively simple, in that the appropriation  for local and national politicians, rather than
is held with the ARG budget and therefore    as providers of quality public services.
downloaded directly through the same proce-
dures governing PS for other departments. As  Widespread suspicions of ghost teachers and
these are ABM allotments, they are released  the integrity of the ARM education payroll
without additional clearance. The ORG tasks  and human resource information systems have
the DepEd ARMM management with the           been key concerns of the caretaker administra-
transfers or physical distribution of salaries.  tion since it took office in early 2012, and these
The actual rate of budget execution for the  were motivating factors behind the request
ARG budgeted education PS and MOOE is        for assistance through this project. DepEd
impossible to derive: interviews verified that  ARMM themselves estimated that these
SAOB reporting for DepEd ARMM was pre-       problems were resulting in a leakage of about
pared by the ORG budget office without ac-   30 million pesos per month." A diagnostic of
tual expenditure reports for recent years, giving  human resources management and payroll ser-
a notional 100 percent execution rate for these  vices at DepEd ARis  was therefore under-
oAuthor interviews: DBM and DepEd ARMM staff.
bPresentation of DepEd ARMM Assistant Secretary Noor Mohammad Saada, June 2012.


﻿taken as a component of the BE-PEIR project,        ary increments for seniority." These factors                     57
and issues of teacher absence were specified as     impact the payroll within the parameters of
a focus for the school survey.89                    the plantilla as different staff fill approved
staff posts. The HRIS was both incompletely
The diagnostic process identified three broad       populated (with only about 80 percent of the
weaknesses in the hiring, payroll and human         required 22,000 entries) and was unable to
resource information management system:             link unique teacher identities to particular
school assignments or generate a region-wide
1.   Lack of integration or communica-          list as it only processed data by division.92
tion between HRIS and Payroll processes;        This also made it difficult to validate teacher
2.   Weak accountability and safeguards         presence as part of the surprise school survey.
in hiring and payroll entry and processing;     It is important to note that school principals
3.   Lack of skilled staff to ensure accu-      appeared to report teacher's assigned to their
racy in data in both HRIS and Payroll.9o        schools relatively accurately, but this had no
real feedback to the HRIS system.93 The
There are three databases which may be used         HRIS, due to technical issues related to its
to keep track of the notional teacher workforce     design and the scale-up and transfer of serv-
in ARIM: the approved DBM       plantilla (the     ers to national level, does not have an inte-
approved staffing establishment against which       grated payroll processing capability. While in
budgets are made), the payroll system, and          theory the approval system for data entry to
the Human Resource Information System               the HRIS is stronger than that of the payroll,
(HRIS). At the beginning of the BE-PEIR            in reality a lack of trained data entry staff
project these three systems showed different        meant that the data was entered by casual
numbers of employees and had not been cross-        labor using a single user-ID, and errors were
checked. Out of the 22,493 plantilla positions      detected during the diagnostic exercise.
filled, only 20,996 were in the payroll and only
18,780 in the Human Resources Information           In turn, the payroll must be up to date and
System (HRIS). These systems were not inte-         free of spurious entries to ensure that only the
grated with each other, and each was compro-        correct salaries are processed and distributed.
mised in important ways.                            The regional payroll system runs on a sepa-
rate platform (earlier devolved from DepEd
The Human Resources Information System              National) with each School Division having
(HRIS) should maintain the most current             separate databases - thus duplicate names,
information about staffing, including reg-          errors, and discrepancies across Divisions
istering new incoming teachers (and their           cannot be validated automatically. There is
qualifications) as well as retirements and sal-     no system to check payroll data with that
8Australian Aid engaged Carole Belisario, HR operations analyst and Jonathan Masalonga, IT expert: Belisario and Masalonga (2013).
atBelisario and Masalonga (2013), p. 6.
The HRIS runs on a web-based application using MS SQL Server hosted under DepEd national. The HRIS program was developed through
the BEAM Project of Australian Aid tor regions XI, XII and ARMM. It was turned over to DepEd Central Office at the end ot the project in 2011. The
nationwide scale up on the use of HRIS is under DepEd Central management.
92uBelisario and Masalonga (2013), p. 5.
s While the HRIS platform was initially rolled out for ARMM at the regional level, the server was subsequently transferred to DepEd Central.
Connectivity issues then made it de facto impossible to update information in a timely fashion.


﻿58                 of official plantilla position numbers, and    civil society organization (CSO) represen-
employee absences, transfers, termination and  tatives in April and May 2013 to the vari-
retirement were not regularly being input-     ous divisions to distribute payroll cheques
ted. Informality, discretion and a the lack of  manually, with the exception of Maguin-
a processing calendar were observed in the     danao school-based personnel that picked up
processing of new entries, transfers and other  cheques at the ORG Complex (Figure 22).
payroll-related requests.94                    A significant number of cheques were left un-
claimed, suggesting ghost teachers. However,
These weaknesses led to delays in the release of  this approach had a number of limitations.
salaries and inaccurate salary payments, exces-  Even if cheques were collected, this was no
sive retirement terminal leave payments, and   guarantee that teachers would actually teach
fraudulent payments to "ghost" employees. The  regularly. For many bonafide teachers, physi-
discrepancies and delays also have an impact   cally coming to central points also involved
on budgeting as they affect the release of     significant time and financial costs.
funding for additional plantilla positions from
DBM as reports are difficult to reconcile.     At the same time, the project team carried
In this situation, DepEd ARIM man-            out a triangulation of data between the three
agement sought to validate the payroll by      database systems for a sample of school
deploying RPSU personnel accompanied by        divisions (Box 5). Subsequently, the DepEd
Figure 22:
Payroll Cheque Collection in ARMM
94 Belisario and Masalonga (2013), p. 9.


﻿ARMM has taken steps to cleanse the payroll  with the payroll database. A new operations         59
database. Following the diagnosis of the sys-  manual (see below) specifies the use of this
tem flaws, the technical assistance to DepEd-  report as a validation document required for
ARMM helped clean up the payroll list by   the processing of the disbursement voucher
correcting or deleting names that are not  that releases the payroll cheques. This system,
eligible for payment of salaries. As a direct  however is a temporary fix that should not
result of these efforts by DepEd ARMM, 400  substitute for continued efforts by DepEd
spurious data sets have been removed from  National or DepEd ARMM to launch a
the payroll, resulting in an estimated saving of  functional HRIS with local server access and
800 million PHP per year.95                an integrated payroll module.
A software solution was also developed     A final important issue for Personal Service
to manually link the cleaned HRIS to the   execution has been a history of varied hiring
payroll database. This tool generates a list  procedures and criteria for selection, resulting
of duplicate or inaccurate entries using the  in allegations of subjectivity fraud and delays
HRIS as reference, and cross validating them  in the deployment of teachers in the schools.
Bnta                                           ases He a o ceus this sysem, duplic66
Tringuatin   Pyrol nd lanill daa) e at sioal or De e  AMM si tof aunchantlafrBslnai
of HRIS paroll dupicaed etris iallt funcdtione,as HiS wi locaal sre cc eessand bewn18(i
800bse millions PHP pernce year.epayoIn itgrteayroLnmo dSule         ahprvne nLaa        e u
Ao aesl    tion wa ualson eveloped  A,7  finals iportan issueresnale Sincpetorspiou,wh
tomnulyiik bh leandlct H ries  s the  teeto sbeen  a histor of0 vatried shiringonsprustxae
payol daabse Thsto  weeraeslite pof rocedurnestiatind cieifrsction, ubresul Tng eros ab u
ofe duplicateio ornife inaccurate entries usin the in allegnation of subecivty frau andmpet delay
HRSaveeec,aros aidtingt them plni nd the dpalym entr,teache in thae hools. daandmr
Tragltodayrolland. Plarintila da) ldaabs revealed spurious orbeso    hsoresoviac
o   pcate enes winhallftrentemaaaes dues in          n
andplatilla(ayllown prcessig, ad acfaiue to acue leave
datbastie b atalnepeatnd absences   Thnr the payoll In total,ntoin  ndevl
LocalizaionLa hetriangulhatson reveale 7,772 g error or pos-io  sige  oodc
sionsofte hirelscle dihuliatessent across the theessitst  iiinrscolovrf
of~~~~~n 862fiaios  weren seosn  n -ectied fouth inesonne.itdo  hpyolaepyi
teacheroverL Thser trgton otentiieds dulcatey eti of shos.Hwvrtesho
As a rsult,the aious kecinstf nve bothibe theo plantill and thentpayroll
in ARMMhasdatabse. The reinlpyoldtscoe rfteeale      ftahr asne n
teDpdAM      ad ovenr0tatsed  uplctdGSSnm
bers Analysiso ofd thelng                                    plantill fo8Bsian1Twi
eliaro ad Msaong (213, p 8-. he ocaiztio La (A 890)ais t  awproit and Larnaof delcSurs reveoaledetee 18 (in
aonsfullat660 er                                    s      one spurios t
identification .                   .     nube. These eror maybedu
to eg* a                           .omiato ofporadnomlt dat
entry.6failure6to update6personne data andmor
Subjective and partial interpretation of theThrhabenoaciem          itigadevl
Localization Law has meant that school divi- uaigtmatheRioasgndocnut
sions often hire locally without assessment  flo  pvst odvsoso       col ovrf
of qualifications, often choosing non-eligible thtpronliseonheayllrehs-
teachers over LET passers from other areas. cayreotnatshl.Hwvr,hecol
As a result, the quality of teaching staffsuvydcrbdelwhpdtoinifte
in AMM hs dclind.scoee thd              pbeoteersnitornc andvl
uting Deam atMV thaeein  aned mcnuc
followaurvisitsdoMaiviionsaor2chool, o3verif
96 Belisario and Masalonga (2013), p.8-41. TeLclzto  a  10 ist rn roiyi iigo ecest oa eiet,bti
consideration of qualifications.


﻿60                 needed division supervisor posts in the 2014    further strengthen the integrity of the system.
budget, in line with staffing already available  This could be through the approval of additional
in other regions of the Philippines. Availability  supervisor, finance and data entry posts, and
of biometric scanners should also improve the   continued attention to developing the HRIS to
situation, assuming they are used to inform    its technical potential. The current addition of
payroll processing and the management infor-    new division supervisors in the 2014 budget is a
mation system.                                  welcome first step in this direction.
An operations manual has been developed         MOOE
in consultation with regional and division      MOOE expenditures, like PS, appear out-
level staff with roles in personnel and payroll  wardly to be effectively executed - informa-
processes. The manual sets out roles, structures,  tion on the monthly downloads of MOOE
and defines agreed principles guiding HR and    to schools or district offices are available and
payroll operations. It lays out steps for all key  suggest the MOOE budget is executed in a
HR processes including hiring, new forms        timely fashion. However, liquidation reports of
and timetables, and establishes enhanced ac-    this routine MOOE from schools and districts
countability for concerned offices/staff posi-  are absent, meaning there is no reliable way to
tions. Institutionalizing the procedures in this  know the actual use to which the funds have
manual throughout ARMM is a vital task          been put. As noted in Chapter Two, the re-
going forward to sustain these reforms.         sponse by DBM to the failure to demonstrate
expenditure needs and history is to budget
The final report of the TA to DepEd ARMM        incrementally rather than based on needs,
includes recommendations for sustaining the     thereby perpetuating the relatively low levels of
new business processes, staff capacity building  routine operating and maintenance funding.
and internal reorganization." The creation of
an internal audit unit to concentrate on data   The weaknesses of budget execution for the
integrity within the DepEd ARMM is rec-         recurrent budget - PS and MOOE - chan-
ommended to complement the oversight of         neled through the ARMM are therefore not so
the Action Center for Education (ACE) over      much in the process of obligations or releases,
procedures, timelines and hiring processes. The  but in the poor integrity of the payroll and
long-term integration of the payroll and HRIS   the inadequate reporting on funds use. These
system is the key structural reform needed. Cru-  deficiencies mean that salary is used for non-
cial also is continued dialogue with the DBM    productive or even unauthorized purposes, and
and DepEd National both to ensure alignment     MOOE needs are not well known.This situa-
with national human resources policies, but     tion constrains the budget possibilities for the
most importantly to coordinate on the use of    ARVV by reinforcing a cycle of mistrust that
the savings gained from payroll cleansing to    encourages DBM to continue budgeting for
iaBelisario and Masalonga (2013), p. 14-15.


﻿staff and operations and maintenance incre-       additional steps to the national budget execu-                  61
mentally rather than on the basis of plans.       tion process.00 In general, the allotment for
regions requires an additional "sub-Allotment
Execution processes                               Release Order" or "sub-ARO" in addition to
of centrally-managedfunds                         the SARO used for the lump sum. For some
The execution of the many important programs      funds, notably ALS, the ARMM     regional al-
for ARMM basic education that are managed         lotment is handed over directly to the regional
by DepEd National present considerably more       education office via a funding cheque, poten-
complications.Ihe funds must be released to       tially saving some time.
the DepEd National first, and then to regions
or divisions, according to a set of guidelines and  This procedure is cumbersome even for the
procedures prepared by the DepEd National,        national agency, never mind for the ARMM. In
as well as several different mechanisms for the   most cases funds or the inputs purchased with
sub-allotment process set out by the DBM.         them are distributed to schools divisions offices,
The policies surrounding release of funds have    with the regional offices playing a managerial or
been frequently changed and this is a key factor  oversight role. For example, funds for the distri-
influencing the effective execution of education  bution of textbooks are sub-allotted directly to
resources. The 2012 Philippines-wide educa-       school divisions offices, based on the issuance of
tion public expenditure review found that policy  a Notice of Cash Allotment (NCA) from the
instability surrounding the procedures for key    corresponding region's DBM   office.'Ihe region
flows such as furniture, school-building, and     education office oversees delivery.101
textbooks had major negative impacts on the
pace of budget execution Philippines-wide: "As    However, for ARMM      the purported "au-
desirable as they may be, policies, operational   tonomy" of the regional DepEd (as an agency
changes, or rule changes create a risk of imple-  of the ARG) works against it. The DBM    does
mentation failure".99                             not have an office in ARMM    and so sub-al-
lotments and NCAs cannot be handled within
Many of the major programs of the DepEd -         the region and thus do not reach the regional
notably Basic Education Facilities and text-      authorities. Consequently, textbooks and funds
books - have been appropriated to the DepEd       for other programs may be downloaded di-
budget as a lump sum.1That is, at the time of     rectly to school divisions, at times without the
budgeting they were not broken down by re-        knowledge of the ARMM      region, and poten-
gion, and therefore specific clearance for each   tially without subsequent reporting back to the
allotment to regions are needed from DBM          region. In addition, in the national DepEd ac-
during the budget year. The DepEd then must       counts, the execution of the funds for ARMM
"sub-allot" the funds to the regions or other     is not broken out, rather being subsumed
administrative levels as needed, introducing      under the central office. Therefore, while it is
9 World Bank (2012), p 73.
100 DepEd ARMM Regional Sub-Allotments work through an Authority to Debit Account (ADA) which authorizes download to Region Offices and
to Schools Divisions. For ARMM these procedures involve either a reversal of SARO or a specific funding cheque to the new recipient.
101 DepEd Order 49/2012, "Policies and Guidelines on the Utilization of Distribution Funds for Centrally Procured Textbooks (TXs), Teachers
Manuals (TMs), and K to 12 Basic Instructional Materials (BIMs)" (June 15, 2012).


﻿62                  possible to calculate obligation rates for several  to illustrate just how different monitoring
key education programs by region, the same        of the execution of some of the most crucial
information is not available for ARMM.            parts of the education budget is for ARMM.
Bear in mind, that it is this component of the
What is clear is that central office obligation   budget that was increased so dramatically to
rates of key funds such as the Basic Education    tackle acute classroom shortfalls, meaning the
Facilities Fund (BEFF), textbooks, and alterna-   increased budget allocation is likely having less
tive delivery modes, fall dramatically behind     impact on the ground than the budgets alone
those of the individual, non-ARNM  , regions.     would suggest.03
For example, Regional BEFF and textbook fund
utilization rates for 2012 were both above 70     A similar challenge might be found in Ma-
percent for all regions, while the central office  drasah education, which as seen in the last
allotments for the same fund were only 8 percent  chapter has been heavily funded for ARMM.
and 24 percent used respectively. Unfortunately,  In terms of utilization, the madrasah education
it is not possible to impute a value for ARMM     program was 32 percent obligated on average,
execution or obligation rates from this difference,  but the central office rate, in which ARMM
both because ARMM finds are co-mingled with       is included, was 16 percent." While a direct
the other aspects of the national program, and    conclusion about the ARMM     execution rate
because some programs also implemented some       cannot be drawn, it appears certain to be very
of their components for ARMM via neighbor-        low.
ing regions. Nevertheless, it appears clear that
problems experienced in efficiently disbursing    Some of these complications may be improved
resources to the other administrative regions are  somewhat by recent changes to national public
compounded for ARMM.                              financial management processes. In the 2013
budget the regional sub-allotment is being
The sheer lack of information, and likely         specified in the appropriation. For the 2014
underperformance, is brought into relief by       FY there will be no SAROs to approve allot-
the 2012 BEFF project status report. While        ments, only NCAs. In this sense, the budgeted
ARMM's target of 1,032 for new classrooms is      appropriation becomes automatically available
actually the highest in the country, at year's end  to the agencies in question, which should elim-
the program had reported no projects com-         mate one major source of delay to the execu-
pleted, nor any even ongoing.02 Admittedly       tion of central finds intended for regional use.
this is against a very low 22 percent comple-     However, this raises its own questions about
tion rate nationwide, but the national average    the procedures that can be adopted to con-
for the percentage of allocated new classrooms    trol expenditures intended for ARMVI     e
at least begun was 81 percent. While it is likely  continued absence of a DBM   presence in the
the rate of zero is a reporting failure, it goes  region implies downloads will still be handled
102 CY 2012 Basic Education Facilities Fund, Project Status (December 31, 2012).
103  lack of progress on education facilities construction is an issue of such concern that the Regional Governor has tasked staff from his
Office of Special Concerns to physically verity each individual project.
104 Statements of Allotments and Obligations (FY 2012).


﻿through the DepEd Central Office.                                                                                 63
An additional point of interest are the high      The survey was implemented across an initial
levels of "continuing appropriations" found       sample of 180 schools drawn randomly from
across these important parts of the education     the full list of ARNIM  schools. There were 140
sector. These figures reflect unobligated CO or   primary and elementary schools (out of total
MOOE funds that can be carried over from          2173 in the 2011 school list) and 40 second-
the previous year, to be spent in the second      ary (of 298 total in the 2011 school list) in
year. However, in a major change the 2014         the sample. After replacement of inaccessible
national budget policy specifies that there will  sample schools and some elimination due
be only "one year validity of appropriations",    to data irregularities, there were 163 schools
meaning this process is disallowed. Should        remaining in the final sample for analysis. The
these levels of unused appropriations continue,   survey collected information through ques-
the loss of resources to those programs that are  tionnaires administered to the school principal
slow to execute would be substantial.105          or ranking teacher, the Barangay captain where
the school is located, and direct observation of
Frontline service delivery: the schools survey    the teachers and students present in the class-
The efficiency with which budgeted funds are      room on the day of the survey.
executed shapes the levels and timeliness of
education inputs available, but fiscal data alone  The survey used a surprise visit and direct
cannot confirm if the staff and other inputs are  observation approach that is standard in
actually available to deliver education servic-   provider absence surveys.106 While the teams
esat the frontline. The ARIM  government         had authorization by the regional education
has had specific concerns in the area of human    authorities, the list of sample schools was kept
resources and school conditions. To investigate   confidential until survey teams were deployed
these issues, the project implemented a school    to their respective divisions. Only 21 schools
and community-level survey with local part-       reported being forewarned in any way of the
ners the Coalition for Bangsamoro Civil So-       visit, with only 5 of these aware of the timing.
ciety (CBCS), between 4 and 8 March 2013.         The trade-off is that the use of surprise visits,
The survey gathered representative data on:       while essential to collect absence data, may
undermine the quality of other types of data -
*    Patterns of teacher and pupil absence;    such as financial or administrative information
* Perceptions of school and community - collected due to the lack of preparation time
leaders on education challenges;               for school officers.
* Textbook delivery;
*    Community and Local Government            A striking result from the survey was the high
Unit inputs (in cash or in kind) to basic      number of schools that were not open at all
education.                                     on the day that the survey teams visited, and
105 NBM 115 (December 28, 2012), p 1.
106 Rogers and Koziol (2011), p. 11.


﻿64                  which therefore could not be included in the      official teaching period and 6 schools reported
statistical sample. Altogether 29 out of 163      that they had already completed the year. This
schools visited (18 percent) were closed on       raises questions around the degree of rigor in
the day of the survey visit. A portion of this     observing the annual education calendar. The
school closure is related to the proximity of the  reasons given by schools for these closures are
survey to the end of the school year: the survey  as follows (Table 10):
took place three weeks prior to the end of the
Table 10:            Reason                                 Frequency     %
Reasons for          Closed for year                        6             21
school closure
during survey        Staff meeting                          6             21
Division meeting                       3             10
Unknown                                3             10
Classes finished for day               2             7
Classrooms in use for NAT              2             7
Local conflict                         2             7
Biometric update                       1             3
Exam preparation                       1             3
LET exams                              1             3
Postponed for feeding program          1             3
Students attending another school      1             3                Source:
2013 CBCS-Australian Aid-WB
Total                                  29            100
Total                                  29        _   100              ARMM School Survey
While the number of closed schools is too         expenditure management systems described
small to permit statistical analysis of reasons   in this report may create excess demands on
by province or division, it is striking that 19   teachers and increased absences or school
of the 29 closures were in Lanao del Sur. As      closure, further damaging education quality.
will be seen below, this province also regis-
tered very high absence rates for teachers and    Most dramatically, one school could not be
pupils in some of its divisions. When gradua-     located at all, and two more were closed due
tion and year-end activities (including "closed   to local violence. Even if some of the impact
for year") are excluded, 23 schools were shut     of the survey timing is removed, the sample
for other reasons. Over half of these remain-     implies that on average it is likely that 15
ing schools - 13 in fact - were reportedly        percent or more of ARNIM     schools may be
closed for some form of education adminis-        closed on a given day.
trative function such as teachers taking LET
exams or staff meetings. Such a high propor-       Teacher absence andghost teachers
tion of closure for administrative reasons        Teachers' absence is a serious issue in the
suggests the very inefficiencies in the public    ARMM     education system.10  Among 1,577 in-


﻿dividual teachers captured in the survey, only 69  average absence rate of 19 percent.109 As                      65
percent were present on the day of the survey,    shown below, there are considerable variations
giving an average absence rate of 31 percent.10s  in absence rates across provinces/divisions
This absence rate may consist of a combination    within ARIM. Teachers'absence is high-
of working teachers who are absent on the day,    est, nearing half of the teachers, in particular
and some "ghost teachers" who are reported as     parts of Lanao del Sur (IA and JIB), and
staff by schools in their reporting.              Sulu (11). This is reflected in the province-
level variations. In general,absence is lower in
These rates compare unfavorably with inter-       city divisions. Further analysis and future sur-
national comparators - for example, a review      vey rounds may be able to provide additional
of teacher absence in six countries for the       insight into the reasons for this clustering of
2004 World Development Report found an            absence problems.
Province                Absence Rate (re) Division                      Absence Rate  v           Te
Basilan                 11                      Basilan                 15                          Provincial!
division teacher
Lamitan City            7                          absence rates
Lanao del Sur           35                      Lanao del Sur IA        25
Lanao del Sur IB        25
Lana     o del Sur  (IA   49
Lanao del Surl111       48
Marawi City             25
Maguindanao             25                      Maguinsana  s F        26
ey Maguindanao  b     l 25
Sulu                    38                      SuWu D                  37                          Source:
Suu al                 46                          2013 CiC-Austra-
lian Aid-WB ARMM
Tawi-Tawi               37                      Tawi-Tawi na                                        School Survey
The ability to identify ghost teachers was        collected prior to the survey. This data is at
unfortunately limited in this representative      school level, but is likely to reflect mainly
survey. In the case of elementary schools the     existing teachers, though some ghost workers
payroll identifies teachers not by post, but by   may be included. The ability to separate out
school district, making it impossible to use the  ghost absences from regular teacher absence
list of teachers being paid as a reference for a  was also constrained by the use of a single
sample-based survey - a non-reporting teacher     survey round in the year, which removed the
listed in the payroll may be assigned to another  possibility to discern persistent from occasional
post in the district. Instead, absence rates were  absence without a follow-up. A second survey
calculated based on monthly administrative        is planned for the 2013-14 school year.
reporting data on staff from school divisions
"'h teachers captured in the survey comprise teachers listed in the DepEd ARMM's administrative records as assigned to a given school, if
that school was open when visited.
u Rogers and Koziol (2011), p7 See also World Bank (2004): the countries are India, Bangladesh, Uganda, Indonesia, Ecuador and Peru.


﻿66                  Male teachers were more likely to be absent (39    Pupilabsence
percent) than females (30 percent).1o Senior-     Student absence is also highly prevalent in
ity is weakly correlated with higher rates of      ARMM. We calculated attendance rates at
absence, and Principals have the highest absence   the class level (each section of each grade)
rate.'Ihe statistical significance of the difference  based on the reported enrolment of the
is low but the finding is consistent with some     school in monthly reporting collected before
international studies, with the proposed expla-    the survey. On the day of the surprise visit,
nation that weaker accountability for more se-     the average attendance rate was 71 percent.1
nior staff contributes to higher absence rates.1    Lanao del Sur has the highest absence rate
for both male and female students, as with
teachers' absence, though these figures are this
time concentrated in the 1A and B divisions
(Table 13).
Table 12:            Teaching Grade                                   Absence Rate r(%)
Presence bysurvey.rO                                                                   t,
Teachrgersednc rt ws 1pecet
teachfionrbuenogihe                            benerae.           LaagelSrhaahdhgetebecert
teachers absneMaster Teachers                    26                              Source:
2013 1BS-Austra-
Head Teachers                                    25
lian Aid-WB ARMM
Principals                                       30                              School Survey
110 There were 101 teachers for whom the surveyors did not clearly identify sex, 96 of whom were not present on the survey date, but for the
purposes of the study sex has been imputed from given names.
111 For example, Kremer et al. (2005), found across several states in India that "[o]lder teachers, more educated teachers, and head teachers are
all paid more but are also more frequently absent."
112 This rate is calculated from schools and classes that are in session on the day of the survey.


﻿67
Table 13:
Absence rates (%) of students in classes in session by province, division and gender
Province     Total         Male          Female        Division     Total         Male         Female
Basilan       16           19            13            Basilan      16            19           12
Lamitan City  17           20            14
LanaodelSur   61           62            59            Lanao IA     61            58           63
Lanao IB      64           69            59
Lanao IIA     38           51            25
Lanao IlB     63           65            61
Marawi        63           69            57
Maguindanao   23           25            21            Maguindanao I 25           25           25
Maguindanao   24           24            24
II
Sulu          26           28            24            Sulu I       21            23            19
Sulu II       44           44            44
Tawi-Tawi     28           28            28           Tawi-Tawi     28            28           28
Source:
2013 CBCS-Australian Aid-WB ARMM School Survey
Figure 23:
Prevalent pupil
absence


﻿68                   Attendance rates do not vary greatly by             the absence rates is that they are lowest in
grades, but as a whole, absence is a greater         the final year of either elementary or second-
concern for secondary school than elemen-            ary schooling, suggesting a "near graduation
tary school (Table 14). In all grades, female       incentive" for those who have not dropped
students were more likely to be in classrooms       out earlier. This data raises the importance of
than males (74 percent for females versus 68         attention to early drop-outs in particular.
percent for males). An interesting feature of
Table 14:             Grade                             Male                             Female
Student absence       Grade 1                           39                               33
(%) by grade
and gender
Grade 3                          41                                35
Grade 4                          38                                41
Grade 5                          38                                31
Grade 6                          27                                26
Elementary Average*              37                                34
Year 1                           37                                34
Year2                            50                                43
Source:               Year 3                            35                               29
2013 CBCS-Austra-     Year 4                            26                               25
lian Aid-WB ARMM
School Survey.        Secondary Average*                37                               33
There is a complex relationship between              Teacher and student absence tend to vary
municipality-level poverty incidence and             together positively - that is high absence
absence."' Attendance rates of both teachers        rates among teachers corresponds to higher
and students seem to show non-linear "U" type       rates among pupils (Figure 24). It is evident
relationships with poverty incidence. In other      that students tend to attend their classes at
words, attendance is higher when poverty in-         a greater rate if teachers are likely to come,
cidence is very low or very high, and absence is     or equally, teachers tend to come to schools
highest in the middle level of poverty. It is pos-  where more students attend their classes.114
sible that more urbanized settings offer higher     This finding suggests that efforts at increasing
returns to schooling while remote areas with        teacher presence in schools may contribute to
high poverty incidence have lower opportunity        a virtuous circle of attendance, and incentives
costs for schooling (thus teaching), both of         for attendance should be found for teachers as
which strengthen the incentive to attend (and        well as for students (as currently exist in the
teach). However, the mechanisms behind the           national conditional cash transfer program).
relationship between locality and teacher and
pupil absence require further study.
hNSCB, Small Areas Poverty Estimates, 2010.
114 Though the causality is still unclear, the data suggests that teachers' presence rates hypothetically rise from 65 percent to 80 percent as
students' attendance rate moves from 40 percent to 100 percent. This finding, as with all absence rates reported, includes only students in
classes in session on the day of the visit.


﻿69
Figure 24:                                                     Source:
Teacher and student presence (%) by division                   2013 CBCS-Australian Aid-WB ARMM School Survey
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Tee
ca       tu       0         0
M Teacher Presence <0%)                             9 Student Presence C%)


﻿70
Map 3:
Student and Teacher Absence Rates by School Division
Student Absence Ru                                                F E ALErSTUDENTS ABSeNCe Rate(%)
1 6%-22%.                                                                                                            \
-  -4.00%
57.00
-          6100%0
-          600% 0
12 2 %      ¯      -                                        0 .00--
26  35%2300 %                                                                            ¯
*                 ~4.00' r<l
6000
600%
Clockwise, f* o   et
Student Absence Rate, Female Student Absence Rate, Male Student Absence Rate, Teachers Absence Rate


﻿Challenges identifiedby schools                    schools, suggesting that recent investments in                  71
School heads reported a range of serious chal-     both the PS budget and especially basic educa-
lenges to their ability to provide quality educa-  tion infrastructure may not yet have resulted
tion services (Table 15). This "view from the      in sufficient corrections at the school level,
frontline" confirms many of the deficiencies       though these problems are no doubt echoed
in the public expenditure system identified in     to verying degrees throughout the country.
the preceding sections of this report. Teacher     The quality of teachers is also raised frequently,
and classroom shortages are reported most          reflecting the impact of many years of prob-
frequently as the biggest single challenge for     lematic recruitment practices.
Table 15:
Frequency of top challenges mentioned by school heads
Challenges                       Frequency                       %
Need more classrooms             37                              23
Need more teachers               25                              15
Need better building maintenance  18                             11
Need better teachers             17                              10
Need more textbooks              14                              9
Need more budget                 8                               5
Need more teaching materials     7                               4
Poverty in general               7                               4
Drinking water                   5                               3
Too many students                4                               2
Electricity                      3                               2
Need support personnel           3                               2
Sanitation                       3                               2
Peace and order                  3                               2
Long commuting time              2                               1
Students absenteeism             2                               1
Need more support from parents   1                               1
Family feud                      1                               1
Enrollees with insufficient supporting  1                        1
documents
Need financial support from LGU  1                               1
Relationship between school staff  1                             1
and PTA, community
Total                            163                             100
Source:
Source: 2013 CBCS-Australian Aid-WB ARMM School Survey


﻿72                 Though some schools reported insecurity-        difficult to compare these school level fig-
related challenges, the majority of principals  ures with central records on deliveries, which
highlight problems in school conditions as      indicate only the district where textbooks are
the most serious challenge after teachers and   delivered, and this may be an area for further
classrooms. About 20 percent of the schools     work. Even with some survey error, there is
named some combination of issues related to     a significant problem in the completeness of
maintenance, budget, and need for outside       textbook distribution.
financial support for running costs or utilities
as their single biggest challenge, and many     Contributions from Local Government Units,
more listed them second.1The limited avail-     particularly local Barangays, play a role in the
ability of routine operations and maintenance   overall education resource picture, although
funds outlined in Chapter Four is reflected     less so in ARMM than elsewhere in the Phil-
in the concerns of school heads.'Ihe survey    ippines as noted in Chapter1Tree. However, it
confirmed that elementary facilities have not   is not easy to attribute LGU spending spe-
been given any regular MOOE budget from         cifically to education from national and local
their divisions or districts. MOOE to high      government budget records. The survey was
schools was generally being delivered, though   able to capture some aspects of the significance
5 High Schools of 37 captured in the survey     and variability of LGU support to schools.
reported they had not received an MOOE          Again, out of 158 schools that gave informa-
payment in the last two school years. Some of   tion about their resource flows, 103 schools
this result may be due to the interviews be-    (65 percent) reported receiving some form of
ing conducted with someone other than the       Barangay support. Conversely, this means that
principal or other errors.                      approximately one-third of schools reportedly
do not have any inputs from their Barangay.
Textbooks and teaching material shortages
combined were the number one problem in 13      The lack of a regnlar pattern of Barangay and
percent of schools. As noted earlier, procure-  other LGU involvement in education has
ment and distribution of textbooks is a central  equity implications, as it may advantage certain
ministry function, and thus involves consider-  schools over others. Of these 103 schools
able logistical challenges. The survey collected  receiving support from Barangays, more than
some information on textbook deliveries to      half received either cash or in-kind contribu-
schools, and the data suggests that these are   tions or both (56 and 58 percent respectively).
very few and very irregular. Out of the 158     One quarter of the schools that received sup-
schools providing information on educational    port did so in the form of Barangay funded
materials they received, 29 schools, about 18   or supported "volunteer" teachers.'This means
percent, claimed they had not received any      that some 37 or 38 percent of schools receive
textbooks in the previous two school years. It is  cash or in-kind resources that other schools do


﻿not, and 16 percent have access to additional       30 percent of schools reporting such support.                    73
staff (though the question of the quality and       Unfortunately the information given on the
attendance of that staff is open). While it is      source and amounts of these contributions
difficult to draw robust conclusions about          was very inconsistent, but it does continue
provincial variation from this sample size, the     to suggest equity problems, with a very small
"barangay participation rate" in supporting         number of schools receiving cash contributions
schools varies between 92 and 56 percent of         in tens of thousands of pesos. Parent-Teacher
schools depending on the province, suggesting       Associations and communities in general
large geographic variations in support. Support     frequently contribute to schools, again in
from other levels of LGUs was reported less         about 65 percent of cases, potentially leaving
frequently, though it is possible the survey data   one third of schools without this form of local
at times conflated support from Barangays           support. 45 schools (28 percent) reported that
with that of municipalities.                        they collected fees from parents and students,
though the amounts reported tended to be less
The amount of support also varies widely. For       significant than other sources.
cash, schools reported contributions ranging
from a few hundred pesos to a maximum of            On the whole the survey revealed that in
PHP 38,000 on an annual basis, suggest-             the absence of sufficient regular resources
ing that the range of LGU policies is indeed        through the education budget, schools seek
wide. Unsurprisingly, barangays themselves          and may receive a range of additional support.
reported a higher rate of participation in edu-     However, not all schools have access to such
cation, claiming to support 91 percent of el-       means, and amounts vary widely. This implies
ementary schools (not all barangays had high        that LGU funding may contribute to inequi-
schools in the sample). However, the amounts        ties among schools. An additional research
they claim to have given also vary widely,          question would be to correlate LGU spend-
again from nearly nil up to PHP 120,000.115         ing on schools with poverty rates to see if this
This variation further emphasizes that un-          spending is progressive or, much more likely,
regulated LGU participation in education has        regressive.116 The dual lack of both policy and
important implications for resource equity          reliable reporting around LGU and commu-
across the ARMM, and probably the Philip-           nity contributions to education is a serious
pines as a whole.                                   gap in the ability to assess and plan education
resources, and a major contributor to inequi-
Contributions from other LGU tiers and              ties in the availability of such resources. 117
Congresspeople were less frequent, with only
1I Due to the surprise methodology of the absence survey, triangulation of Barangay and school reporting on assistance was not possible, but a
second survey round may focus on this question.
11 At the time of writing, additional analysis of the existing survey data and collection of a further round of information is planned for SY 2013-14.
1" Lack of coordination between LGU spending and DepEd spending is a problem nationwide as well: World Bank (2012), p 76.


﻿74                CHAPTER          SIX:                        Inability to linkpolicyplanning
CONCLUSIONS AND                              and budgeting
RECOMMENDATIONSThe DepEd ARMM and the national govern-
mment have introduced various initiatives to
more strategically allocate education resources,
including regional education strategic plans,
"bottom-up planning", and the national
results-based budgeting process. In February
2009 the DepEd ARMM released an updated
Summary assessment of the PEM system for     Regional Basic Education Development Plan
basic education in ARM\'M                    for 2009-14, with an accompanying Strategic
All well-functioning public expenditure      Plan.' The plan identifies limited operational
management systems share three broad goals.  funds as a key "constraint" on the depart-
They aim to ensure fiscal discipline - that  ment, noting that only 6.0 percent of the 2006
public expenditures do not dramatically ex-  DepEd ARNI budget was MOOE.
ceed the available resources.'Ihe system must
also provide a way of deciding how to allocate  However, rather than prompting an improve-
those resources among different priorities -  ment, the MOOE proportion of the DepEd
the goal of allocative efficiency. Finally, they  ARMM budget has not improved, but has
need to manage the resources in a way that   actually declined to 4.8% in 2013. In keeping
they can efficiently and effectively produce  with meeting the challenges to school atten-
the desired outputs and eventually outcomes  dance outlined in Chapter Two, the strate-
- known as technical or operational efficiency.  gic plan also emphasizes the need for more
provision of Alternative Learning Systems
As a subnational entity, ARMM has had        to counter the region's low participation and
limited control over the aggregate available  functional literacy rates: "One of the major
resources, though this may change under new  difficulties is DepEd's lack of sufficient bud-
wealth sharing arrangements for the Bangsam-  get to implement the ALS program."19
oro. The BE-PEIR findings therefore relate
mostly to the issues of allocative and technical  As seen in Chapter Four, the budgetary al-
efficiency - how are resources allocated and  location for Alternative Learning Systems is
how efficiently and effectively are they spent.  based on the reported number of teachers and
The overall performance of the PEM system   learners, not the needs in terms of potential
for Basic Education for ARMM suffers from    target populations. In ARMM the provision
four broad weaknesses, each with their roots in  of budgets is hampered by poor reporting
the ARMT PEM syndrome.                       on numbers of teachers and learners, though
this problem appears to affect a large num-
DepEd ARMM (2009), p 5. The plan is organized around three strategic pillars of governance, learning environment and infrastructure. It is
itself an update of previous Asian Development Bank and BEAM supported master plans completed in 2003 and 2007
200DepEd ARMM (2009), p 13.


﻿ber of Philippine regions. There is therefore   ARMM     can be identified, effectively coordi-               75
a disconnect between the policy objective in    nated and managed," not a budget guidance.120
ARMM     of emphasizing new ALS cover-
age, and the budget process as it takes place   The ORG-DBM budget process to deter-
in the central government. Donor programs       mine the overall ARG allocation also dem-
including BEAM-ARMM        and USAID's          onstrates the disconnection with regional
EQUALS II provide significant support to        strategic plans. In 2013 the Office of the
Alternative Learning Systems in ARMM,           Regional Governor introduced a strategic
making a like for like comparison with the      framework for articulating ARMM's spend-
rest of the Philippines difficult.              ing priorities referred to as "HELPs" for
health, education, livelihoods, and peace and
In a similar vein, ARMM's allocation for        governance.The framework was intended to
Alternative Delivery Modes (aimed at pro-       both organize existing resources and to guide
viding flexibility for pupils in school) in 2013  additional funding requests.121 For education,
remains at a flat rate of 4.9 million pesos.    new requests were made for regional educa-
This allocation is the same as all other regions  tion supervisors and other staff in managerial
excepting the largest two (NCR and IV-A),       or health and nutrition posts, as well as 40
and ranking fifth in per capita terms - dem-    million pesos of additional MOOE, along-
onstrating that central ADM budgeting is        side infrastructure for specialized schools
based on an equal shares principle rather than  and the transfer of the madrasah education
an assessment of needs.                         program funds from the national government
to ARMM management. In the event, these
In short, the strategic planning of DepEd       requests were not successful, yet the region
ARMM is not connected to the budget pro-        received a considerable increase in its overall
cess, because the relevant parts of ARMM's      infrastructure allocation. While additional
education budget are not drawn up where the     resources were available, again the priori-
strategic planning took place. While certain    ties identified by the ORG did not translate
areas in the development plan - new infra-      clearly through budget preparation.122
structure for example - have received increased
attention in national government allocations,   As described in Chapter Three, the DBM   also
this is not as a result of the ARMM  strate-    requires the submission of the ARG budget
gic planning exercise, but rather changes in    in its standard OPIF results-based framework
national political attention to the region. In  linking programs, activities and projects to
fact, the education plan itself notes that, rather  desired final outputs. Yet the ARG bud-
than shaping national budgets, it is primar-    get for education covers only the recurrent
ily intended to be "a framework within which    expenditure for existing staff and the routine
assistance programs for basic education in      MOOE. It is therefore impossible for the
120 DepEd ARMM (2009), p 11.
121 ARMM Office of the Regional Governor (2012).
122 In the 2014 budget preparation process some of these requests have been met - in particular allocation of funds for additional education
supervisors - due to increased interaction between the DepEd ARMM and the DepEd National planning department.


﻿76                 ORG to submit a true program-based budget       sources of funds in one place. Little infor-
for education under the current structures.     mation is transparently available on donor
contributions to education for ARMM   as
The most important impact of the PEM            a region. These need not be included in the
syndrome and particularly its fragmenta-        budget, but they should be planned for and
tion among local, regional, and national        reported on in a way that enables region
institutions is therefore the great difficulties  level budgeting and accounting. A significant
it creates in turning plans and policies into   share of the infrastructure program under the
budgets. When strategic planning is done at     national government's Special Purpose Funds
regional level, or performance management       are not broken down for ARMM. Similarly,
frameworks are introduced at national level,   the use of LGU funds are not readily known
the fact that the budget process is scattered   in the region, and this prevents planning for
across so many channels and institutions        LGU resources, which are applied very un-
means that these efforts have little chance of  evenly across the region. It should be noted,
shaping budget outcomes.                        however, that this problem is also present
outside ARMM.
Lack ofbudget comprehensiveness,
integration andpredictability                   A lack of comprehensiveness and integration
A related failing is that there is no single "edu-  has knock-on effects on the predictability
cation budget" for the ARMM. Allocations are    and transparency of the budget. It exacerbates
spread across the ARG and the DepEd Na-         difficulties in comparing actual expenditures
tional budgets, with additional components in   to budgeted ones caused by poor reporting
Special Purpose Funds and LGU entitlements.     by obscuring the amounts that have been al-
The preparation of the recurrent budget occurs  located for a given purpose. A related weak-
through one relationship, while most programs   ness of the planning and budgeting cycle is
and all capital expenditures are separated in  that it does not have a multi-year outlook.
the DepEd National budget. This means, for      These problems make constructive political
example, that it is difficult to link recurrent im-  engagement by regional representatives, civil
plications with capital spending: currently the  society and the public more difficult because
region receives low levels of "routine" MOOE    the budget is not prepared or presented in a
to repair and operate existing infrastructure,  single, transparent way.
while at the same time major increases in con-
struction have been budgeted.                   Slow and ineffective budget execution
Just as in budgeting, the execution of key edu-
In addition to being unintegrated, the          cation funds is divided among local, regional,
budget(s) are not comprehensive-mean-           and national institutions. For the budget man-
ing they do not capture the most important      aged by DepEd ARMM and the ORG, funds


﻿are downloaded to the regional office for dis-  The execution of DepEd National programs               77
tribution as salaries or school and district level  is more complex. For most of the Philippines,
MOOE payments. The other programs have       major inputs such as facilities and textbooks
a range of different policies and procedures to  are budgeted as a lump sum and need to be
determine how these funds are obligated and  sub-allotted to regions, after which they are
disbursed depending on the program.          downloaded to school divisions and overseen
by regional education offices.JThis process al-
The weaknesses in PS execution are mostly    ready causes significant delays in budget execu-
related the poor integrity of the payroll, and  tion throughout the country. In the ARMM
inefficiencies and delays in hiring qualified  it is compounded because there is no regional
teaching staff. The systems at regional level  DBM office to process the cash allocation.
for recording human resource information
such as attendance and retirement, and using  Recent changes to national public finan-
it as a basis to generate accurate payrolls do  cial management systems - specifically the
not function as intended. In turn, there have  presentation of regional program budgets
been no consequences for abusive or shoddy   in the National Expenditure Plan and the
reporting in the past. Procedures for updating  removal of the SARO - are opportunities to
the payroll are being developed but not suf-  more clearly identify budgets for ARMM,
ficiently institutionalized yet, and the hiring  and remove some of the steps in the process
process is being updated to encourage trans-  of sub-allotment. These changes will allow
parency, merit and qualifications, and speed.  information to be shared more easily between
ARMM and National DepEd on what re-
The execution of routine MOOE - included     sources should be expected. The next chal-
in the ARG budget - is regular, but suffers  lenge is to increase ARMM's involvement in
from two problems. Due to its inadequate     budgeting and managing these funds while
budgeted amounts as well as ingrained prac-  not reproducing the accountability problems
tices that need revisiting, no funds are distrib-  seen in PS and MOOE execution.
uted to elementary schools. Second, there is
inadequate - or entirely absent - reporting on  Weak accountability and reporting
the use of these funds from the division, dis-  The ability of public expenditure manage-
trict and school level to the region, and from  ment systems to budget and execute funds
the region to DBM. True MOOE needs are       effectively is also dependent on the budget
thus hidden, and mistrust limits the budget  accountability and reporting that they gener-
for the ARMM by causing DBM to continue      ate. Without knowing how funds are used
budgeting for operations and maintenance     it is difficult to either project future needs
incrementally                               or authorize additional spending. In a way,
reporting for AR sM has "slipped through


﻿78                   the cracks" because DepEd National has             lic finance in the region. It imposes a system
tended to assume ARMM       should report,          of outputs and indicators that is intended for
while ARMM      has seen these funds as central     agencies that are (a) focused on a single sector
government activities outside their own con-        and (b) control all the components of their
trol. LGUs and school divisions do not have a       budget needed to produce given results. In
strong reporting relationship to regional gov-      ARMM, this framework is misapplied because
ernment, making it hard to gain an accurate        the ARG covers many sectors, and there are
picture of the use of resources.                    many budget components that bear on pro-
gram success controlled outside the ARMM.
Public expenditure management systems are           A more ARMM-specific results-based bud-
increasingly monitoring the outputs and even        geting and management framework should be
outcomes of public spending. The wholesale          suited to the specific objectives of the regional
application in the ARMM     of the national         government, while taking into account the
government's results-based management               nature of the ARMM     budget.
framework is ill suited to the structure of pub-
Table 16:
Summary of key weaknesses in the basic education PEM system
fBudgeting                    Execution and Delivery        Accountability & Reporting
PS                            Based on spurious past payroll  Payroll, hiring and HR integrity  HR reporting systems not ef-
data                          weaknesses                   fective at region office, high
absence rates
Routine MOOE                  Budgeted by ARG & DBM on     Insufficient levels & not delivered  No liquidation reporting rein-
incremental basis            to elementary schools          forces incremental budgeting.
Other Programs                Lack of ARMM participation in  Cumbersome sub-allotment and  Division reporting to region weak
setting programs              execution procedures
Program budgets hard to link to  No regional DBM function   Region cannot report to DepEd
strategic plans                                             National
CO                            Lack of ARMM participation in  BEFF and SBP execution from  Limited or no program comple-
budgeting                     different regions             tion information available at
ARIMM


﻿The next three sections introduce recommen-  ment committed to increasing investments              79
dations for strengthening education public  and the reform orientation of the ARNIM
expenditure management, improving ARMM-     government, offer hope of a better future.
wide public expenditure management systems,
and preparing for a transition to the Bangsam-  Any single actor working alone cannot re-
oro. These recommendations and some pre-    solve these problems, and the conclusions and
liminary indicators for a results framework are  recommendations that arise from this analysis
summarized in Table 18 and Figure 29 below.  are therefore directed at multiple audiences:
the education departments at ARNVIM and
Improving public expenditure management     national level, the ARNM regional govern-
for basic education in ARNIM                ment, the national budget institutions and
Improving performance of the education      particularly DBM. Equally they must also
sector in ARIM will require fundamental    address the members of the Transition Com-
changes in the institutional arrangements   mission and other organizations aiming to
underpinning public financing for the region,  shape the institutions of the Bangsamoro to
while making frontline service delivery more  ensure better education and development
responsive and accountable. Fortunately, the  outcomes, and to create genuine and effective
combination of the prospect of a lasting peace  political and fiscal autonomy.
settlement, coupled with a national govern-
Figure 25:
Improving AedMM education


﻿80                 Ensuring qualfied teachers are budgeted,      ers also experience lower pupil attendance.
paid, andpresent
As the bulk of the education budget, Personal          Teacher attendance must therefore be
Services is the most important area for im-       incentivized, both positively and negatively.
proving the effective use of funds. It is also one  This process can be supported through im-
area where considerable progress has already      proved payroll processing to utilize current
begun, and can be deepened by:                    attendance or bio-metric records, promote
performance-based mechanisms, and rein-
*    Continuing the data clean-up and          force good attendance.
updates in the HRIS for all employees as            Additionally, the evidence on pupil
basic requirement for inclusion of person-     absence suggests interventions should be
nale in the payroll, and resolve the technical  particularly geared towards preventing early
issues in the HRIS preventing its use as a     dropouts.
check for payroll integrity;                        Social accountability tools to monitor
*    Continuing the improvement of man-        problems in teacher attendance might be
agement systems for Human Resources            piloted.
and payroll management to break the high
degree of individual discretion and access to  Correcting the "routine MOOE gap"
data, including creation of an HR manage-   The "routine MOOE" gap must be eliminated
ment unit responsible for HRIS database     to help ensure predictable funds for day-to-
maintenance, and a separate payroll section  day operations and maintenance. It is also
with redefined unit assignments based on    unreasonable to expect additional appropria-
functions (such as deductions, fringe ben-  tions without improvements in liquidation
efits) rather than Schools Divisions.       reporting from the divisions and schools, and
*    Improving recruitment and promotion    without a policy to ensure the funds reach the
processes by instituting new business pro-  school level. In the short-term it is necessary
cesses such as creation of personnel boards,  to increase the available funds quickly while
equitable access to information and stan-   ensuring accountability, and as soon as possible
dard application of new selection criteria  the budget for MOOE in ARMM should be
based on qualification and merit.           set according to norm-based criteria rather
*    Institutionalizating the HR and pay-   than incrementally. Specific steps include:
roll operations manual.
* DBM could make additional funds
Beyond weaknesses in the payroll, the school      available for use as routine MOOE by
survey indicated that the absence rate among      ARMM schools equivalent to the amount
teachers is a major problem for service delivery.  budgeted by DepEd National per school
Areas with higher absence rates among teach-      uder its planning formula, based on data


﻿agreed between DepEd ARMIM and           resources with the ARMM is an important                81
DepEd National.                          process that can begin immediately. An overall
DepEd ARMM should clarify the        objective to eventually move funds for use in
policy on distribution of existing MOOE  the region onto the ARG budget appropria-
between division, district and schools, with  tion should be agreed with DBM and DepEd
DepEd National confirming this policy    National. In the medium-term (2016 budget
to schools divisions to ensure compliance.  preparation), the ARMM or Bangsamoro
The policy and the appropriations could be  should aim to be able to allocate the total pool
publicized to encourage transparency.    of program funds according to its priorities.
* Agreeing a set of reporting bench-
marks between ARG, and DBM for the       However, this must be done in a phased man-
utilization of MOOE funds.               ner through a transition to more ARMM
*   DepEd ARMM and ORG work with         participation and eventual authority over both
DepEd National to develop and implement  budgeting and release of key funds (Figure 26),
an operational MOOE planning norm for    coupled with improvements in the accuracy
long-term use, taking into account any data  and timeliness of budget accountability report-
limitations specific to the region. This is  ing by the region.'The complexity of transfer-
used as the basis for future budget requests.  ring the responsibility for these centrally-
*   Outreach to division, district, and  managed funds requires enhanced education
school staff to orient them on the oppor-  liaison capacity and resources between region
tunity for additional resources, but also the  and national agencies.
need for and procedures for reporting on
the allocations.                                (Re-)introduce a dedicated education
*   Civil society and communities could     liaison who can use the standing invita-
be involved in monitoring the arrival and   tion to participate in the weekly Executive
use of MOOE funds through citizen           Committee and monthly Management
reporting, NGO monitoring, or other         Committee at DepEd National where
mechanisms.                                 important policy, program and budget deci-
sions are made.
Integrating centrally-managedprograms with         DepEd ARMM and DepEd National
ARMMI education budget                         should discuss the basis for the regional
The programs of the DepEd National represent   allocation of all centrally-managed funds,
an important portion of the ARMM education     and progress to jointly preparing the alloca-
budget and are budgeted and executed accord-  tion of program funding. Regular ARNI
ing to different procedures that are not always  participation in Management and Execu-
apparent to the ARMM, the eventual recipient.  tive Committee meetings will promote this
Integrating budgeting and execution for these  dialogue.


﻿82                        At the same time, the appropriation        through exchange or secondment of staff -
for some crucial funds should be included      may be required from DepEd National to
in the ARG budget appropriation for            support implementation capacity of DepEd
execution, considering technical complex-      ARMVM for programs migrated to regional
ity and only upon the achievement of           responsibility.
improvements on budget reporting - for              Accounting arrangements should
example obligation and utilization of funds    be explored that allow regional release of
already implemented regionally. Madrasah       centrally-managed funds in the absence of
education remains a good candidate             a regional DBM office.
since almost half of it is dedicated to the         In the medium term the budgeting
ARMM at present.                               and appropriation of key funds should be
Additional central resources - possibly    included in the ARG budget proposal.
Figure 26:
Transition to ARMM     -       -
responsibility for
centrally-managed
education funds      2013
FY 2014
uget xecuton2013-14
FY 2014 Budget
Preparation and       FY 2015 Budget
Execution             Preparation
The longer-term goal for PEM reform is         gion's role in budgeting and executing national
bringing unity to these processes within the   resources, increases in own source revenue
region, while ensuring that it has the capacity  generation can also have the effect of creating
to handle funds effectively and transparently. A  new possibilities for reduced fragmentation of
final point about budget fragmentation is that  public expenditure through the increased fiscal
in parallel to a process of integrating the re-  space they create.


﻿Improving ARMM Public                          process. The Office of the Regional Governor                83
Expenditure Management                         should supplement the National Budget call
with guidelines setting out the responsibilities
Strengthening the intra-ARMM                   of the ARMM agencies in budget preparation.
budgetprocess                                  The aim of the guidelines should be to shift
A more effective budget preparation process    the ORG budget team's role from preparing
within the ARMM Regional Government            the budget submission itself towards manag-
would help sectoral priorities from the con-   ing the inputs of the ARMM sectoral agencies
stituent ARMM sub-agencies to be intro-        to ensure they are supportive of regional plans
duced effectively into the national budgeting  and DBM requirements (Figure 27).
Figure 27:
Relationship be-
DBM                       * National Requirements                                          tween national and
. * .E **  *      *Calendar
regional budgeting
guidelines
* Internal ARMM Calendar/Deadlines
* Interpreting National Requirements
*Agency Submission Formats
DepED ARMM* Information Needs
Procedures                *Validation Procedures
- and Guidelines              * Internal Agency Deadlines
* Roles and Responsibilities


﻿84                  This guideline should build in sufficient time            Indication of priority areas of govern-
for the agencies to collate required Budget          ment activity, programs and projects (i.e.
Accountability Reports (BARs) and guide the          based on ARMM     HELPs);
preparation of ARMM    agency spending pro-               General and specific guidelines for
posals, for example by specifying data require-      formulation of agency budget proposals, for
ments and aiding integration with the regional       example through prescribed forms;
OPIF and P/A/P frameworks (see below).                    Indicative budget ceilings to depart-
It should include:                                   ments/agencies;
Calendar of budget preparation activi-
ties within the region (Table 17).
Table 17:                                                   Sources:
Indicative ARMM regional budget preparation calendar (FY 2014)  DepEd ARMM-Central Government Budget Relations,
unpublished BE-PEIR discussion note (Feb 2014).
National Activity                     ARMM Activity &Deadline                DepEd ARMM Activity
Budget Call (December 28)
Budget Forum (January 11)             Include ARMM sectors
Budget Ceiling(January 15)
Consultations of Agencies with RDCs, CSOs, ORG consultation with sectoral ARMM agen-  DepEd ARMM consults with divisions and
and other stakeholders (January-February)  cies on regional OPIF and circulates budget  schools (and other stakeholders) (February)
guideline (February)
Submission of PastYear's (2012)       ARMM Agencies submit SAOBs and other   Divisions and Schools submit SAOBs and
Actual Budget and CurrentYear's (2013)Ap-  BARs and Current Year Program     other BARs to DepEd ARMM (February 15)
proved Budget (March 15,2013)         (March 1)
Submission of 2014 Proposal (April 15,2013) ARMM Agencies submit proposals to ORG
budget team(April 1)
Technical Budget Hearings             ORG prepares Governor's Budget Message
(April 17-May 7,2013)                 (April)
ORG to attend TBH to be conducted by DBM
for ARMM
Presentation to President and Cabinet
(June 21-29)
Submission of Budget to Congress (July 23)


﻿Given the capacity constraints and the lack of  simple and limited results-based budgeting           85
previous opportunities for experiencing more    framework that concentrate on elements
integrated and performance-oriented budget      of the budget that are negotiated via the
preparation and reporting observed in both the  "ORG channel", that is recurrent expendi-
DepEd ARMM and the ARG, this intra-            tures on Personal Services (PS) and Main-
ARMM budget process will require a capacity     tenance, Operations and Other Expenses
development plan with elements that might       (MOOE). This exercise can be a capacity-
include training programs facilitated by DBM    building step towards more comprehensive
and DepEd National, exchanges of staff, and     results-based budgeting as additional bud-
secondments to ARMM functions of national       getary authority accrues to regional govern-
civil servants.'This plan can also be linked to  ment in the future, for example through
the transfer of certain centrally-managed funds  the transfer of certain currently centrally-
to ARMM control.                                managed education programs.
At the same time, the ARMM
Integrating regional and national budget systems  regional government should identify key
The ARG budget is prepared by the ORG and       objectives and indicators for an ARIM
negotiated with Bureau D of the Department     regional results management framework,
of Budget and Management. For education it      based on the HELPs priorities and tak-
only consists of PS and routine MOOE al-       ing into consideration the most important
locations, but in the submission process it has  data requirements and current data limita-
to conform to an ill-adapted national perfor-   tions. The indicators in this framework can
mance-based budgeting framework. There is a     also be aligned with the gradual transfer
strong argument for introducing elements of     of budgeting and execution participation
performance accountability to the AR M,       by DepEd ARMM in selected centrally-
but this needs to be balanced with the need     managed funds just described.
for improved control and adapted to the             A simple joint regional/national pro-
region's unique conditions: its cross-sectoral  gram-based budget that links the two main
responsibilities, and its partial control over the  channels of the ARMM Basic Education
resources for use in its territory. The need for  Budget process could be a way to link both
a regional performance framework will only      ARG and DepEd National budgets to a
become greater as more fiscal control is shifted  set of agreed program objectives and results
to ARMM, and eventually Bangsamoro. The         indicators.The ARMM HELPs framework
following changes are vital:                    can provide the basis for this program-
based coordination mechanism.
* The DepEd ARMM, ORG, and
DBM should modify the national OPIF
framework for ARMM to promote a


﻿86                Developing aframework ofhorizontal and       challenging environment for communities and
downward accountability                      civil society.'This pathway should acknowledge
In general, ARMM suffers from weaknesses     that important interests - for example both re-
in both top-down and bottom-up forms of      gional and national politicians seeking to boost
accountability, which can be a risk to effective  vote numbers - have been advanced in the past
decentralization. As the 2004 World Develop-  through weak accountability in the region, and
ment Report discussed in detail, both forms of  will be challenged by reform. Improved report-
accountability are needed to induce providers  ing, better results-based management and
and governments to perform better (Figure    budgeting, social accountability, and improved
28). The region must consider the pathway    and more open data are the building blocks of
from the current situation towards an account-  this pathway to decentralized accountability,
ability system connecting citizens, government  and could help provide an important legacy for
and providers, that takes into account the   the Bangsamoro.
Figure 28:                                                                               Cne
Decentralization
and the service                                                             ineets           Plcbothke-
delivery framework                                                       national pliasentbo
A--Devolution
Delgtion
Voice                   Compact   eeraeo eentation
Source:
2004 World               Ciiescint                                    rvdr
Clent power
Development          Nnor          Po                          rnln       raiain
Report (p 188)
For both the ARMIM in general as well its    to be considered given the fragile and conflict-
education sector, there is considerable potential  affected context. Given the role weak account-
to explore social accountability mechanisms  ability has played historically in enabling local
to support better stewardship of public funds,  and national patronage politics, it is danger-
At the same time, the challenging conditions  ous to assume that CSOs or communities are
for community and civil society engagement   immediately placed to provide unguarded and
in accountability initiatives in ARDI  need  open feedback. Civil Society Organizations


﻿with a strong interest in social accountability  score-cards, hotlines, and websites.                 87
for public funds exist in the region and may be     The scheduled second round survey
further supported. Tools to do so include:      under this BE-PEIR project for SY 2013-
14 can be used as a pilot for introducing
*   Increased budget transparency and        sustainable mechanisms for CSO and
publication of sector budgets or ARMM's      citizen input and monitoring.
overall budget. For example, newly in-
creased MOOE funding could be publi-      Table 18 summarizes these recommendations
cized such that schools and communities   according to the Public Expenditure Manage-
know their entitlement.                   ment problems they are intended to confront,
*   Grass-roots levels information cam-   and potential indicators for improvement. This
paigns and initiatives to harness demand  "Action Plan" is aimed at building on initiatives
side-accountability by parents both for edu-  already underway for improving public expen-
cation and other public expenditure areas  diture management in both basic education
such as infrastructure.                   and across the ARMM more generally, as well
Service delivery feedback mechanisms  as establishing a foundation for a transition to
such as citizen report cards and community  the Bangsamoro, discussed next.


﻿88
Problem                            Actions                            Indicators/Milestones*
Improving ARMM Basic Education Public Expenditure Management
Weak payroll integrity (ghost teachers, un-  * Continue data clean-up on HRIS and  * Completeness of HRIS &
qualified teachers, leakage of PS)  payroll                           HRIS-payroll congruence
* Complete and institutionalize payroll and  * Organizational restructure complete,
HR manual                          establishment of personnel boards
* Enhance HRIS-payroll integration  * National integration of HRIS-payroll
system
Teacher & pupil absence            * Incentivize teacher attendance and preven- * Absence rates
tion of early dropouts
* Include communities & civil society in
monitoring
Routine MOOE gap                   * Provide additional MOOE operational funds * Operational MOOE availability
& agree a norm-based budgeting approach  * Reporting on MOOE utilization
with DBM/DepEd National
* Introduce policy for distribution to ARMM
schools
* Establish reporting system to region &
regional budget reporting to DBM
* Include communities & civil society in
monitoring
CMF budgets unconnected to policy or  * Increase ARMM involvement in budgeting  * ARMM/DepEd National liaison activities
regional conditions                Centrally-Managed Programs, beginning with
enhanced liaison capacity, participation in
budget process
CMF execution slow                 * Move key centrally-managed programs  e Proportion of program budget appropriated
to ARMM appropriation for direct release  directly to ORG
(Madrasah, ALS)                    e Reporting on program fund utilization
* Agreed reporting benchmarks
* Capacity support & staffing for program
implementation (temporary & long-term)
Low or unknown completion of classrooms  * Clarify monitoring responsibilities for BEFF/ * School construction projects completed
SBP
* Involve communities & civil society in
monitoring
LGU education spending             * Integrate LGUs into regional planning &  * Level of LGU spending on education
inconsistent & inequitable         budgeting, agree regional LGU expenditure  increased
responsibilities for education     * Increased information on LGU spending to
region
Improving ARMM Regional Public Expenditure Management
Budgets unconnected to policy      * Revise OPIF framework for ARMM   * Develop framework of key indicators for
& planning for region              * Establish sectoral budget working groups  HELPs, agree with national agencies
and/or joint national/regional program-bud- * Pilot ARMM open data initiative
get based on HELPs framework with results
indicators
* Improve budget transparency & include
civil society & communities in monitoring
ARG budget proposal weak           * Strengthen intra-ARMM budget process  * Issuance of ARMM budget circular with
prior to ORG submission (calendar, guide-  calendar & guidelines
lines, hearings)                   * Timely submission of ARMM agencies
* Increase RBMO role
Table 18:
Indicative Action Plan                                *To be tracked by school division and LGUs


﻿Considerations for Bangsamoro                  transitional authority should coordinate and                 89
discuss this framework, rather than assuming
7he importance of implementation                it can be introduced anew when the Bangsam-
Some lessons from ARMM's experience are         oro is established. Considerations include the
pertinent to the process of negotiating the Ba-  means for achieving different forms of ac-
sic Law and other provisions for the Bangsam-   countability:
oro. The first is that the failure of fiscal au-
tonomy in ARMM is not simply the result                 External accountability (for example
of insufficient autonomy on the one hand, or       to central agencies for inputs);
poor governance on the other. A significant             Internal accountability (by spending
reason for the emergence of the ARMM PEM           departments of inputs);
syndrome falls on incomplete implementa-               Managerial (by managers of outputs
tion of existing provisions of the Expanded        and total costs, against performance frame-
Organic Act, such as the establishment of          works);
effective regional budget and management               Public input in decisions, assessing
institutions. Indeed, under different conditions   satisfaction and reporting irregularities
the prior ARMM institutions would already          (bottom-up or social accountability).
have technically met many of the requirements
of the Framework Agreement on Bangsam-          Fiscal management and
oro. A key concern for the negotiators of the   inter-governmentalframework
Bangsamoro institutions should therefore be     Third, as a subnational government the
asking what mechanisms should be in place to    ARNIM has largely been a passive recipient
ensure implementation of the provisions of the  when it comes to the overall size of budgets.
peace agreement and Basic Law be measured,      It has not enjoyed any significant own source
monitored and enforced?                         revenues in the "regional fund", and has not
tried to develop medium-term fiscal or expen-
Second, the region therefore needs to consider,  diture frameworks. At the same time, budgets
define and agree with central institutions and  for ARMM have generally been determined
regional stakeholders, including civil society,  on a sector-by-sector basis through negotia-
a model for accountability. A regional results-  tion with DBM  and national agencies. The
based management framework developed by         ARMM has thus not had to produce macro-
ARIM could be an important contribution        fiscal estimates of revenue or expenditure over
to this process by setting objectives, developing  the medium-term, has limited experience with
and beginning to effectively measure indicators  revenue policy and administration, and has not
and baselines, and institutionalizing monitor-  had any opportunity to make strategic cross-
ing and civil society involvement. The ARNIM    sectoral allocation decisions. It is fair to guess
and the Transition Commission and any           the MILF also is underprovided with these


﻿90                policy skills. Under Bangsamoro these func-     tralization framework between the region
tions will likely become much more important    and its LGUs.
due to an increase in the amount and flexibility
of revenue accruing to regional control. So  Coordination between BTC,,ARMM
the development of regional tax and revenue  andNational Government
policy and administration, and a macro-fiscal  Regional autonomy does not in fact reduce
and cross-sectoral strategic planning capac-  the demand for coordination, dialogue and
ity should be key priorities for the transitional  cooperation between regional and national
institutions.                                authorities. If anything, the experience of
ARIMV shows that autonomy in the context
Fiscalframework for LGUs                     of continued central support increases the
and regional autonomy                        demands on all actors to share information,
The lack of clarity over the accountability  support capacity building, and share influence.
relationships between the regional government  Institutionalized means to regularly commu-
and the other levels of LGUs has resulted in  nicate but also participate are more pressing
incomplete information about LGU budgets     for an autonomous region given continued
and plans at the regional level, and inequities  dependence on national resources. In particu-
caused by uneven LGU spending on education.  lar, consideration might be given to exchange
This is one of the most sensitive of all areas for  and secondment arrangements that will ease
reform, as the autonomy enjoyed by LGUs has  the challenge for regional public servants and
formed deeply entrenched interests, and a key  increase familiarity and competence with both
question is whether disciplining or reforming  national, regional, and future Bangsamoro
IRA in the ARIM is best seen as part of a   institutions.
national attempt at IRA reform, or pursued
through the mechanisms of the peace process.  When these processes are not in place, it is
easy to descend into negative cycles of weak
In the medium and long-term the       accountability, mistrust, and blame that in the
fiscal framework defining the relationship  end harm the intended recipients of services -
between the LGUs and the region needs     citizens and in the case of education, children
elaborating: what will be the expenditure  - the most. Emphasis should therefore be
assignments (i.e. service delivery responsi-  given by the BTC to establishing problem-
bilities) of the LGUs under the ARMM      solving, coordination and monitoring insti-
and eventually Bangsamoro?                tutions between the Bangsamoro and the
*   In return for this increased account-  national government. In the short-term, such
ability to the region, LGUs should be given  coordination should be established immedi-
a role in planning and budgeting for the  ately between the ARMM and the negotiat-
region. In short, there is a need for a decen-  ing teams to begin making arrangements for


﻿the transition of existing institutions -           in relation to the three objectives of improving                 91
particularly in the case of large departments       basic education public expenditure manage-
such as DepEd ARMM.                                 ment, strengthening the region's PEM   systems
overall, and informing the preparations for
Figure 29 illustrates these recommendations         Bangsamoro institutions.
Figure 29:
A framework for improvement
Improving ARMM Basic Education            Improving ARMM Regional
Public Expenditure Management             Public Expenditure Management
* Continue Payroll & HRIS reform &        * Strengthen intra-ARMM budget process
reduce absences                           * Revise OPIF to joint regional/national results
* Tackle routine MOOE gap                 framework based on HELPs to connect policy and
* Phasing in greater ARMM involvement     budgeting
in program budgeting & execution          * Involve civil society & communities
* Context sensitive social accountability  * Address inconcistencies with LGUs
Cons deraI is for Bangsamoro
a ARMM BT(C (PH            *   ring of agreeent               F                                 rna LGUI
Principles for future engagement                    laboration are necessary to locally ground these
The BE-PEIR activity has been providing             recommendations and adapt them to changing
technical assistance to the DepEd ARM              circumstances which might emerge from the
and (to some degree) the DBM     and DepEd          ongoing peace process.
National since mid-2012. The contributions
have focused mostly on payroll and human            The report has also shown that significant gaps
resource management, but has also covered           remain in understanding many aspects of both
issues such as ARMUM   budget preparation and       public expenditure and education services in
ARMM-DepEd interaction over centrally               ARMM. Further research and technical as-
managed funds.12r Constant support and col-         sistance is planned, including an additional
1'Written outputs from these TA interactions include the payroll and HRIS assessment by Belisario and Masalonga (2013), and two discussion
notes on 2014 Budget Preparation and Centrally-Managed Funds by Nixon (2013) that have been circulated to the ARMM and National DepEds,
DBM, and ORG.


﻿92
Box 6:            *Equity and regressiveness of spending within  *Status and prospects for functioning Local
Areas for         the region;                                    School Boards in ARMM;
future research    * Patterns of LGU spending;                   * Using social accountability to reinforce educa-
* What determines educational outcomes in     tion services;
ARMM - correlates of student performance and    Tracking expenditures under the BEFF
equity of achievement levels;
round of school-level surveys. Potential areas  results indicators for the clusters, and support-
for investigation are listed here.            ing means to measure them. Key principles
for this ongoing engagement should include
Institutional reforms in basic education are a  (a) building collaboration across ARMM and
focus of Australian Aid's large scale BEAM-    national reform constituencies, (b) encourag-
ARIM program, which provides one entry        ing coalitions/collaboration across ARM
point for public financial management reforms  DepEd, division! district staff and frontline
within the regional government. Australian     facilities, (c) enhancing collaboration with
Aid has also recently approved a Mindanao      NGOs and communities, and (d) encourag-
Delivery Strategy to support institutional    ing information sharing between the current
capacity building for peace and development in  ARNIM stakeholders and the key players in
conflict-affected areas. In addition to Austra-  the Bangsamoro transition.
lian Aid's efforts, the World Bank through the
Mindanao Trust Fund is involved in developing  Immediate next steps can include continued
a Bangsamoro Development Plan, and through     and deepening civil society involvement, foster-
its partnership in the FASTTRAC initiative in  ing public awareness of public expenditure,
providing support to the Transition Commis-    education access, and quality issues through
sion. These programs are opportunities to build  public campaigns, improved reporting systems,
on the diagnosis and reforms started by the    and more effective data management and
BE-PEIR project, and active dissemination of   presentation. Continued frontline data collec-
findings and recommendations is ongoing.       tion in close collaboration with civil society
utilizing information technology, and improved
The overarching rationale for continued tech-  presentation and use of data through geospatial
nical assistance could be organized around the  initiatives, are immediate steps that are being
objective of developing the aforementioned     explored with the support of the regional gov-
regional results-based management and bud-     ement and its partners in the ongoing efforts
geting framework. This framework can be built  to improve basic education in ARMM, and
around the HELPs clusters being proposed by   public expenditure management as a whole.
ARMM regional government by developing


﻿References                                                                                         93
Antonio, Ella S. and Cielito F. Habito. 2012. "Financing Peace and Development in Mindanao".
Unpublished discussion paper prepared for Australian Aid (March).
ARMM Office of the Regional Governor. 2012. "ARMM Reform Agenda".Presentation at
Department of Budget and Management (6 July).
Asian Development Bank/World Bank. 2005. Decentralization in the Philippines: Strengthening
Local Government Financing and Resource Management in the Short Term. Manila:
Asian Development Bank/World Bank (March).
Ateneo School of Government. 2011. G- Watch Assessment ofthe Responsiveness ofthe
Education Resource Allocation for the Year 2009. Final Report for the Budget Transparency
Forum. Quezon City: Ateneo de Manila University (December).
Bacani, B. 2005. "Should ARMM Dance the Cha-Cha?"Autonomy and Peace Review, Vol. 1, Issue
1. (October-December).
Belisario, Carole and Jonathon Masalonga. HRIS and Payroll Systems Final Report. Australian Aid
unpublished TA report.
Department of Budget and Management, Republic of the Philippines, National Budget
Memorandum, No. 115,28 December 2012.
Department of Education ARMM. 2009. Basic Education Development Plan. Cotabato (February).
Department for International Development. 2001. Understanding and reforming public expenditure
management. Guidelines for DFID. London: Department for International Development/
Oxford Policy Management.
Department of Interior and Local Government. 2012. "Seal of Good Housekeeping for Local
Governments: No. of Recipients by Region January 2012" [http://www.dilg.gov.ph:
accessed 18 June 2013].
F6lscher, Alta. 2007. "Budgeting Methods and Practices" in Budgeting and Budgetary Institutions,
Anwar Shah ed. Public Sector Governance and Accountability Series. Washington, DC:
World Bank.
Government of the Republic of the Philippines. 2012. National Poverty Statistics. National
Statistics Coordination Board. [www.nscb.gov.ph: accessed 17 June 2012].


﻿94
Government of the Republic of the Philippines/Moro Islamic Liberation Front. 2012. Framework
Agreement on the Bangsamoro (October).
Government of the Republic of the Philippines/Moro Islamic Liberation Front. 2012. Decision
Points on Principles (24 April).
HDN/UNDP. 2013.2012/13 Philippines Human Development Report. Manila, Human
Development Network with UNDP [http://hdn.org.ph/20122013-philippine-human-
development-report/].
The International Center for Innovation, Transformation and Excellence in Governance. 2007.
Towards Strengthening the Fiscal Capabilities of ARMM - A Policy Paper [http://
incitegov.org/towards-strengthening-the-fiscal-capabilities-of-armm-a-policy-paper/].
Kremer, Michael, Karthik Muralidharan, Nazmul ChaudhuryJeffrey Hammer and E Halsey
Rogers. 2005. "Teacher absence in India.A snapshot"Journal of the European Economic
Association 3(2-3): 658-67.
Koyama, Takiko and Futoshi Yamauchi. 2013. Endogenizing potential learner population sizefor
out-of-school programs: Evidence from Alternative Learning System in the Philippines.
Mimeo: World Bank.
Landingin, Roel. 2010. "Sharp Spike in Maguindanao, ARMM Population a Big Riddle." Philippine
Center for Investigative Journalism. [http://pcij.org/stories/sharp-spike-in-maguindanao-
armm-population-a-big-riddle/].
Local Government Support Program in ARMd\M (LGSPA). 2007. Towards Strengthening the
Fiscal Capabilities ofARMM. INCITEGov Policy Paper. Manila: INCITEGov.
Parcasio, Randolph C. Undated. Rapid Field Appraisal of Decentralization: Autonomous Region
of Muslim Mindanao. USAID/The Asia Foundation.
Rogers, Halsey, and Margaret Koziol. 2011. Provider Absence Surveys in Education and Health:
A guidance note. Washington: World Bank Human Development Network.
Schiavo-Campo, Salvatore. "'Ihe Budget and Its Coverage." In Budgeting and Budgetary
Institutions, edited by Anwar Shah, 53-87. Washington, DC:'Ihe World Bank, 2007.
Schick, Allen. 1998.A Contemporary Approach to Public Expenditure Management. Washington:
World Bank Institute.
Sefiase, Charlie. 2013. "No shortage of teachers in ARMM following elimination of ghost pupils".
Philippine Inquirer (6 June 2013).


﻿95
Sevilla, Annalyn. 2008. "ARMM Budgeting and Spending System and Procedures". Unpublished
discussion note. World Bank (July).
Shah, Anwar and Chunli Shen. 2007. "A Primer on Performance Budgeting" in Budgeting and
Budgetary Institutions, Anwar Shah ed. Public Sector Governance and Accountability
Series. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Siegel, Joseph and Patrick O'Mahony. 2006. "Assessing The Merits of Decentralization as a
Conflict Mitigation Strategy". Background Paper. Development Alternatives Inc.
(October).
Torres, Wilfredo, ed. 2007. Rido: Clan Feuding and Conflict Management in Mindanao. Makati
City: The Asia Foundation.
Tribal Helm. 2010. "An Assessment of Current Financial Management Services in DepEd-
ARMM". Unpublished report commissioned by Australian Aid. Implementation support
to design BEAM-ARMM (November).
United Nations Development Program. 2009. Philippines Human Development Report 2008/9.
Manila: Human Development Network.
World Bank. 1998. Public Expenditure Management Handbook. Washington, DC: The World Bank.
World Bank. 2003. Human Developmentfor Peace and Prosperity in the Autonomous Region of
Muslim Mindanao. Report 27593. Human Development Sector/East Asia Pacific Region.
Washington DC: World Bank (November).
World Bank. 2004. Making Services Work for Poor People. World Development Report.
Washington, DC: World Bank/Oxford University Press.
World Bank. 2009. Preparing PERs for Human Development: Core Guidance. Washington, DC:
World Bank (May).
World Bank. 2011. Philippines: Public Expenditure Review, Strengthening Public Finance for
More Inclusive Growth. Manila: World Bank (June).
World Bank/Australian Aid. 2012. Philippines Basic Education Public Expenditure Review.
Manila, Report No. 71272-PH.
World Bank/Australian Aid. 2010. Behind the Veil of Conflict: Moving Towards Economic
Integration for Sustained Development in Mindanao, Philippines. Manila: World Bank.


﻿96              World Bank/WFP. 2011. Violent Conflicts and Displacement in Central Mindanao:
Challenges to Recovery and Development Key Findings (Manila: World Food
Program/World Bank).
World Bank; Australia AID. 2012. Philippines : Basic Education Public Expenditure Review.
World Bank, Pasig City, Philippines. ( World Bank.https://openknowledge.worldbank.
org/handle/10986/13809 License: CC BY 3.0 Unported.


