Ukraine – Unbundling options for gas transmission and storage


Ukraine – Unbundling options for gas transmission
and storage1




    This project is jointly funded by the European                                  This task is implemented
    Union the World Bank and the Energy Sector                                      by Economic Consulting
    Management Assistance Program                                                   Associates Ltd


Executive summary

Unbundling options and key implementation steps
The aim of this assignment is to support the Government of Ukraine and NJSC
‘Naftogaz of Ukraine’ (NAK) with assessing a few suitable restructuring options for
the transmission, storage and production business lines of NAK and developing a
feasible and reasonable implementation plan for the restructuring model that the
Government will choose based on the assessment. This report deals with the
unbundling of the transmission system operator (TSO) and the storage system operator
(SSO). The assignment is supported as part of the European Commission-World Bank
Gas Trust Fund and under the World Bank managed Energy Sector Management
Assistance Program.

This note summarizes the first part of the assignment covering transmission
unbundling and linkages to storage unbundling, and an outline implementation plan;
a second stage of the work will cover the analysis of restructuring options for
production and storage (as further related to production). The note is supported by
draft reports (in power point format) covering the unbundling options and proposed
approach for the TSO, the SSO and linkages between transmission and storage
unbundling.


Unbundling options for gas transmission

Conformity with the European Union’s (EU) Third Energy Package (3EP) requires
transmission unbundling and recognises three main models: ownership unbundling
(OU), independent system operator (ISO) and independent transmission operator
(ITO) options. The Ukraine Gas Market Law (GML) only allows the OU and ISO (not
ITO) options, but for completeness all three models are assessed as part of this
assignment.


1This work is being done as Task 1 of the joint EC-WB Facility to support the Ministry of Energy and Coal
Industry of Ukraine and NJSC ‘Naftogaz of Ukraine’ on advisory services and technical assistance for the
reform and modernization of the natural gas sector.
The views in this report constitute the consultant’s views and do not necessarily reflect those of the World
Bank or the European Commission.


Ukraine Gas: Unbundling options for transmission and storage, February 2016                                    1
Ukraine gas unbundling options for TSO and SSO - executive summary_FINAL) 25/2/16
Executive summary


There are a number of factors that could be constraints on the choice of the model and
need to be taken into account in any unbundling option. A key feature of the
transmission system is that Ukraine’s domestic gas consumption and Gazprom transit
volumes to the EU are of roughly similar sizes and use the same transmission assets.
The transit activity is governed by a transit agreement between Gazprom and NAK
and can probably not be directly assigned to any new TSO2. Another factor is that the
transmission and transit infrastructure is not separated. Finally, the Ukrainian
legislation prohibits privatization of the main gas transportation pipelines; they must
be owned by a state entity.

The key differences of the three unbundling models are that, in the OU model, system
operation and transmission assets are under common ownership and control (as well
as being fully separated from production and supply), whereas in the ISO model the
ownership of transmission assets (and hence investment) are separate from the system
operator. In the ITO model the system operation and assets remain in the vertically
integrated company but must be effectively ring-fenced from supply; this is difficult to
achieve. Whichever model is adopted, good corporate governance is needed to ensure
effective implementation and transparent operation.

NAK itself had originally considered both the ISO model and the OU model but more
recently has proposed the OU model, with the aim to establish a new company under a
separate owner which could ultimately attract a private partner. There is broad
consensus among other stakeholders for the OU model but with different views on
ownership (e.g. locating the management of shares at the Ministry of Energy and Coal
Industry (MECI), the Ministry of Economic Development and Trade (MEDT), or the
State Property Fund of Ukraine (SPFU), which currently acts as owner of the
transmission assets). Another area of discussion is whether to establish a new
transmission company or retain the Ukrtransgaz (UTG) structure, which includes
storage.

Comparison with nearby EU countries has shown that a mixture of models have been
adopted. However, many of the operators in the larger and more mature EU markets
have implemented the OU model, which is more compatible with efficient and
effective market competition – a direction in which Ukraine seeks to go. Several others
have implemented the ITO model but this is not permitted under the GML.

This study, after carrying out a further assessment against a range of criteria, continues
to recommend the OU model. The assessment and comparison of the three unbundling
models has been carried out against six criteria. These include compliance with 3EP
(including the facilitation of transparency of operation and decision-making),
consistency with EU practice for relevant comparators, efficiency with respect to
operation and future investment, and ease of implementation. The six factors (see table
below) have been used to evaluate each of the unbundling options (ITO is included in
the comparison for completeness though, as noted above, is not an allowed option
under the GML). The resulting assessments are shown in the table below, indicating
support for the overall preference for OU.



2An alternative would be to maintain the transit contract between NAK and Gazprom, with NAK then
having a back-to-back agreement with the TSO. This would avoid the need for obtaining Gazprom consent
for assigning the contract (or avoiding arbitration), but could limit the possibility of introducing changes,
for example, to the tariff setting regime from distance and volume based tariffs to entry-exit tariffs.


Ukraine Gas: Unbundling options for transmission and storage, February 2016                                2
Executive summary




Although it is not superior on all criteria, the balance of assessment is in favour of OU.
Specifically, the OU model is the preferred 3EP model as it maximises the potential for
greater independence and non-discrimination in system operation and investment; it
fully integrates investment, long run planning and short run operation of the system
and provides incentives to make capacity available to facilitate more trading; it is likely
to be more robust to the future evolution of the gas industry (greater competition and
interconnection with EU markets); and it is more conducive to attracting investment
compared to an ‘asset-light’ ISO model.

The ISO model, on the other hand, requires additional and robust regulation especially
of transmission investment; it is not commonly adopted in the EU especially among
large TSOs; it creates interface problems between asset ownership and operation; and it
is generally perceived to risk under-investment in the transmission system. Finally, the
ITO model, although it is adopted in several other countries, is the least consistent with
the principles of independence, non-discrimination and transparency; it may result in
limiting investments which would benefit competitors; it is unlikely to further the
reform and transformation of the gas sector in Ukraine as it is inconsistent with the
reform objectives of the stakeholders (including NAK and MECI); it may stifle the
development of competition; and it does not encourage private sector participation.
Moreover, its implementation would require amending the Ukrainian Gas Market Law
which could have adverse consequences in the current political situation.

The prevalence of the OU model among countries that have structures and markets to
which Ukraine aspires, indicates the longer term benefits of the approach, even though
the ITO (not permitted under the GML) and ISO models may be simpler to implement
in the short term. Notably, countries with larger and mature gas markets (such as the
Netherlands, Spain and the UK) have adopted the OU model, while some other EU
countries that started with ITO have since (at least partly) moved to the OU model: e.g.
France (one out of two TSOs), Germany (the largest TSO) and Italy.

Nevertheless, implementing the OU model will pose a number of practical
implementation challenges for Ukraine. These include whether to set up the model by
spinning UTG out of NAK or setting up a new company, the transfer or other
arrangements for the transit contract, entitlement to the transit revenues, which public
bodies will own the unbundled parts of NAK, and how to ensure effective separation
of exercising the ownership function for transmission from the ownership function for
production and supply in the sector by the respective public bodies.

Ukraine Gas: Unbundling options for transmission and storage, February 2016                3
Executive summary


Unbundling options for storage

The 3EP is less prescriptive in terms of unbundling options for storage compared with
transmission though it does require that storage facilities are able to provide access to
all users on a transparent and non-discriminatory basis. This can be achieved within a
variety of ownership and structural options (including being part of a group that owns
either transmission or supply activities) but the essence of the requirements are that
SSOs are legally separate from production and supply and have operational
independence3 from other affiliates (including, especially in this context, transmission).

In the context of considering the various restructuring options for the gas sector in
Ukraine, the study examined unbundling options for storage. The current analysis is
partial (linkages with production have not yet been specifically considered) as it is
mostly focused on linkages of storage with transmission, which should be considered
when selecting the appropriate unbundling model for the TSO. The key linkages are
the need to coordinate in a transparent way the provision of information on
transmission and storage, available capacities and the instructions for dispatch of those
capacities, including cross-border capacities where relevant.

Key factors for the effective operation and use of storage relate to the type of storage
facilities, the opportunities and demand for storage in the current and expected market
conditions, the pricing and value of storage, and its regulation. The main drivers for
considering storage unbundling relate to the unique factors in Ukraine; the
exceptionally large amount of storage, the role it plays in both domestic and transit
support, promoting its more effective use within Ukraine’s developing market but also
the potential opportunities arising from integrating with the EU markets.

Ukraine has nearly 31 billion cubic meters (Bcm) of gas storage capacity, the largest
working volume in Europe, although its usefulness is limited by the type of storage
(mainly depleted gas fields and some aquifers, which have low deliverability and is
therefore of more use for long term seasonal storage than short term trading), the
limited connectivity with EU markets and the current narrow spread of gas prices in
Europe. Key areas where Ukraine needs to introduce change or strengthen storage
within its gas sector is transparency in terms of pricing and information availability,
accessing the available storage and associated transmission and cross-border capacity,
ensuring withdrawal, coordination with the TSO for transmission and cross-border
trade, and offering low prices to compete. This has to be considered against the
background of the current ‘virtual storage’ arrangements whereby users have
insufficient visibility of where their gas is stored or what constraints might apply to its
withdrawal and delivery.

Of Ukraine’s 31 Bcm of storage, only about one quarter (7 Bcm) has relatively high
withdrawal rates. The latter capacity is potentially attractive as a trading asset; though
this has to be offset against the difficulties of switching between injection and
withdrawal that the nature of the facilities – all either depleted fields or aquifers –


3 Operational independence is not unambiguously defined in the EU directive or the relevant interpretive
note issued by the European Commission. Our understanding is that operational independence would
require separate management and accounts (i.e. functional and accounting unbundling). This facilitates
transparent and non-discriminatory third party access (as required by 3EP) and charging for storage
services independently of other gas market activities and functions (again, as also required by 3EP).


Ukraine Gas: Unbundling options for transmission and storage, February 2016                                4
Executive summary


dictates. In practice, the facilities will primarily perform a seasonal storage role, unlike
salt caverns that exist elsewhere in Europe and which are much more suited to rapid
switching. Nevertheless, there may be significant potential for the volume of relatively
faster storage to support commercial activity and trading, especially given the large
number of facilities. However, for this potential to be realised, there needs to be a
significant improvement in transparency and commercial security of operations.
Discussions with traders from nearby countries indicate that there is very little
confidence that gas put into store in Ukraine can be tracked with a level of
transparency that gives undisputed title whilst being stored and ultimately withdrawn
on time, including access to the needed transmission and cross-border capacity.

Nearby countries provide contrasting examples of how to manage their systems:
storage operations in Hungary have lacked transparency and hindered commercial use
of storage, with a major facility initially being privatised but then bought back.
Uncertainty over levels of state mandated strategic storage have further undermined
confidence. Nearby Slovakia, on the other hand, has two operating storage facilities
providing transparent and secure commercial services to traders, efficiently
coordinated between transmission and storage operations.

Storage in Ukraine is also very important for the transit activity, with gas from Russia
being put into the system at the Eastern border and taken out from transmission or
storage at the Western border. This integration between transit and domestic use of
transmission and storage has been an important feature of the integrated use of the
system; for the time being, facilitating transit activity through coordination of
transmission and storage may still be a role that is required and could have a
significant influence on the future use and operation of the system. Some interlinkage
between the storage necessary for transit (if defined) and the TSO would therefore
seem logical.

If storage stays within the NAK group, it will be closely associated with the production
and supply functions of NAK. Ensuring transparent and non-discriminatory use of
storage by competing suppliers in Ukraine may be difficult and there will be concerns
over information confidentiality. Furthermore, leaving storage within NAK while the
TSO is unbundled would imply an early restructuring of UTG, together with the
associated issues of ensuring coordinated operation of transmission, transit and
storage.

The study has identified 4 main options for unbundling storage; together with sub-
options, there are 7 main combinations of ownership and structure that can be
evaluated. In all cases, and consistent with the preceding analysis for transmission, it is
assumed that the TSO will be ownership unbundled from the NAK group. The storage
restructuring options assessed are the following:

Option 1    NAK owns and operates the storage system operator (SSO) as a legally and
            operationally separate entity
Option 2    Storage is transferred to be in a structure with the ownership unbundled
            TSO, with three structural variants:




Ukraine Gas: Unbundling options for transmission and storage, February 2016                5
Executive summary


Option 2a SSO is a division in a joint company with the TSO; the joint company is
          ownership unbundled from NAK. It could be an ownership unbundled
          UTG or a new holding company4
Option 2b SSO is a division of a holding company which is ownership unbundled
          from NAK and which owns the legally unbundled TSO
Option 2c HoldCo owns the SSO and TSO as two separate subsidiaries, legally and
          operationally unbundled from holding company, which is ownership
          unbundled from NAK
Option 3      The SSO is a separate OU entity owned by a private company or state
              entity5 independent of the owner of NAK
Option 4      Storage is split into one or more ownership unbundled SSOs; with
              dedicated capacity for the TSO’s use
Option 4a Storage is split into two (or more) ownership unbundled SSOs; one is
          dedicated to use by, and owned by, the TSO
Option 4b One ownership unbundled SSO, but with a minimum amount (say 2 BCM6)
          of gas storage capacity dedicated to the TSO.
These options have been evaluated against two sets of criteria: General ease of
implementation and support to the market; and storage specific factors:

             The general criteria are:
                     Meeting the requirements for compliance with 3EP and national
                      legislation
                     Ease of implementation, the extent to which costly and time-
                      consuming corporate restructuring is required
                     Support to development of a competitive market, through non-
                      discriminatory access to storage and promoting investment in
                      capacity to support trading
                     Transparency; timely availability of accurate information, open access
                      to capacity and execution of instructions
             The storage specific criteria are:
                     Security of supply to the domestic market, assurance of storage and
                      withdrawal capacity to meet seasonal and peak demand
                     Facilitating cross-border trade
                     Improving efficiency of storage operation/use, monetising the value
                      of storage


4In each of variants of option 2 the holding company could be a new special purpose company or UTG
separated from NAK. The choice will depend on the practicalities of separating UTG from NAK, i.e.
whether there are complications with such issues as other assets or activities not directly related to the
TSO and SSO, contracts, liabilities etc
5In each of the models in option 3 and the variants of option 4 the State Investor could be a new company
separate from production and supply or ownership unbundled UTG.
6The TSO requires an amount of storage for priority operational purposes; it could be a little more or less
than around 2 Bcm – this figure is for illustrative purposes only.


Ukraine Gas: Unbundling options for transmission and storage, February 2016                                   6
Executive summary


                Attracting investors in storage facilities
Using these criteria, we have assessed the 4 options and variants, below:




                 Green = positive impact, red = negative impact, circle size = size of impact

The suitability of each option for Ukraine depends also on the relative importance of
each criterion; they are not all of equal relevance and value. Nevertheless, based on a
simple ‘addition’ of the evaluations in the above analysis, the higher scoring options
are option 2c (Holding company owns both TSO and SSO, in effect an unbundling of
main parts of UTG), or option 3 (independent SSO); these are indicated with the
highest evaluations.

The medium scoring options are 2a, where the TSO and SSO are both divisions in a
combined or holding company (this could of course be UTG) which is ownership
unbundled from NAK, and option 2b (SSO is a division of a holding company, TSO is
legally separate from it). These options are ones without a potentially conflicted owner
(either NAK in option 1), or the complication of two (or more) SSOs or dedicated
storage (options 4a and 4b).

Another consideration is the potential for synergies from the coordination of
transmission and storage in promoting efficient trade and use of storage, such as
ensuring that the system remains sufficiently stable and secure, and that shipper and
consumer actions do not impede the efficient functioning of the system or result in
pressure reductions or supply interruptions. These benefits are more likely in the
options that retain storage and transmission under common ownership (Options 2a,
2b, 2c and 4a), although these same synergies could theoretically be achieved through
contracts under the other options.

A constraint for the first step of unbundling is that currently storage and transmission
operate together in UTG. The distraction of needing to (rapidly) unbundle from UTG
both the storage and transmission operations simultaneously could jeopardise timely


Ukraine Gas: Unbundling options for transmission and storage, February 2016                7
Executive summary


3EP compliance for the TSO. Therefore, it may be relevant to consider as a first step an
option that is easy to implement and enables further unbundling of the storage
operations later on.

Options 2a or 2b could be a practical first step for the unbundling of storage
operations. Based on the evaluation, it supports the development of the gas market
fairly well and it also has a path to further restructuring, i.e. full separation of the TSO
and SSO into separate companies, potentially attracting private JV or equity partners to
each in the future. In this scenario, the other more highly evaluated options - 2c
(Holding Company) and 3 (Independent SSO) – could be adopted in the second stage..

There are still many practical and unresolved issues to deal with to reach a fully
unbundled system. These include regulatory issues such as transition to alternative
tariff regimes, the treatment of shared costs, the relationship between transmission and
storage tariffs, assessment of the real asset base including non-core (storage) assets.
There are also valuation and ownership issues for some assets, and issues of
identifying and separating activities within UTG. All of these indicate that there are
likely to be considerable implementation costs.

An approach which reflected the need to deal with the number and nature of
unresolved issues, and spread the cost and effort of unbundling over a reasonable
period, could have some merit. The overall unbundling process could then be viewed
as a two-step approach, with a transition to full unbundling being accomplished in
two steps, such as: adoption of option 2b for TSO unbundling in the first instance,
followed by transition to one of options 2c or 3 (say after 3-5 years). This approach is
examined more fully in the next section.


Recommended transitional structure for the gas sector

The long term aim of the reforms embarked upon in Ukraine’s gas sector is to establish
a fully competitive market. Fulfilling this objective requires the implementation of a
large number of measures, some of which have already been planned and/or executed,
including the adoption of new enabling legislation (the Gas Market Law) in conformity
with the EU’s 3EP, the adoption of phased pricing reforms to eventually establish cost-
recovery across the entire value chain and greater integration with the EU market.

The restructuring and unbundling of gas transmission and storage should be viewed in
the same context, that is, as an important step in removing barriers to (or, conversely,
enabling) future market development, competition and private sector participation.
While there is currently no agreed and shared vision among key stakeholders of the
preferred structure for Ukraine’s gas sector in future, it is important that the immediate
unbundling decision for transmission and storage is consistent with the overall
objective of introducing competition and that it does not preclude the possibility of
further industry restructuring in keeping with this aim.

In light of this, and the evaluation of the unbundling options for both transmission and
storage discussed above, the proposed transitional structure for the gas sector is
depicted in the figure below. The top panel shows the current structure, an integrated
monopoly (of key gas market activities) under the Naftogaz group, while the bottom
panel shows the recommended transitional structure. The arrow running along the left-



Ukraine Gas: Unbundling options for transmission and storage, February 2016                8
Executive summary


hand side of the figure demonstrates that this is part of an evolutionary process toward
a more competitive market structure (yet to be defined).




As shown in the figure, the recommendation is that the transmission and storage
functions are contained as separate divisions or legal entities in a corporate entity
that is separate from the production and supply functions of Naftogaz. This entity
can be the existing Ukrtransgaz (but legally separated from NAK) or a new company
(‘NewCo’), but in either case the shareholder (‘State owner 2’) and management of this
company must be separate from and independent of the owner of Naftogaz (‘State
owner 1’). The proposed structure:

          Is consistent with the evaluation of the unbundling options against the
           agreed criteria eg it adopts ownership unbundling for transmission and
           ensures storage is operated independently of both trading activities and
           system operation

          Recognises practical constraints and imperatives such as the need to:

                complete the unbundling by June 2016 in accordance with the ‘Gas
                 Sector Reform Implementation Plan’

                minimise the unnecessary duplication of ownership and operating
                 arrangements (at least in the short term)

                ensure the continued and stable operation of the gas system during a
                 period of large structural change

                in the case of storage, make a more informed decision when the
                 current financial and technical status of the facilities is better
                 understood




Ukraine Gas: Unbundling options for transmission and storage, February 2016            9
Executive summary


             Does not preclude the possibility of further restructuring in the future
              such as entirely separating transmission and (some or all) storage and/or
              ‘unbundling’ production from supply, if this is perceived or assessed to
              create improved preconditions for efficient operation, market development
              and the attraction of private investment.


Key implementation steps
Implementation of the recommended structure requires careful planning and entails a
number of actions and prerequisites, the most important of which are listed in the table
below. These would necessarily follow a decision of the Cabinet of Ministers of
Ukraine to adopt the proposed industry structure and which would, we assume,
clarify:

             the identity of the owners of the two corporate entities (Naftogaz and the
              combined TSO-SSO company, respectively)

             whether UTG would be retained (albeit as a company that is ownership
              unbundled from Naftogaz) or whether the TSO and SSO functions would
              be undertaken by a newly established company.

We note that the table below should be treated as a high level guide – there is
significantly more detail required to fill out the implementation plan, while some steps
(eg development of network and storage codes) may have already been completed. The
actions also focus on those needed for the establishment of the proposed transitional
structure. Once this phase is completed, and after a period of integrated operation of
transmission and storage, further work will be required to determine and implement
additional restructuring and the adoption of the ‘final’ target structure for the gas
sector.

Implementation area                     Rationale/comments
Legislation
Prepare and submit to the Energy        ECS is the relevant authority for confirming that the
Community Secretariat (ECS) a           unbundling model conforms to 3EP requirements.
proposed plan for effective             Early approval will ensure timely implementation, that
unbundling, compliant with the Gas      unbundling is undertaken with certainty and the
Market Law                              provision of a positive opinion as part of the formal
                                        certification process (see further below under
                                        'Regulation')
Amend any laws (eg Law on Pipeline      Various legal amendments will or might be required to
Transport, Law on the Management        ensure (i) the unbundling complies with the
of State Property Assets) and prepare   requirements of the Gas Market Law (including for the
or finalise secondary legislation       effective separation of public ‘bodies’ exercising control
(network and storage codes, tariff      over the different companies), and (ii) the operating
methodologies) that is required to      framework of the regulated companies and the
ensure unbundling is effectively        conditions for accessing transmission and storage
implemented                             infrastructure are in place
Regulation
Design and implement a programme An independent and authoritative regulator is critical
for building regulatory capacity to certify the unbundling process, set cost-reflective
                                 tariffs, provide ongoing incentives for efficient
                                 operation and investment and ensure that only efficient
                                 costs are charged to users. The objective of the capacity


Ukraine Gas: Unbundling options for transmission and storage, February 2016                     10
Executive summary


Implementation area                    Rationale/comments
                                       building would be to ensure that the regulator can
                                       competently and effectively undertake these critical
                                       tasks
Certify the unbundling model and       Under 3EP and the Gas Market Law, the TSO must
submit to ECS for approval             apply for certification with the national energy
                                       regulator, which in turn must submit its certification
                                       decision to the ECS to provide its opinion on the
                                       certification procedure
Assess and set allowed revenues for    If not already undertaken, the regulator must
transmission and storage               determine the allowed revenues and approve the
                                       regulated tariffs for transmission and storage. This is
                                       important for both transparency purposes and for
                                       ensuring the financial independence of the regulated
                                       entities (as required by 3EP)
Commercial and organisational
Establish TSO-SSO company with         Irrespective of whether UTG is unbundled or a NewCo
clear management structure and         is formed, the TSO-SSO company must be self-standing
operating procedures                   ie it must have the managerial, administrative, financial
                                       and staff capacity to operate independently and at
                                       arms-length of Naftogaz or other entities, and employ
                                       effective operating and management procedures
Establish a corporate governance       This is being developed with EBRD support and is
framework for UTG or 'NewCo' in        important for both the empowerment of the board and
accordance with OECD Corporate         management of the TSO-SSO company and for the
Governance Principles                  effective governance of the chosen ownership entity
Transfer pipeline and storage assets   The ownership of the underlying assets must be
                                       unambiguous and clearly be vested in the transmission
                                       and storage company (UTG or NewCo) or the
                                       underlying shareholder entity (relevant Ministry or
                                       other public body such as the SPFU)
Undertake due diligence of UTG         This is more important in the event of a NewCo being
contracts and assets                   established, but must be undertaken in any case to
                                       clarify the current condition of the assets, to ensure that
                                       all contracts required for operation of the assets are in
                                       place and that contracts and assets associated with non-
                                       TSO and SSO activities are identified and separated
Undertake technical and commercial     The current status, marketability and hence value of
due diligence of storage assets and    storage is highly uncertain. Further decisions regarding
operations                             the pricing and restructuring of storage (including the
                                       possibility of decommissioning some assets) require a
                                       detailed technical and commercial audit
Allocate transit revenues              Transit revenues are currently earned by Naftogaz as
                                       party to the contract with Gazprom that expires in
                                       2019. A mechanism is needed to ensure that some or a
                                       portion of these revenues flow to the TSO-SSO
                                       company, consistent with the new tariff methodology
                                       for transmission services

Separate TSO and SSO                   While TSO and SSO services are proposed under the
(and other activities)                 transitional structure to remain in a single company,
                                       operational independence is necessary and any shared
                                       costs must be transparently allocated. Also, the costs of
                                       other regulated or unregulated activities undertaken by
                                       the TSO-SSO company must be clearly identified and
                                       not recovered through transmission and/or storage
                                       tariffs


Ukraine Gas: Unbundling options for transmission and storage, February 2016                      11
Executive summary




As mentioned above, the unbundling of the integrated TSO-SSO company is likely to
be an initial (although significant) step in gradually moving from a monopolistic to
competitive gas market with increased participation of the private sector. Hence, the
completion of this unbundling phase is likely to be followed by:

          A period (say, one year) of integrated operation of transmission and
           storage, in order to ensure system stability, strengthen the capacity of the
           regulator, establish the independence of storage operations and to clarify
           the respective costs of transmission, storage and other non-core activities (if
           any) of the combined TSO-SSO company

          Preparation for the separation of (some or all) storage from transmission
           – this can be undertaken in parallel with the period of integrated operation
           and would be informed by the suggested technical and commercial audit
           (see table above). The preliminary view is that most (or possibly all) storage
           can be unbundled from gas transportation (although some storage could
           remain with the TSO if essential for system stability and subject to 3EP
           conditions), while current storage operations are likely to require
           significant rationalisation

          Establishment of new companies – subject to the outcome of the preceding
           preparation phase, the new TSO and SSO companies would be established
           with their own management and operating procedures (in practice, this is
           likely to apply just to storage while the TSO should be able to operate and
           be organised as before). This step could be implemented within 3-6 months
           after the initial one-year period of integrated operation

          Invitation for private sector participation – the final step would entail
           preparing the companies for private sector participation, and inviting and
           selecting appropriate joint venture partners (additional 6 months).




Ukraine Gas: Unbundling options for transmission and storage, February 2016             12
