         LEARNING REVIEW OF REGIONAL PROJECTS
                 Summary Assessment Sheet
COUNTRIES                      Africa                    PROJECT                    3A-Telecommunicat
                                                                                    ions APL (FY07)

REGION                         AFR                       SECTOR                     Global
                                                                                    Information/Commun
                                                                                    ications Technology

TASK TEAM LEADER               Maria Isabel A. S. Neto   SECTOR MANAGER(S)          Philippe Dongier

REGIONAL OR COUNTRY
DIRECTOR(S)

LN/CR AMOUNT ($MIL)            164.5                     LN/CR/GRANT NUMBER 42840

PROJECT ID                     P094103                   TTL (Please indicate if HQ Headquarters
                                                         or Field-based)

DATE APPROVED                  03/29/2007                DATE EFFECTIVE             08/21/2007

CO-FINANCING PARTNERS

MTR DATE (Planned)             12/01/2009                MTR DATE (Actual)

ORIGINAL CLOSING DATE          07/31/2012                REVISED CLOSING           07/31/2012
                                                         DATE

PREVIOUS QAG                   QEA8
ASSESSMENT(s)

CO-FINANCING PARTNERS:

                               BB                        TF                        Total

PREPARATION                    1095                      48                        1143
EXPENDITURES ($’000):

SPVN BUDGET $000 (incl. TF):   FY07                      FY08                       FY09

                               48                        189                       273
ACTUAL:
DO/IP RATING:                                     FY08                          FY09

ISR:                    DO                         MS                            MS
                        IP                         MS                            MS

EA CATEGORY             Partial Assessment        ASSESSMENT DATE              10/14/2009

MODERATOR               Ricardo A. Halperin       PANEL MEMBER(S)              John R. Nellis;
                                                                               Antoun F. Moussa

PERSON(s) INTERVIEWED   Maria Isabel A. S. Neto; Doyle Gallegos; Mark D. J. Williams; Philippe
                        Dongier
          LEARNING REVIEW OF REGIONAL PROJECTS
1. Quality of Design

The economic and technical rationales for this ambitious, complex three country operation are
impeccable. At inception, when the project was expected to finance both the submarine cable and the
individual country “backbones” for connectedness there was absolutely no question as to the regional
nature of the operation. Even after the funding of the submarine cable was shifted to another, mainly IFC
operation, the extra-national synergies and spillover effects arising from the project appeared significant
enough to justify the regional approach. But from the outset, observers from within the region (the
internal quality review process) and outside (QAG, in its QEA-8 review of this operation) expressed
concerns that the project was attempting too much, too quickly, in the absence of the necessary
supporting institutional and legal frameworks. Now, 26 months after effectiveness, it is seen that, as
predicted by the observers, the overall pace of implementation is indeed far slower than anticipated. A
good part of the reason for the delay is due to circumstances beyond the control of the task team or the
Bank; i.e., a political crisis in Madagascar that brought the operation to a halt in that country, and a
freeze on disbursements for several months in Kenya following the post-election crisis in 2008. The
Panel accepts these factors as very important. It still suspects, nonetheless, that a more searching
assessment of the scope of what was being proposed might have led the team, at the outset to design a
less complex project, more in line with the institutional capacities of the clients. The team and the region
evidently concur: In two rather similar new regional telecommunications projects underway in West and
Central Africa, the operations concentrate solely on connectedness (i.e., no e government issues).
Moreover, the operations are divided into two phases: In the first a vertical APL is being used to lay the
institutional/legal/policy base through technical assistance; only in the second phase will a horizontal
APL finance the backbone investments. The Panel endorses this approach.

2. Quality of Implementation

In general, implementation progress in all three countries lags behind schedule.

However, the pace varies from one country to another:

- In Kenya, delays stem from the disbursement freeze and the need to “realign” the project to bring it in
line with altered technical circumstances and client demand. Some progress has been made, but overall
project implementation has progressed very slowly in the area of e-Government applications. The team
is confident that the realignment, along with an extension of the project closing date by “one or two
years” will result in the achievement of the PDOs. They argue that spot short-term pricing terms are in
the range of $400 - $600/Mb while longer term (e.g. 15-20 year) pricing terms are as low as $150 –
200/Mb. The Mombasa to London segment alone is estimated to be within the $50-$70/Mb price range.
This is a major change and the project (and the dialogue around it) has contributed to this impact. The
new prices should be compared to the prices existing just one year ago (standard pre-submarine cable,
satellite transponder pricing) which were in the range of $3,000/Mb. The competing submarine cable
projects are reported to be on track with estimated commercial operation dates of October, 2009
(TEAMS cable) and June, 2010 (EASSY cable).

- In Madagascar, implementation has been suspended following the latest in a series of political crises in
the country. The team argues that such project suspensions under O.P. 7.30 “should not be factored
into” QAG assessments of the likelihood of achieving PDOs. The Panel respectfully disagrees. PDOs are
designed to be achieved within some set timeframe. QAG panels are asked to judge whether the PDOs
will be met according to plan. The Panel acknowledges that there was little or nothing the Bank could
have done to prevent or avoid these particular delays, but the objective fact remains that it is unlikely the
PDOs will be met in Kenya and Madagascar according to the original schedule. Note also that even
before the most recent crisis the project was delayed in Madagascar due to lack of Government decisions
concerning the sector liberalization framework and constructing the national telecommunication
backbone. It is not fully apparent that in the absence of the political difficulties the project would have
proceeded on schedule.

- In Burundi, the Panel’s first impression of little progress was corrected by further information provided
by the team: “… the implementing institutions have been set up (SETIC and the consortium of
operators), all technical and preparatory studies, including the tender documents have been completed,
the tender process has begun with the call for pre-qualification. The legal documents for the PPP contract
are at an advanced stage and are expected to be signed before the end of the year.”

The project team realizes the extent and impact of the implementation delays and is devoting
considerable effort to remedial actions, including realignment and streamlining the activities of the
Kenya TCIP/CIP1 project, and speeding up institutional arrangements and recruitment of external
consultancies in Kenya and Burundi. In the case of Madagascar, the project team is trying, without much
success so far, to enter into high level discussions with the relevant officials to come to agreement on the
direction of the project. The Panel understands that at the moment the team is not allowed even to contact
the Minister dealing with the sector.

Given the scope and complexity of the project, and the still apparent policy gaps and institutional
deficiencies in all three countries involved, the Panel feels that there is a low probability that the project
can be implemented on schedule. However, if the project closing date is extended for 24 months, as the
team proposes, then the likelihood of PDO achievement increases substantially.

3. Quality of Bank Supervision

Despite concerns regarding project design and the implementation delays, the Panel feels that the Bank
supervision has been satisfactory. The supervision teams include experienced staff and consultants from
regional offices and from headquarters, as well as sector specialists from headquarters. It is receiving
good support from sector and country management. The Panel judges that the team possesses the
required skills for project supervision, and supervision missions have been undertaken with the frequency
required for such a challenging regional project. While the original TTL has been replaced, he still works
in the sector in the region and continues to contribute to the effort. For such a complex and ambitious
regional project, a larger than normal supervision budget has been provided.

The diagnostic and corrective efforts undertaken by the team seem sound. For example, supervision
missions intervened in a timely manner in the Kenya TCIP and succeeded in realigning the project to
speed up implementation. The innovative PPP under development in Burundi has required extensive
hand-holding at all steps of the complex process. The acute problems in Madagascar are due to political
events beyond the control of the team.

The team strongly feels that further streamlining of Bank internal review and procurement processing, to
bring them in line with the special requirements of regional operations, would promote more efficient
supervision; the Panel agrees.
4. Likelihood of Achieving Development Objectives

                                                                  Assessment Rating
                                                                  1 = Highly Satisfactory/Likely
                                                                  2 = Satisfactory/Likely
                                                                  3 = Moderately Satisfactory/Likely
                                                                  4 = Moderately Unsatisfactory/Unlikely
                                                                  5 = Unsatisfactory/Unlikely
                                                                  6 = Highly Unsatisfactory/Unlikely
                                                                  NA = Not Applicable



  (i)       List of DOs:                                                              Ratings:
        2
 PDO
 DO1 Contributing to lower prices for international capacity and to extend                        3
        the geographic reach of broadband networks.
 DO2 Contributing to improve Government Efficiency and Transparency                               4
        through e-Government applications
 DO3
 DO4
 DO5
 Other (if Applicable)

            Likelihood of Achieving DOs                                                                    3

            Comments: Efforts are now mainly concentrated on DO1,
            connectedness and lowering of costs, which accounts for the bulk of
            the operation. The Panel judges that this goal will be achieved, though
            considerably later than anticipated. DO2, promoting transparency and
            accountability through e government applications, was only ever
            envisaged for Kenya (where it was very much needed), and now
            seems to be slipping somewhat off the radar screens of both
            government and project authorities. Nonetheless, some progress has
            been made in Kenya concerning enhanced digital “inclusion” and
            initial work on a High Court Registry. The Panel initially judged that
            few other e-government applications were likely to be implemented
            over the remainder of project life. The team provided additional
            information showing that other applications have been advertised
            since the panel interview; that the project has recently tendered out a
            package for the company registrar portion of this component, and that
            a second high court package is under review. Work is also being done
            on eProcurement, which includes applications that are expected to
            have a major impact by increasing transparency of public procurement
            and that have already been tendered out. While the Panel remains
            dubious about the full achievement of PDO 2, it recognizes that the
            bulk of the operation responds to PDO 1, the achievement of which is
            moderately likely.
5. Risks to the DO at the time of the Review: (1 - Negligible or Low; 2 - Moderate; 3 - Substantial; 4
- High)

   (i)   List of Risks:                                                                Ratings:

 RISK1Project complexity                                                                          3
 RISK2Implementation capacity                                                                     3
 RISK3
 RISK4
 RISK5
 Other (if Applicable)

         Overall Risk Rating at the time of the review                                                 3

         Comments: It is quite likely that a number of the policy and
         regulatory reforms necessary for sector development will not be fully
         implemented within the originally set project time frame. This seems
         especially probable in the case of Madagascar, but blockages or
         delays could occur in the other two countries as well. Thus, there is a
         substantial risk that the team will not be able to implement many
         project activities, both horizontal and vertical, in three countries at the
         same time, within the intended implementation time frame.



6. Panel Recommendations

Response from the Region and Comments of the Panel

In response to a draft of the report, the task team provided the Panel with additional information that led
to a number of revisions in the text. The amendments include: Acknowledging signs of progress on DO1
in Kenya; revising upward the initial impression of scant progress in Burundi; and acknowledging more
clearly that if the project’s closing date is extended, as presently proposed, then the likelihood of
achievement of PDO 1, at least, would be substantially increased. All these changes and more are
reflected in the revised text. Specifically, the team made a case that the Panel, in its overall rating of the
probability of PDO achievement, gave equal weight to both PDOs, even though PDO 1 covers the vast
majority of interventions made under the project. The Panel accepts this reasoning and revises its rating
accordingly.

In addition, the team disagreed with the Panel’s opinion that the operation could have and should have
been more fully prepared before Board submission. The team (and others involved in other regional
projects) argues that the Bank’s decision to launch this project prior to its being fully prepared was both a
conscious and justified decision. The rationale is that the Bank needed ‘to give momentum to the
program…at a time where there were divergent visions in the region among country leaders, and where
the early approval of the Bank project was meant to help build consensus by demonstrating an
irreversible commitment…”

The Panel is not fully persuaded by this argument. Yes, the Bank must show client countries buying into
an innovative operation that it is prepared to stay the course; that this is not a momentary fad. But the
Panel feels that this way of showing commitment imposes too high a cost, as it could easily reinforce the
view of country stakeholders (and Bank task teams?) that originally set timetables are not to be taken
seriously. With so many regional projects undergoing delayed effectiveness, low disbursements,
realignments and extensions of the closing dates it is hard to avoid the conclusion that a longer timetable
and less ambitious initial plan is required.

Panel Recommendations

The Panel endorses the approach that circumstances have already led the team to adopt; i.e., simplify
project activities, increase the time frame for accomplishments, expend more effort on laying the
institutional/policy base prior to building infrastructure, decrease the emphasis on e government
applications until there are clearer signals that the client is truly committed, and streamline and
standardize financial management and procurement processes, both within the Bank and the countries
involved.

7. Any Systemic Lessons

This is one of a number of regional projects in which the team has had to propose or has carried out an
extension of the closing date. This issue merits investigation.

For regional projects involving countries with weak implementation capacities, special attention should
be paid to:

       - Having institutional capacity in place as early as possible – preferably by the time of Board
presentation; and,
    - Simplifying project activities and focus on primary regional requirements.

To advance the pace and utility of regional operations, the Bank needs to simplify and standardize
procurement and financial management procedures and, at the very least, eliminate the need for double
review processes.

A small point on reporting: The Panel had trouble disaggregating ISR ratings. The team reported that
they were required by the reporting system to enter a single rating for an indicator, even when the
progress on the dimension varied greatly from country to country within the regional project. They
claimed they felt compelled to enter an “average” rating. ISRs for regional projects should have the
flexibility to report varying degrees of progress among the different countries in the operation.



1/
  The summary assessment should be kept brief (maximum 3 pages). Further details should be provided
in the relevant sections of the questionnaire and cross-referenced here.
                   Learning Review of Regional Projects
                         Guidance Questionnaire


Context Section:

1.1 Quality of Design

1.1 Strategic Relevance and Approach

    1.1.1Adequacy of enabling environment?

           (a) Analysis of enabling environment, including agreements and
               institutions, and relevant macro, sectoral and institutional policies in
               the participating countries.

                Comments: Despite the supplementary information provided by the
                team in response to a first draft of this report, the Panel still thinks
                that the original design was too optimistic regarding the enabling
                environment and the likelihood that obstacles could be quickly
                identified and overcome. (Note, however, that this was not evident at
                the outset: QAG, in an August, 2007, QEA-8 review, assessed the
                project’s Strategic Relevance as a 1, and awarded a 2 to Technical,
                Economic and Financial Aspects.)

           (b) Adequacy of measure through the project, or complementary actions,
               to address policy and/or institutional constraints.

                Comments: The team has made appropriate, concerted and timely
                efforts to address both policy and institutional problems in all three
                client countries involved.

    1.1.2Strategic relevance and appropriateness of DOs?

                Comments: At the outset, the relevance and correctness of both the
                DOs seemed evident. In time it became clear that no matter how
                desirable the transparency and accountability enhancement objective
                of DO2, it was largely beyond the present grasp of the borrower.
                (DO1 remains appropriate, but the time frame for its achievement
                was underestimated.)

    1.1.3Quality of the results framework to achieve the DOs (including clarity of
         outcome indicators and targets, and realism of causal links between the
         project’s inputs, activities, outputs, and intended outcomes?)

                Comments: A lot was asked of marginally prepared institutions.
    1.1.4Quality of arrangements for monitoring and evaluation (including
         responsibility for data collection and use of performance indicators and
         availability of baseline data)?

                Comments: Same as above.

    1.1.5Quality of cooperation with other development partners
         (Guidance: Consider how the operation takes into account the experiences
         of other financiers, how it links to other projects financed or planned by
         other development partners, and how the concerns of the various financing
         sources have been taken into account in project design.)

                Comments: No apparent problem.


1.2 Realism of Project Design and Risks

    1.2.1Appropriateness of project design, complexity, and approach, given the
         countries’ past track record and absorptive capacity?

                Comments: The project started in three East and Southern African
                countries thought to be advanced with regard to policy readiness and
                general receptivity to the operation’s activities. This estimation
                proved to be flawed. The Panel thinks this should have been foreseen
                at the outset (though it notes that the regional QER of this project, in
                December of 2006, while it called for project simplification and a
                strengthened M & E framework, did not specifically stress client
                readiness issues).

    1.2.2Adequate attention to the technical, financial and economic aspects of the
         project and to potential political economy challenges?

                Comments: One might fault the team for a too sanguine view of the
                political stability of Madagascar, given the country’s track record, but
                the Panel generally accepts that the nature and depth of the current
                crisis, which has brought project development to a halt in that
                country, could not have been predicted. Poor Kenyan performance
                on transparency matters is near legendary, but again, one should not
                fault the team for making an effort to address the issue.

    1.2.3Quality of institutional framework for the project?

                Comments: Generally acceptable, given the assumptions and
                assessment made at the outset.

    1.2.4Adequacy and terms of funding for project preparation
                Comments: Funding for project preparation was more than
                adequate.

    1.2.5Quality of risk assessment and mitigation measures?
          (a) Country risks
          (b) Sector risks
          (c) Operation-specific risks

                Comments: To repeat and summarize, the Panel judges that the lags
                and problems that surfaced to delay the operation should have been
                better anticipated. Country risks could have been a bit more sharply
                delineated.

    1.2.6Readiness for implementation

                Comments: The Panel feels, and the team generally concurs, that
                project experience to date shows that the team “might profitably have
                spent a few years on TA prior to major expenditure” (direct quote
                from team member during the interview). Readiness was
                overestimated.

1.3 Fiduciary/ Safeguard Aspects

    1.3.1Quality of arrangements for governance and anti-corruption in project
         design?

                Comments: Satisfactory.

    1.3.2Were the arrangements to address environmental and social safeguards
         suitable for a regional project, and did they result in a satisfactory treatment
         of these aspects?
           (a) Environmental Aspects
           (b) Social Aspects

                Comments: Satisfactory.

    1.3.3Were the arrangements to address fiduciary concerns relating to financial
         management and procurement suitable for a regional project, and did they
         result in a satisfactory treatment of these aspects?
           (a) Financial Management
           (b) Procurement

                Comments: The need to duplicate country-based with central
                procurement reviews adds greatly to transaction costs, taxes the time
                of TTLs, and is one of the reasons for delayed implementation. This
                is a recurring and major issue for the team.
2. Quality of Implementation

  Context: Major issues affecting project implementation

       Comments: As noted, external political events beyond the control of the
       team have affected the progress of implementation. The Panel, however,
       places as much or more weight on internal factors, mainly the incomplete
       readiness of the borrowers to undertake the policy, legal and managerial
       changes required by the operation. As is shown in this and the following
       section, the Panel feels that the principal reason for poor implementation is
       that too much was asked of institutionally deficient borrowers.

   2.1 Effectiveness in addressing fiduciary aspects (financial
       management/audit, procurement, and compliance with
       covenants)?

        (a) Financial Management
        (b) Procurement
        (c) Compliance with covenants
            Comments: Again, the team complains of the substantial additional
            time and effort required to deal with both local and central reviews on
            procurement and financial management issues.

   2.2 Effectiveness in addressing environmental and social aspects?

        (a) Environmental Management
        (b) Social Management

             Comments: : No apparent problems.

   2.3 Effectiveness in resolving implementation issues in a timely
       manner?

             Comments: The Panel considers this a key issue, and finds the
             borrowers’ commitment to implementation lacking. The Sector
             Manager states, realistically, that one must expect a slow pace of
             implementation in institutionally weak countries such as those in this
             project. Nonetheless, the Panel feels that the difficult nature of the
             operating environments should have been taken more into account at
             the outset, and steps taken, a priori, to increase readiness.

   2.4 Timely production and utilization of M&E data?

             Comments: No apparent problem.
2.5 Effective coordination between executing agency and
    implementing agencies, participating countries, partners and
    stakeholders.

         Comments: Satisfactory.
3. Quality of Bank Supervision

   3.1 Focus on Development Effectiveness

       3.1.1 Extent to which the Bank identified and responded in a timely manner to
             implementation problems?

                  Comments: The Panel thinks the Bank team is doing a good job in
                  difficult circumstances. However, it also feels that the team was
                  saddled with a design that has taxed its ingenuity in each of the three
                  client countries.

       3.1.2 Appropriateness of Bank advice and proposed solutions to the Borrowers?

                  Comments: The Panel notes the team’s candid reporting on the
                  problematic situation in Madagascar; the patient consensus building
                  regarding the development of an innovative PPP in Burundi; and the
                  decision to realign the Kenyan portion of the operation to deal (inter
                  alia) with some managerial/administrative difficulties encountered early
                  in the project’s life. The steps taken all seem apt and were initiated
                  rapidly.

       3.1.3 Adequacy of Bank’s efforts to address significant risks during supervision?

                  Comments: See above; 3.1.2

       3.1.4 Extent to which Bank’s supervision efforts focused on sustainability issues
             (including strength of country relations within the region, borrower and
             stakeholder ownership, technical assistance and training, accountability of
             public institutions)?

                 Comments: Satisfactory.

       3.1.5 Extent to which the Bank’s supervision efforts made adequate use of
             quantitative and/or qualitative performance indicators:
             (a) To assess implementation progress?
             (b) To identify potential obstacles to achieving the DO (attention to
                  outcomes)?

                  Comments: The technical aspects of supervision do not appear to pose
                  any problems.

   3.2 Fiduciary/Safeguard Aspects
    3.2.1 Quality of Oversight of Governance and Anti-Corruption Aspects (including
          procurement, financial management and other fraud and corruption issues that
          affect project quality)?

               Comments: Satisfactory.

    3.2.2 Quality of Financial Management and Procurement Oversight?
           (a) Financial management
           (b) Procurement

               Comments: In recent ISRs the team has accurately rated financial
               management and procurement as marginally satisfactory. The Panel
               concurs; while not posing a severe obstacle to project progress, delays,
               overlaps, and lack of clear lines of authority in these areas contribute to
               the slow pace of operations and to high costs.

    3.2.3 Quality of Oversight of Environmental and Social Aspects?

            (a) Environmental Aspects
            (b) Social Aspects

               Comments: Environmental aspects regarding resettlement were
               discussed and were, apparently, resolved satisfactorily.


3.3 Supervision Inputs and Processes

     3.3.1 Staffing
      (a) Supervision skill mix?

      (b)     Staff continuity?

              Comments: The quality of involved staff strikes the Panel as high.

     3.3.2 Adequacy and timeliness of management attention and actions (including
           Comments in the ISR)?

              Comments: Sector management seems to have kept a close eye on the
              operation, as evidenced by constructive comments found in the ISRs, and
              by the revised design of follow-on projects of a similar nature in other
              parts of the region, based on lessons derived from this operation. CMU
              involvement has been less intense but worthwhile and helpful.

     3.3.3 Adequacy and effectiveness of budget use?
            Comments: The budget is adequate; perhaps too much so? Over US $1
            million has been spent on preparation of this operation, and there is a
            large supervision budget for handling what amounts to three separate
            projects, with two sub-TTLs located in the field, all producing additional
            coordination costs. What is not clear to the Panel is whether this amount
            of expenditure would meet a cost-benefit or opportunity cost calculation.
            One of the questions the larger study of regional operations must address
            is the additionality of regional projects; i.e.; whether these operations are
            an optimal use of the extra resources devoted to them.

3.4 Candor and Realism of ISR

     3.4.1 Candor and realism of ISR ratings for:

      (a)   DOs

     (b)    IP

            Comments: Regarding the DOs the team has concentrated mainly on
            DO1 (mainly applicable to Kenya), and has tended towards
            over-optimism in general.

     3.4.2 Quality of supervision reporting

            Comments: See above.

     3.4.3 Consistency between supervision reporting and supervision ratings?

            Comments: Until recently the ISRs were too optimistic regarding project
            progress. Recently, deficiencies have been more openly acknowledged.
            Management comments, from both the sector and the CMUs, have not
            minced words about problems, to the point where one CMU authority
            noted: “This project is on the verge of slipping into Unsatisfactory status
            if not monitored vigilantly and if the client does not receive additional
            capacity/support.” Such candor is welcome.
                      Learning Review of Regional Projects
                      Table 1: Risk Flags and DO/IP Status

COUNTRY: Africa                             REGION:                AFR
PROJECT ID: P094103                         PROJECT TITLE:         3A-Telecommunications APL
                                                                   (FY07)


DO/IP/Risk Factor                                  FY08                               FY09
                                            ISR            Panel            ISR              Panel
DO/GO                                       MS              MU              MS                MS
IP                                          MS              MU              MS                MS

Project Components




      Comments: The views of the panel on the likelihood of achieving the DO of the
      project are discussed in the front section of the report.




To:   Michele Ralisoa Noro
