The World Bank’s First Loan – May 9, 1947


NUMBER 001
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: MARCH 2002




                          January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
The World Bank’s First Loan – May 9, 1947

The World Bank officially opened for business
on June 25, 1946. As with many new
organizations there were initial difficulties.

The first President, Eugene Meyer, resigned
abruptly in December 1946, without a clear
successor. The Bank’s Vice President, Harold
Smith, died suddenly on January 23, 1947.
Although a few applications had been received,
the Bank had thus far made no loans. However,         Damage to French industry and
the election on February 23, 1947, or John J.           infrastructure during WWII
McCloy as the Bank’s second President marked
the start of true operations in the World Bank.
The Bank was soon embarked on the preparation and execution of an important
series of reconstruction loans to countries of Western Europe, the first of which
                           was to France.

                              The Loan Application

                              The French loan application for $500 million arrived as
                              a simple letter attached to an outline of the
                              government’s reconstruction program, the Monnet Plan.
                              The overall requirements included $106 million for
                              equipment, $180 million for coal and petroleum
                              products, and $214 million for raw materials. The
                              equipment included ships, freight cars, trucks, radio and
                              electrical equipment, and coal mining equipment. The
                              list of raw materials included fertilizers, copper, tin,
     The French loan         synthetic rubber, animal fats and chemicals.
application. See below for
    enlarged version.    The timing of the French loan was ideal for the Bank to
                         establish its credibility as a lender. It was just before the
Bank’s first bond issue. France was expected to make good use of the dollars
and was an acceptable credit risk. It was also understood within the Bank that
this loan would not set a precedent. The loan was not “for the purpose of specific
projects of reconstruction or development,” as specified in the Bank’s Articles of
Agreement, but was covered under the “special circumstances” provision. For
many years to come, program loans such as this French reconstruction loan
would remain a minority as the Bank concentrated on project lending.
Appraisal

Richard H. Demuth, at that time Assistant to the
World Bank's Vice President, recalled:
Nobody knew where to begin. We were
inexperienced. We didn't know what kinds of
questions to ask, what kind of investigation to make.
We hadn't developed the kind of project approach
that we worked out later. Our European problems
were very different from our development problems at
that time, of course, and the whole idea in fact of           Steel mill at Montataire
making national creditworthiness studies hadn't yet
been developed. Just like any other new institution in
a new field, at that time we were trying to struggle along finding our way.

Loan Negotiations

Mr. Garner recalled that the loan negotiations were not without their difficulties:

                            It was difficult for him [Baumgartner] to accept our
                            policy to require specific certification as to the precise
                            use to which every dollar of our loan would be applied
                            and the provision of the negative pledge clause.
                            There was not precedent for such requirements and
                            he considered that they were a derogation of the
                            dignity of his country. The requirement for specific
                            designation of the use of all the proceeds meant that
                            every contract for purchase of equipment and
                            materials must be submitted and approved by the
     Steel mill at Denain   staff of the Bank against certified bills of the suppliers.
                            We agree to station a staff member in Paris to
facilitate the necessary approvals and the system which we set up has been
followed by the Bank.


Signing the Loan

France had originally applied for a loan of $500 million. The Bank agreed to half
that amount, with the possibility of a second tranche. The relative amounts for
each category in the overall requirements remained the same. The loan, the
Bank's first, was signed on May 9, 1947. With this loan the Bank committed more
than one/third of its loanable funds held on June 1,1947. In real terms it is still the
Bank's largest single loan, with an FY97 value of $2.6 billion. The Bank's Second
Annual Report 1946/1947 assessed the circumstances surrounding the loan to
France:

The importance of France in the economic position of
Europe made it particularly fitting that France should be
the first country in whose reconstruction the Bank should
play an active part. France is vital to Western Europe
because of her size and her productive capacity and the
problem of her recovery cannot be divorced from the
recovery of Western Europe as a whole.

The Bank is fully aware of the uncertainties and                  Part of the Bank's loan
                                                                         financed air
difficulties facing France. Leaders of the French                      transportation
Government themselves have stated that they realize
that unless France's budgetary difficulties are overcome,
the ensuing fiscal instability will endanger the entire reconstruction program.
Some of the factors impeding recovery are beyond the control of France. But to
the extent that France has been able to speed her own recovery considerable
success has been achieved. Her external debt record has been excellent. The
Bank believes that its loan will hasten the process of reconstruction, that it will
result in raising the level of France's productivity, and that the risks involved are
of the type which the Bank was designed to accept.


                             Recovery in Western Europe

                             Further reconstruction loans to the Netherlands,
                             Denmark and Luxembourg followed. Including the loan
                             to France, the Bank loaned almost $500 million to the
                             postwar reconstruction efforts.

                             Although the Bank's efforts were later upstaged by the
  Electric Gantry cranes     Marshall Plan, they played an important part in the
 were installed in several
           ports             economic recovery of Western Europe.

                             As Mr. Demuth observed:

In the winter of 1947 the prospects that Western Europe would achieve economic
viability were bleak indeed. The financial requirements were immense and the
countries of Western Europe had practically no
foreign exchange reserves to help meet them.
Indeed, the threat loomed large that the
Western European economies would come to a
standstill for want of dollars to keep essential
food, fuel and raw material imports flowing in.
The Bank's reconstruction loans were an
emergency measure to meet this situation. It
took a bit of stretching for the management to
conclude that repayment prospects were                Railway locomotives were also
reasonable; the economic report on France, for            financed under the loan
example, laid its stress, not on financial
resources or specific export prospects, but on the French "collective will to
recover." The Bank's gamble paid off handsomely, however, for it won time
necessary for the European Recovery Program (the Marshall Plan) to be
formulated and put into effect (with considerable help from the Bank's staff), with
results that are now familiar history.

Sources:

Doggart, Caroline, "From Reconstruction to Development in Europe and Japan"
in Lateef, K. Sarwar, ed., The Evolving Role of the World Bank? Helping to Meet
the Challenge of Development. Washington, D.C.: The World Bank, August
1995.

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, Second Annual Report
1946/1947 Washington, D.C., 1947.

"The Bank's First Loan: $250 Million to France" in The Bank's World, May 1987.
