The Presidency of Eugene Meyer


NUMBER 038
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: NOVEMBER 2004




                         January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
The Presidency of Eugene Meyer

The search for the first World Bank President was not
easy. As Edward Mason and Robert Asher describe in
“The World Bank Since Bretton Woods” it was a
challenge to find a president who would be acceptable
to Washington, to Wall Street, and to the rest of the
world. Several wellknown persons including Lewis
Douglas, a director of the General Motors Corporation,
declined the presidency of the Bank.

The nomination of Eugene Meyer as President of the
World Bank by the Executive Directors on June 4,
1946, ended the quest for the first Bank’s
president.Three weeks later the institution officially     The first President of the
opened for business. Mr. Meyer had the qualities of an    World Bank, Eugene Meyer
ideal candidate. As a successful investment banker in
the past, highly respected on Wall Street, he had the capacity to build financial
support for the Bank.

According to Mason and Asher, Mr. Meyer also had a long record of
distinguished public service dating back to World War I and was well known to
                           U.S. President Harry Truman. Eugene Meyer also
                           served as an editor and publisher for The Washington
                           Post after acquiring the newspaper in 1933. (His
                           daughter, Katherine Meyer Graham, was the Post's
                           publisher from 1969-1979; his grandson, Donald E.
                           Graham, is the newspaper's current publisher.)

                            During his brief tenure as World Bank President
                            Meyer’s major preoccupations were recruiting
                            personnel, and raising money for the Bank. In general,
                            Meyer was tasked with finding the proper path for the
                            institution, and developing procedures and
                            partnerships which would build a solid base for the
Press release announcing    Bank’s operations.
 the selection of Eugene
Meyer as President of the
World Bank. See below for  Although these tasks proved to be very challenging
    enlarged version.      Eugene Meyer significantly contributed to the early
                           development of the Bank. He played a key role in the
establishment of a sound financial basis for the Bank in an era when investors
were wary of any international lending (remembering the defaults in the 1930s).
Mr. Meyer persuaded the US financial markets that the newly formed Bank was a
good investment and one that would be free of political maneuvering. He
recruited many of the individuals who played a significant role in setting the
Bank’s course.

Unfortunately Meyer had a contentious relationship with the Board of Executive
Directors. He insisted that the Bank should demonstrate fiscal prudence and
sound management before initiating any lending though some members of the
Board disagreed with this.

In December, 1946 Eugene Meyer resigned, asserting that the Bank was now on
sound footing, and that it was an appropriate time for him to return to his previous
position at The Washington Post. In reflecting on the establishment of this new
institution and his contribution as the Bank’s first President Eugene Meyer said,
“At the request of Secretary of State Byrnes and President Truman, after others
had declined the task, I agreed to accept the Presidency of the Bank in order to
launch it and get it started. We had no staff then, no clear definition of our role,
no operating policies or procedures, and no established standing in the private
investment market. But we had a conviction that, if the Bank properly discharged
its responsibilities, it would be able to contribute considerably toward the
rebuilding and development of the free world.” (International Bank Notes, June
1956)
