In Memoriam: Edward Donovan


NUMBER 007
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: FEBRUARY 2003




                         January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
In Memoriam: Edward Donovan

One of the Bank’s original employees, Edward J.
"Eddie" Donovan, passed away on January 14,
2003. He joined the Bank on May 22, 1946, more
than a month before it officially opened for business
on June 25, 1946.

In an interview in the June 1976 issue of Bank
Notes, Donovan said that he heard about the Bank
through the father of a friend. He applied, and was
assigned to Office Services (he later became Chief
of the Office Services Division). He was on
probation for five weeks, and then stayed until
1978, when he retired.

In a special supplement to The Bank’s World                    Ed Donovan, 1986
celebrating the Bank’s 40th anniversary Donovan
remembered that H Street was a noisy place in
1946. Trolley cars still ran along 18th and 19th streets and on Pennsylvania
Avenue. The building at 1818 H Street (which eventually became known as the A
building) and the Hurley-Wright Building (later acquired by the Bank to become
the B building) were the only office buildings in the area. The Bank’s first offices
were at 1818 H Street, which had originally been constructed in 1941 to house
the U.S. Surgeon General. In 1946 it housed offices of the U.S. State
Department.

The Bank occupied the tenth floor, and the International Monetary Fund occupied
the ninth. The rooms were large but bare, and it took time before Donovan and
his colleagues in Office Services could obtain furniture and other necessary
supplies. Their task was made more difficult by the fact that wartime shortages
had not been entirely made up.

Between Bank offices at 1818 H Street and the Hurley-Wright Building was a
brownstone housing the offices of the Columbia Lighthouse for the Blind. The
rest of the neighborhood consisted of the Roger Smith Hotel at 18th Street and
Pennsylvania Avenue, private townhouses, apartment buildings, and at the
northwest corner of today’s Main Complex (later the site of the old F building), a
firehouse used as the meeting place of the Association of the Oldest Inhabitants
of the District of Columbia. Once a year, the Oldest Inhabitants would pull an
antique fire wagon—meant to be pulled by men, not horses—around the park.
The Bank was small then and everyone knew each other. The Bank began
operating with 1 president, a staff of 71, 19 Executive Directors and their
alternates (excluding 5 vacancies) and 38 member countries. "It was like a
family," Donovan said in the 1976 article. "When the first Christmas party was
                              held at the Roger Smith Hotel, there were only 30
                              people."

                               Economic life was different then, too. In the mid-
                               1940s a Bank staff member could live comfortably
                               in Washington on $45 per week. Dinners cost about
                               eleven dollars, and cigarettes cost eighteen cents
                               per pack. Automobiles were available, but were
                               expensive to maintain.

 Largest Bank family: Mr and   By September 1946 the Bank had begun to take
  Mrs. Edward Donovan and
 their seven children (March
                               over more space at 1818 H Street, and Donovan
            1959)              occupied an office on the second floor. He was
                               Assistant to Mr. William E. McCorkle, Chief of Office
                               Services. The Bank’s Administrative Order No. 1,
issued September 5, 1946, assigned a broad range of functions and
responsibilities to Office Services. These included payroll and general clerical,
travel and transportation, property and supply, printing and drafting, messenger
service, and telephone operators.

Despite this organizational progress, "The first year
was very uncertain," Donovan recalled. By the end
of September 1946 only two member countries had
asked for loans, and these were only requests or
inquiries, not adequately documented loan
applications. "Mr. [Eugene] Meyer [the Bank’s first
President] left in December…Then Mr. [Harold]
Smith, the Vice President, died, and things seemed
                                                        Ed Donovan (left) at the 1954
to be going downhill in a hurry. "                      World Bank Christmas Cocktail
                                                                   Party
But the atmosphere in the Bank improved when Mr.
John J. McCloy, Meyer’s eventual successor, arrived. "There was a tremendous
camaraderie. Everyone pulled together and got things done," said Donovan.

"We were all on a first-name basis, and I especially remember our Christmas
parties-- which the staff paid for. Professor [Kyriakos] Varvaressos, the Executive
Director from Greece, was a wonderful man, and would entertain us by playing
the piano and singing carols…

"At the annual picnic, Mr. McCloy and Mr. [Eugene] Black [U.S. Executive
                                           Director and later Bank President]
                                           would choose the baseball teams.
                                           They were both very interested in the
                                           staff, and it was quite something to
                                           hear the bantering going on between
                                           the two of them…

                                         "The word around town was that the
                                         Bank would pay tax-free salaries,"
                                         noted Donovan. "That set the phones
                                         ringing all day and the secretaries
                                         who answered them got tongue-tied
                                         saying International Bank for
                                         Reconstruction and Development over
and over again, for the name The World Bank, though it occasionally appeared in
                                         the press, hadn’t come into general
                                         use yet."
Bank staff members celebrating five years of
service in this 1951 photograph. Donovan is   Donovan was also a bowler of some
   second from the right in the back row      renown. As the April 1, 1951 issue of
                                              International Bank Notes records,
"The Bank Bowling League was simply ‘bowled over’ by the record -breaking
bowling displayed by Edward J. Donovan." He broke the record of high game and
individual high set, the latter being the highest ever bowled in the Bank League.

Perhaps the most complex and massive job supervised by Donovan during his
years as Chief of the Office Services Division was the office moves
accompanying the 1972 reorganization of the Bank. As noted in the October
1972 issue of Bank Notes, while the staff of the Bank vacated the premises from
the close of business on Friday, October 6 and stayed away until Tuesday,
October 10 (the Columbus day holiday was celebrated on Monday, October 9),
Mr. Donovan’s crew of 105 men moved 15,000 items including furniture, cartons,
file cabinets, pictures, office machines, etc. from 1,000 offices and 500
secretarial areas used by 1,400 staff on 35 floors in 7 buildings to somewhere
else. With time out for two nights’ sleep, the team did this in just 26 hours
working time, beginning 6 p.m. Friday and finishing late Sunday afternoon.
The job was completed 14 hours under the estimated time with no injuries and no
arguments. Part of the crew "warmed up" by moving another 100 staff members
earlier in the week.

Said Donovan, "Everyone went home grinning Sunday evening, proud of their
accomplishment. I was more proud of them than they were of themselves."

Eddie Donovan was a very popular, well-liked member of the Bank’s staff, and
provided a living link to its early days. He will be missed.
