Annual Meetings 1973, Nairobi, Kenya


NUMBER 044
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: AUGUST 2005




                          January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
Annual Meetings 1973, Nairobi, Kenya




The painting “Peace and Tranquility? was used in a card to welcome the
participants of the Annual Meetings of the Boards of Governors of the World
Bank and the IMF held in Nairobi, Kenya in September 1973. "Peace and
Tranquility" was commissioned by Ambassador Kibinge in 1972 to promote the
universal theme of joy and peace. The
snowcapped Batian, Nelion and
Lenana peaks of Mt. Kenya depicted
in the painting reflect the cool morning
sunshine in a peaceful and green
pasture outside a typical rural Kenyan
homestead.

This painting was an apt illustration of
the 1973 Annual Meetings, which
focused on the importance of poverty
reduction in the rural areas of the
developing world. Almost 3,000
delegates representing 126 countries
packed Nairobi's Plenary Hall of the       Left to right: Mr. McNamara, President of the
                                             World Bank Group; the Hon. Mwai Kibaki,
Kenyatta Conference Center to listen
                                              M.P., Minister of Finance and Economic
to the address of World Bank                Planning of Kenya; and President Kenyatta,
President Robert McNamara.                                 Sept. 24, 1973


In his speech McNamara spoke of the
urgent need to pay more attention to



                                            President Kenyatta (center) arrives at the
                                             Kenyatta Conference Center to open the
                                                Annual Meetings, Sept. 24, 1973
the problems of the rural poor in developing countries. “Neither political
programs, nor economic plans, nor international assistance – bilateral or
multilateral – have given the problem serious and sustained attention. The World
Bank is no exception. In more than a quarter of a century of operations, less than
$1 billion out of $25 billion of lending has been devoted directly to this problem,?
he said.

Mr. McNamara also spoke about the Bank’s plan to finance a series of programs
aimed at assisting smallholder agriculture. The Bank pledged to increase its
lending to agriculture to $4.4 billion between 1974 and 1978. And McNamara
emphasized the importance of land and tenancy reforms to meet the needs of
rural communities for adequate public services.

The 1973 Annual Meetings resulted in a pledge of $22 billion by the World Bank
                                            Group for nearly 1,000 projects
Native dancers perform outside the Kenyatta
     Conference Center, Sept. 24, 1973      during the next five years to target the
                                            problems of the rural poor in the
                                            developing countries.
