First Loan for Family Planning, Jamaica
– Population Project

NUMBER 046
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: DECEMBER 2005




                           January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
First Loan for Family Planning, Jamaica – Population Project

The World Bank has been working in
family planning and reproductive
health for more than 30 years. As of
2005, the Bank has provided more
than $3 billion to finance projects
addressing these issues. The first
country to receive a loan for family
planning (Loan 0690) was Jamaica in
1970. The World Bank assisted the
Jamaican Government to implement a
national family planning program to         Family Planning Center in Kingston, Jamaica
help slow down the growth of its
population. This project was focused
on improving maternal health, family planning, and women’s education, as well
as financing the expansion of the Victoria Jubilee Hospital in Kingston.

Part of this expansion included the construction of a delivery suite with 33 labor
and delivery units and space for midwifery training. The project also addressed
the need for better quality of maternal health facilities in the rural areas. Ten rural
maternity centers, each with an initial capacity of four to eight beds, were built
around the country. Another major component of the project was to design
training programs for hospital personnel to educate women on family planning.

                                               Despite considerable progress in this
                                               area, population and reproductive
                                               health remains one of the top priorities
                                               of the Bank. Some of the major issues
                                               that need to be addressed are:

                                               • Nearly 500,000 women die every
                                               year from pregnancy-related causes
                                               • Poor women lack access to
                                               information about their health and lack
Women wait for family planning advice at the   access to basic life-saving series
  clinic in the Victoria Jubilee Hospital in   • About 30-40% of infant deaths are
              Kingston, Jamaica                the result of poor care during
                                               pregnancy and delivery.
The World Bank, along with other
international organizations, is committed to
reducing maternal mortality by three-
quarters between 1990 and 2015, as
pledged by the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs).



                                                 Women are given family planning
                                               lecture in the Victoria Jubilee Hospital
                                                        in Kingston, Jamaica
