Engineering Adviser General R. A. Wheeler


NUMBER 024
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: JUNE 2003




                          January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
Engineering Adviser General R. A. Wheeler

General R.A. Wheeler, Engineering Adviser of the
International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development, spoke before the Pan American
Division of the American Road Builders
Association on March 7, 1950, at Cincinnati, Ohio.
The talk was typical of many given by Bank staff to
members of the public to describe the role and
functions of the newly-formed Bank.

Wheeler came to the Bank as a retired former
chief of engineers of the U.S. Army on March 1,
1949. His primary task was to organize the
engineering staff. Prior to his arrival, project
appraisal had been undertaken by loan officers                 General R. A. Wheeler,
who frequently had a minimum of technical                    Engineering Adviser of the
                                                             World Bank, 1949 - 1956
expertise. Wheeler created the Technical
Operations Department in 1952, and served as its
director until 1953. He was responsible for the technical appraisal of several
hundred projects, including large road and railway projects in Colombia,
Pakistan, India, and South Africa. He also assisted in large power loans in
                                            various countries, such as Brazil,
                                            Mexico, Rhodesia and Uruguay.

                                          Wheeler was largely responsible for the
                                          Bank’s adoption of the international
                                          competitive bidding process in
                                          procurement. He established the policy
                                          that the Bank would not accept a
                                          project appraisal from a source that
                                          might be selling equipment or services
                                          to the project or engaging in
                                          construction work for it. In 1953 General
  Guests at the 1956 Farewell Banquet for Wheeler became the Bank’s
              General Wheeler             Engineering Adviser. He served as the
                                          Bank’s first representative in planning
the division of the waters of the Indus Basin, and drew up the first proposal
representing the Bank’s mediation of the long-running dispute. He continued as
the Bank’s technical representative after the mediation was transferred to
William A. B. Iliff, a member of the Bank’s management team. In 1956, his
services were requested by the United Nations Secretary-General, to take
charge of the clearance operations of the Suez Canal following the Middle East
war. The Bank gave him leave of absence, and he and another Bank consultant
successfully cleared the Canal of the forty-eight ships, tugs, barges, and bridges
sunk or scuttled during the war.

Following are excerpts from the Cincinnati talk.

"The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, about which you
have asked me to speak, is keenly aware of the essential importance of roads,
because it realized that one of the first tasks of reconstruction from the ravages
of war is the restoration of a country’s transport system, of which roads form an
integral part. Further, the Bank recognized that before industrial or agricultural
development can be effectively achieved a basic highway system to supply and
serve the projects must be in existence. In addition the products of
development, in most cases, are of little value if there are no adequate roads on
which to transport them to market.

"There is nothing easy about
international lending in the world we live
in today, and usually the job requires
weeks and months of hard work. It
includes the services of engineers,
economists, financial experts and
specialists in many fields, all of whom
must work in cooperation and
understanding with each other if a
sound recommendation concerning the
proposed financing is to result.
                                              General Wheeler, right, with Vice President
"On receiving a loan proposal the World       J. Burke Knapp, left, at the 1956 Farewell
Bank makes a preliminary study in order                       Banquet
to determine whether or not the
proposal comes within the sphere of the Bank’s activities as set forth by the
Articles of Agreement. If the proposal passes satisfactorily through the
preliminary stage, the Bank then makes an exhaustive and careful study of all
the factors involved. One of the most important pieces of information which it
requires is a detailed plan of the country’s development program, showing what
it intends to do in the way of development and how the particular project for
which the loan is requested fits into the over-all pattern. Detailed planning is a
must for sound economic development.
"On the basis of the plan submitted to it and of information received from
various sources, the Bank’s staff proceeds to make a thorough technical and
financial study of the loan.

"In surveying the project the Bank desires to
determine its engineering and technical feasibility;
the markets for what it will produce; local capital
costs and the availability of local funds to meet
them; the supply of labor and raw materials;
transport availability; and the supply and quality of
skilled and managerial personnel for the project. In
respect of the borrower, the Bank has a number of
points to determine such as: the quality of the
borrower’s credit; the ability of the borrower to
bring the project to completion successfully and to
run it properly thereafter; and the possibility of the
borrower’s acquiring sufficient foreign exchange to
service and pay off the loan.                            Portrait of General Wheeler


"The surveys and studies made by the Bank as a part of its lending operations
may appear to you to be over meticulous. Believe me, they are not, particularly
when they are applied to development. Often, when an application for a
development loan is received, the country concerned lacks a clear idea of what
course its future economic progress should take. Little or no conception may
exist of the difficulties of carrying out a development program or of the costs
involved; and in some instances statistics and other information necessary to
determine the potentialities of the country either do not exist or are in such
primitive form that they are nearly useless as criteria.

"While the Bank’s loans by themselves are important to Latin American
economic development, they do not represent the total of the organization’s
efforts. In that area, of equal importance are its advisory services which have
helped materially in the preparation and planning of sound development
projects and programs. These services, which by the way are not restricted to
Latin America alone, are a direct offshoot of the loan investigations I have
described for you. One of the principal forms they take is the field mission,
which the Bank usually sends to a member country to make an on-the-spot
study of all the aspects of a proposed loan.

"The missions are composed of experts and may include loan officers,
economists, engineers, and other technicians drawn from the Bank’s staff.
Where needed, outside expert consultants may also be hired to assist a
mission. The great advantage of these groups in connection with a loan is that
in assessing and weighing all factors affecting the loan for the project for which
it has been asked they go beyond the realm of printed statistics and information.
They also come into direct contact with the personalities connected with the
project, the borrower and the country’s development program and, thereby,
                                                 have an excellent opportunity for
                                                 judging their abilities.

                                                      "Aside from the benefits
                                                      accruing to the Bank from the
                                                      work of field missions, the
                                                      member countries receive
                                                      substantial assistance from
                                                      them as well. In their reports and
                                                      findings the missions are often
                                                      able to point out the most
                                                      practical course for planning and
                                                      achieving development in a
                                                      particular country. Often they
                                                      make suggestions for changes
Farewell banquet for General Wheeler. World Bank      or additions to development
President George Woods is at center, former World     programs which result in savings
Bank President Eugene Black is at the left, next to
     Vice President Robert L. Garner, far left.       of time, effort and money and in
                                                      a better and more fruitful
                                                      program.

"I should like to touch briefly on the work of some of the Bank’s field missions in
Latin America. Twelve countries in that area were visited by one or more bank
field missions in 1949, and a number of other missions are planned for 1950.
One group recently returned from Brazil where it made a study of the economic
and financial situation of the country; of the priorities that should be set for
development projects; and of the Brazilian Government’s policies for promoting
development. Another mission visited Ecuador to study and discuss
development projects and later in the year a textile expert was sent to that
country by the Bank to analyze particular projects in that field.

"The case of Chile offers one of the most interesting results of the work of Bank
missions. That country was visited in 1948 by a mission which investigated a
prospective loan for hydroelectric development. The mission found that the
necessity to import foods acted as a substantial drain on the country’s foreign
exchange resources, particularly dollars. It came to the conclusion that the
domestic food supply could be increased by greater mechanization of
agriculture, and a loan for $2,5000,000 to finance and import agricultural
machinery was the result. This commitment was in addition to one for
$13,500,000 for the original power projects for which the mission was originally
sent to Chile.

"The most significant mission sent
out by the Bank in 1949 was one
which spent about four months in
Colombia under the leadership and
direction of Dr. Lauchlin Currie, the
eminent economist. Dr. Currie was
assisted not only by experts from
the Bank’s staff but also by
personnel from the Food and
Agricultural Organization, the
International Monetary Fund and
the World Health Organization.
The mission’s principal objectives
                                         General Wheeler, center, with World Bank
were not related to any prospective
                                      President George Woods, left, and former World
loan, but were concerned with         Bank President Eugene Black, right, at the 1956
making a survey of the overall                      Farewell Banquet.
condition of the Colombian
economy; the development potentialities of the country and the wealth of the
nation.

"I hope that I have been able to make clear to you what the purposes and
activities of the World Bank are and how it has and can help the world, and
Latin America in particular, along the hard road to economic development. The
Bank looks on Latin America as a vast and fertile field for future development
which will contribute greatly to the expansion and strengthening of the world
economy. By itself the Bank cannot do more than a small part of the job that
needs to be done; and the major part will have to be achieved by the efforts of
private investors and of the countries themselves. For your part, you can supply
the leadership and the necessary knowledge and technical ability for the
building and maintenance of sound and efficient road systems which form so
important a part of any overall development program."
