Dissemination Note on the Social Assessment
for India Tuberculosis Control Project, 1997

NUMBER 058
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: MARCH 2007




                          January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
Dissemination Note on the Social Assessment for India
Tuberculosis Control Project, 1997

In observance of the World Tuberculosis (TB)
Day on March 24, 2007 the World Bank Group
Archives features the Dissemination Note
“Social Assessment Influences Design of the
India TB Control Project” issued by the Bank's
Environment Department in May 1997.

This document summarizes the use of Social
Assessment (SA) as an “umbrella” approach to
prepare TB Control project in India. SA was
used to conduct the necessary social analysis
and to formulate a key component of the
project, a comprehensive strategy of
information, education and communication. The
newsletter includes information on the SA's
objectives, methods and findings.
                                                    "Social Asssessment Influences
                                                     Design of the India TB Control
Since TB remains a global epidemic, that kills        Project". See below for full
more than 2 million people a year, the                         document.
information in this newsletter continues to be
relevant to current efforts to stop the spread of
this disease.
