90th Birthday, Robert S. McNamara, World
Bank Group President, 1968-1981

NUMBER 051
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: MAY 2006




                          January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
90th Birthday, Robert S. McNamara, World Bank Group President,
1968-1981

In honor of Robert S. McNamara who
celebrates his 90th birthday on June
9th, 2006 the World Bank Group
Archives is highlighting some of his
contributions to development.

As World Bank Group President, Robert
McNamara reshaped the institution by
changing its focus to fighting “absolute
poverty?, and addressing the problems
of economic disparities throughout the
world. By the end of McNamara's
                                           Robert McNamara's visit to Liberia, 1973
second term Bank lending had
increased from $1 billion annually to
$12 billion. The Bank also became a potent intellectual force for development.
During his 13 years as World Bank President, Robert McNamara:

                                             -- introduced the five-year lending
                                            plan, which proposed that the Bank
                                            double the volume of lending during
                                            the next five years. According to this
                                            plan the lending to Latin America and
                                            Africa would substantially increase,
                                            lending for education would triple, and
                                            lending for agriculture would
                                            quadruple.

                                            -- increased World Bank professional
 Robert McNamara welcomed in Korea, 1970    staff from 1,600 to 5,700

                                           -- implemented a major reorganization
of the World Bank in 1972. Responsibility for lending was placed in the hands of
regional vice presidents, who had control over resources required to meet agreed
target outcomes.

-- expanded the geographical range of the Bank’s lending, and the Bank became
engaged in more countries that needed help.
 -- instituted the practice of creating the
Country Program Papers to implement an
overall development strategy for member
countries.

-- appointed Lester B. Pearson to form a
commission to review the previous 20 years
of development assistance, assess the
results, and make recommendations for the
future. The report “Partners in Development?
produced by the Commission in 1969 was            Mr. and Mrs. McNamara during their
                                                          trip to Korea, 1972
successful in energizing donor support and
facilitated the third IDA replenishment, which
doubled IDA resources.

                                       -- searched for new ways to mobilize
                                      resources for development. In 1975
                                      McNamara introduced the “third window?
                                      lending (using OPEC and other
                                      contributions to an Interest Subsidy Fund).

                                        -- proposed that the Bank take the lead in
                                        mobilizing international funds for an
                                        onchocerciasis (riverblindness) control
                                        program. The Executive Directors approved
Robert McNamara's visit to Japan, 1971  the plan, and the Bank convened the first
                                       meeting of the Onchocersiasis Control
Program (OCP) in June. The first OCP funds became available in March 1974

 -- pushed the Bank to be more inquisitive
about development issues. The collection and
processing of data became an important part
of the quest for better understanding and more
effective solutions.

-- emphasized the need for projects supporting
education and family planning. He also
launched an attack on urban poverty.
                                                   Mr. and Mrs. McNamara visited the
                                                        Kingdom of Nepal, 1972
-- introduced the second five-year plan in
Nairobi in 1973 with rural development as its
centerpiece. To raise the productivity of the rural poor, the Bank increased
lending to agriculture by over 40 percent. The integrated rural development
project became the prototype for this assistance.

The backbone of his presidential tenure was to assist those in “absolute poverty,?
a term introduced by Robert McNamara himself.
