Excerpts from the 1973 Annual Report


NUMBER 019
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: MAY 2003




                          January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
Excerpts from the 1973 Annual Report

Thirty years ago, the World Bank Group
published its 1973 Annual Report. It was 29
years after the 1944 Bretton Woods Conference
in New Hampshire, which instituted the Bank and
the Fund. The Bank came into existence in 1945
and officially opened for business in June 1946.

In 1973, Britain, Ireland and Denmark joined the
EEC. The Paris Agreement ended US
involvement in Indochina. Afghan prime minister
Muhammad Daoud overthrew the monarchy and
declared Afghanistan a republic with himself as
president. Chilean General Augusto Pinochet
overthrew Marxist president Salvador Allende
and set up a military dictatorship. Juan Peron        Robert S. McNamara began his
returned to power in Argentina; he was elected         second term as World Bank
president, but died one year later. The Yom             President on April 1, 1973.
                                                         Photo: Fabian Bachrach
Kippur war broke out when Egypt invaded Israel
on the Day of Atonement. US aid to Israel
precipitated the Arab oil embargo and subsequent energy crisis in the industrial
world. Famine struck Ethiopia. The US launched Skylabs 1, 2 and 3, and the
space probe Pioneer transmitted television pictures from Jupiter. The film director
Bernardo Bertolucci released Last Tango in Paris.

Robert S. McNamara had become World Bank Group President in 1968. He
remained in this position until 1981. Upon his arrival he initiated a vigorous
increase in Bank Group lending, borrowing, and numbers of staff.

The 1973 Annual Report summarized the accomplishments of the Bank’s
previous year and provided comparative statistics for the previous ten years.

In 1973 there were 73 loans approved, for a total of $2,051 million (compared to
37 loans approved in 1964, for a total of $810 million). There were 102 member
countries in 1963, and this number increased to 122 by 1973. Borrowings by the
Bank totaled $100 million in 1963, and had increased to $1,723 million by 1973,
a near record level. The single largest source of funds was Japan, which
provided 35% of the total, followed by Germany with 22%. The Bank offered its
first bond issue in Lebanon in 1973.
In 1963 there were 463 "professional" staff; by 1973 this number had increased
to 1,654.

The World Bank Group as a whole approved development assistance totaling
$3,555 million during the year ending June 30, 1973. The figure was higher than
any previous year, and marked the fulfillment of McNamara’s goal (announced
five years earlier) that the Bank Group should provide twice as much assistance
in 1969 – 1973 than it had in the previous five years.

By the end of fiscal year 1973, Bank Group lending was distributed:

Eastern Africa                                        $341.9 million
Western Africa                                        $176.6 million
Europe, Middle East And North Africa                  $912.5 million
Asia                                                  $1,292.1 million
Latin America and Caribbean                           $684.9 million

This lending was assigned to the following sectors:

Agriculture                                           $ 937.5 million
Development Finance Companies                         $310.0 million
Education                                             $276.1 million
Electric Power                                        $321.5 million
Industry                                              $67.2 million
Non-project ("program loans")                         $225.0 million
Population planning                                   $21.5 million
Technical Assistance                                  $ 4.0 million
Telecommunications                                    $247.8 million
Transportation                                        $682.4 million
Urbanization                                          $36.0 million
Water Supply and Sewerage                             $278.8 million
The Report acknowledged that the Bank Group institutions played a vital,
although marginal, role in the global development effort. The greatest proportion
of the resources devoted to development were mobilized by the developing
countries themselves. The problems of development were too complex for
definitive solutions, and the report promised only to highlight the search for
                                solutions.

                                 1973 saw a sharp increase in IDA lending: 75
                                 credit projects for $1,357 million. The Executive
                                 Directors made a comprehensive review of IDA’s
                                 lending policies during 1972 - 1973. This review
                                 indicated that over 70% of IDA’s lending had been
                                 channeled to the poorest countries (those with a
                                 per capita income of less than $120). Over one
                                 half of the IDA resources had been for agriculture
                                 and education. The ED’s review concluded that
                                 IDA’s basic lending policies should be maintained,
                                 and that greater emphasis should be given to the
                                 very poor countries. Increasing emphasis should
                                 be given to lending to sectors that were most
                                 important to the bulk of the population in
                                 developing countries.

                                 The Third Replenishment of IDA became effective
World Bank President Robert S.   in September 1972.
  McNamara discusses and
 agricultural project during a
   visit to Zambia in 1973      For the first time in history, Bank Group lending for
                                agriculture exceeded that for any other sector -
                                $937.5 million, almost doubling the amount of the
previous year. The increase took place during a period when the priority needs of
developing countries were underlined by a dramatic deterioration in the global
food situation. An unprecedented combination of adverse weather conditions in
large parts of the world led to serious shortfalls in food grain production, a
precipitous decline in grain reserves, and a scramble for supplies that raised
world food prices sharply. In Western Africa particularly, where millions of people
were hit by food shortages resulting from severe drought, the Bank explored
supplementing with development schemes the relief operations organized under
the aegis of the UN’s FAO.
The Bank joined with the UNDP and the WHO in an ambitious program to control
river blindness. The Onchocersiasis Control Program was launched over a seven
country area of western Africa in 1973.

In Nicaragua, the Bank Group provided financing to help in the reconstruction of
homes, schools, industries and urban infrastructure following the disastrous
earthquake that hit Managua in 1972.

The Bank Group continued its support for population planning through projects in
Iran and Malaysia; in northeast Brazil a land resettlement project helped the
members of Brazil’s poorest area.

The Report went on to say: "Taking all developing
countries together, their economic growth appears
to have been 6% during 1972, which matches the
target set for the Second Development Decade in
the United Nations’ International Development
Strategy. However, the ‘least developed’ nations fell
below their previous year’s growth; countries with
manufactured exports had an increased growth in
GNP, and petroleum-exporting countries continued
to have a high growth rate. An overall growth rate is
an inadequate index of the underlying problems of
development each country and its people face.
Poverty, even in the developing countries favored
by relatively good resource endowments,
characterized the lives of millions of individuals,       World Bank President Robert
particularly in rural areas. They suffer from             S. McNamara visits Lebanon,
widespread unemployment or underemployment,                     February 1973
poor nourishment and debilitating diseases; their
productivity is generally low. Probably close to 1,000 million people in the
developing world have annual per capita incomes of less than $100 at official
rates of exchange. Of these, 300 million have average incomes of less than half
of that amount. OECD’s Development Assistance Committee indicated that there
was a slight increase in capital flows to the developing countries from 1972 to
1973, although indications were that commitments had increased while
disbursements had decreased as a proportion of donor nations’ GNP."

Record high inflation rates affected the developing world.
The Bank served as executing agency for a number of projects for UNDP, which
was facilitated by the reorganization of UNDP in 1971 and the Bank in 1972.
Approximately half of the projects were related to transportation, but general
planning assistance increased during the year, including projects in Jordan,
Afghanistan, Sudan, Nigeria, and Kenya.

The Consultative Group for International Agricultural Research (CGIAR), started
in 1971, had its membership increased to 29 organizations. By June 1973, 65
states had ratified the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes
(ICSID).

Lending for education was approximately 50% higher than the previous year. The
Bank and IDA supported, for the first time, projects devoted mainly to primary
education (in Indonesia and Lebanon). Elements of these projects included
assistance for the local production of textbooks.

EDI held ten courses and graduated over 250 Overseas Fellows during the fiscal
year. For the first time, courses were held on managing urban growth, water
                               supply and waste disposal, and economic analysis
                               of the agricultural sector.

                              The Bank marketed twenty four bond issues, for the
                              equivalent of $1,887 million, during 1972: in Kuwait,
                              Germany, Japan, Belgium, Switzerland, United
                              States, and Italy. The June 1973 borrowing in
                              Switzerland was the largest single borrowing made
                              by the Bank to date, consisting of SwF 450 million.

                              The Report stated that the Bank’s total income for
                              the fiscal year was $758,001,000; its total expenses
                              were $572, 283,000. Net income was
                              $185,609,000.

World Bank President Robert
                               The 1973 Annual Report was also the first report
S. McNamara visiting Sierra    following the major reorganization of the Bank in
   Leone, January 1973         1972. Before this reorganization, the Bank’s
                               structure had consisted of seven area department
and eight project departments. The area departments were composed of country
experts who had an advanced knowledge of particular countries or groups of
countries. The projects departments consisted of staff with specialized technical
skills in specific sectors who worked on projects in all parts of the world.
Following the 1972 Reorganization, five regional Offices were established – each
responsible for planning and supervising the execution of the development
programs within the countries. Each of these regional offices had control over the
sector specialists, financial analysts, economists and loan officers required to
carry out its responsibilities. This "decentralized" structure was designed to:
permit the Bank to maintain and improve
the effectiveness of the development
assistance; to enable a closer working
relationship between the "country" experts
and the "sector" specialists; and to
contribute to a multi-disciplinary, team
approach in preparing and appraising
projects. In addition, Development Policy
Staff and Central Projects Staff groups
were created. The Development Policy
Staff dealt with global and country-wide
development policy issues, the Bank’s
                                                   International Development Association
economic work, and the Computing                   made two credits totaling $11.5 million
Activities Department. The Central Projects             to Afghanistan, May 2, 1973
Staff dealt with sector policy issues in the
decentralized sectors.

Under the new organizational structure, there were five Regional Vice
Presidents: Bernard Bell, Roger Chaufournier, I.P.M. Cargill, Munir P. Benjenk,
and Gerard Alter. Sir Denis Rickett and Mohamed Shoaib were Senior Vice
Presidents. Bernard Chadenet was Vice President of Organization Planning and
Personnel Management; Hollis B. Chenery was Vice President of Development
Policy; Warren C. Baum was Vice President of Projects Staff; Aron Broches was
Vice President and General Counsel; and Simon Alderwereld was Vice President
of Finance. William Clark was Director of External Relations and P.N. Damry was
Secretary. J. Burke Knapp was Senior Vice President of Operations under
President Robert McNamara.

In 1973 the Bank had a Permanent Mission in Eastern Africa and a Permanent
Mission in Western Africa. There were Resident Missions in Afghanistan,
Bangladesh, Colombia, Ethiopia, Ghana, India, Nepal, Nigeria, Pakistan,
Thailand, and Zaire.
