Mr. Wolfensohn Arrives at the Bank


NUMBER 025
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: JUNE 2003




                           January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
Mr. Wolfensohn Arrives at the Bank

June 1, 2003, marked the eighth anniversary of the arrival of James D.
Wolfensohn to assume his duties as President of the World Bank Group.
Anniversaries are a good time to look back and see from where we have come.
In that spirit here are excerpts from an article written by Jill Roessner that
appeared in the July 1995 issue of "Bank’s World."

Jim Wolfensohn officially arrived at the Bank June 1
and, on that first day, in addition to meeting the
Board of Directors and holding a press conference,
the new President and his wife, Elaine, hosted a
reception for some 150 staff. And they held another
the next day. Bank’s World was there.

I’ll avoid writing things like "one sensed" the
President felt this, or "got the impression" he
believed that. There was no need for extra-sensory
perception. Mr. Wolfensohn—with enormous charm
and tremendous charisma—laid it all on the line. No
one who was fortunate enough to be among the
guests (chosen at random by the computer) was left
in any doubt about the new President’s direction          President Jim Wolfensohn
and values.

Our new boss doesn’t mince words. He’s dynamic, he’s forthright and he
believes in family, integrity, excellence, and teamwork—values most of us
share. He had already made this clear in his June 1 letter to all staff [see
below].

Since his appointment was announced, he has been disturbed by the volume of
mail he’s received, much of it anonymous, criticizing the Bank. While he’s all in
favor of constructive criticism—the kind that includes suggestions to improve the
way we do our work—he does not take kindly to disloyalty, nor to those among
us who peddle rumors and speak ill of the institution.

Mr. Wolfensohn said that he doesn’t yet have a specific vision for the Bank’s
future direction. "I think what we need is to say, ‘What are the areas where we
do best and, within the resources we have in the Bank, where are our
priorities?’"
Together with his wife, he’s going to meet and talk to people, listen, learn, and
immerse himself in the Bank’s activities. And then—only then—will decisions be
taken.




  Upon his arrival as World Bank President, Mr. Wolfensohn and Mrs. Wolfensohn met with
    several groups of randomly selected staff to introduce themselves and to meet staff
                                         members



We’ve all read about Mr. Wolfensohn’s achievements and accomplishments,
and we know about his distinguished career and remarkable background. That
didn’t just happen. He’s obviously dedicated, driven and tough. But at this
gathering, it was apparent that he’s caring and concerned and that he can be
rather gentle, too. Surely it must have seemed a little bit daunting for him to be
surrounded by so many people he’d never met before, each of us listening
raptly, dying to discover for ourselves what he’s really like. He joked with us,
saying he’d give us a glass of wine and a bit of cheese and try to get us on his
side. He let us know that he really wants us on his side. And when he talked
about family, he wasn’t speaking only of Elaine and their three children, he was
talking about all of us. He has given up quite a lot to become the ninth President
of the World Bank—and he’s given it up willingly because he sees the job as a
privilege. It’s challenging, exciting, and a chance to make a real difference.
We’ve all got that same chance. He knows he can’t do it alone, and he’s
counting on us to help him, and to help each other. His energy and enthusiasm
are compelling, and it was inspiring to have him remind us: "Together, we can
change the world."

On the day of his arrival at the World Bank, June 1, 1995, Mr. Wolfensohn sent
a letter to all staff, excerpts from which appear below:

I feel greatly privileged to join you today in your work at the World Bank Group.
The achievements of the Bank, IFC and MIGA have been considerable; you
have every reason to be proud of the contribution you have made to the causes
we all cherish.

There has been much commentary in the press about my plans for the Bank
Group, little or none of it originating from me. Let me then set forth as simply as
I can the structure of my program.

I would like to serve four constituencies: first, our borrowers; second, those who
entrust us with funds for our work; third, the important broader constituencies of
support in both borrower and donor countries; and fourth, our staff and
management.

I will spend a substantial amount of time in the field during the next six
months…Second, I will visit our Part I Shareholders…to get a better sense of
whether we are achieving their aims within the framework of an institution which
at times must balance conflicting expectations. Third, I will meet with those who
can assist us in our work and through whom we can better reach our goals…the
IMF, agencies of the UN, the regional development banks, as well as the NGO
community. And finally, to our World Bank Family, without which our dreams
cannot be realized.

From what I can see, we are blessed with a group of dedicated and highly-
qualified people—diverse and caring, with a long and unique collective
experience. It is much too early for me to comment on the existing climate of
morale and performance in our institution. Let me communicate simply what I
care about and what I expect will characterize the organization under my period
as President.

First, I expect from you loyalty to the institution and to each other. By this I do
not mean that there should not be dissent nor that we cannot criticize our
practices or actions. But criticisms must be internal and constructive,
accompanied by initiatives to solve the problems. I will regard externally–voiced
criticism of the Bank—of ourselves—as an indication of a desire to find
alternative employment.

Second, I hope we can all recognize that the Bank Group is not some inanimate
object, that it is the sum of the individuals. None of us can avoid the
responsibilities for what we do. Each of our actions affects our collective image
as an institution.
Third, I want us to look outwards and forward, not just to internal processes. I
believe we all work here because we care about the world: we care about
poverty, the environment, social justice, and many other issues which make up
the dreams of the institution. These should be our guiding lights. Our
organization and internal practice must serve our objectives, not dominate
them.




                   President Wolfensohn meeting with staff members



Fourth, I expect absolute standards of excellence in our work, and in our
renewal of skills.

Finally, we must have integrity in our word in our behavior, inside and outside
our institution.

I should add only that I have a very strong sense of family, not only about
Elaine, Sara, Naomi and Adam, but about each one of you. You can count on
me to act fairly towards you, and notwithstanding our size, I expect that each of
you will care about one another.

Entering our second half century, the Bank Group is at a critical juncture in our
history. The world around us has changed, and its expectations from, and
demands on, our institution have become enormously complex. We should
regard this as a period of opportunity.

I am truly proud to be with you at this time, looking to create an even greater
institution, worthy of our dreams, and critically important to our children and those
who come after them.
