Summer Recreation at the World Bank Group


NUMBER 052
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: JUNE 2006




                          January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
Summer Recreation at the World Bank Group




Eugene Black, World Bank president, talking   Hula hoop competition at the annual picnic,
  with the staff at the annual picnic, 1959                     1959



Every summer, World Bank Group staff and their families would meet for a day of
fun outdoor activities. Following the tradition started in the early 1950’s, the
World Bank Group staff gathered for the annual picnic in 1959.




   Three-legged race, Smokey Glen Farm,        Children riding in the pony carts, Smokey
          Gaithersburg, MD, 1961                  Glen Farm, Gaithersburg, MD, 1961



The annual picnic in 1961 was held at Smokey Glen Farm, Gaithersburg,
Maryland. The photographs above depict scenes from this event.
 Delight or consternation?     Peter MacKenna serving in      Yvonne Hensley, co-captain
 Pamela Angwin just after    finals of Men's Doubles, 1961   of the Prime Lenders, batting
      teeing off, 1962                                        her way to first base, July,
                                                                         1984



Tennis, softball and golf were among the favorite summer sports of World Bank
Group staff. Clubs would meet throughout the year to prepare for the upcoming
season and recruit new members. More and more teams were formed every year
to play and participate in the tournaments, and each season ended with an
awards banquet.




  Robert W. Cavanaugh and Dessie Seal         Mixed Doubles finalists: Mudi Burney and
  watch Raymond Goodman tee off, 1962       Zdenka Dalecka, runners up; and winners, Lee
                                                   Meyer and Bob Sadove, 1961
