The Development Committee, 1974-1984


NUMBER 017
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: APRIL 2003




                          January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
The Development Committee, 1974-1984

The following article is excerpted and slightly adapted from The Development
Committee: Its First Ten Years, 1974-1984.

Established in October 1974, the Development
Committee is known formally as the Joint
Ministerial Committee of the Boards of Governors
of the World Bank and the International Monetary
Fund on the Transfer of Real Resources to
Developing Countries. The Committee’s
members, usually Ministers of Finance, are
appointed in turn for successive periods of two
years by one of the countries or groups of
countries represented on the Bank’s or the
Fund’s Board of Executive Directors. The
Committee is required to advise and report to the
Boards of Governors of the Bank and the Fund
on all aspects of the broad questions of the
transfer of real resources to developing countries,       Development Committee
and to make suggestions for consideration by                  Meeting, 1975
those concerned regarding the implementation of
its conclusions.

In 1972 a Committee on the Reform of the International Monetary System and
Related Issues (the "Committee of Twenty") was established. After two years of
study, the Committee of Twenty suggested that two ministerial-level committees
be created: one to advise on monetary matters, and one to study and
recommend measures on the broad question of the transfer of real resources to
developing countries. The Development Committee was subsequently
established by parallel resolutions of the Boards of Governors of the Bank and
the Fund at their annual meetings in October 1974.

The Committee was intended to provide a focal point in the structure of
international economic cooperation for the formation of a comprehensive
overview of diverse international activities in the development area, for the
efficient and prompt consideration of development issues, and for the
coordination of international efforts to deal with the problems of financing
development.
The members are designated by each member government of the Bank of the
Fund that appoints an Executive Director or by a group of members that elects
an Executive Director. The Chairman of the Committee is selected from among
its members. While the Chairman has traditionally been selected from among the
developing countries, the executive secretaries have been appointed by the
Committee from the developed countries. The first Chairman was Henri Konan-
Bedie, Minister of Economy and Finance, Cote D’Ivoire. The current chairman
(2003) is Trevor Manuel, Minister of Finance, South Africa. There have been
seventeen successive Chairmen in the history of the Development Committee.




The Development Committee is not a decision-making body, but is a forum of
ministers concerned with finance and development representing the world
community at large. It provides an opportunity for constructive and orderly
dialogue among groups of countries at various stages of development. The
Committee seeks to improve understanding of international development issues,
and to reach a consensus at a high political level which could facilitate decision-
making in the appropriate bodies, such as the executive boards of the Bank and
the Fund. The Committee’s role is therefore to provide advice and guidance.

As part of its coordinating function, heads of other international financial or
economic organizations are invited to participate in the meetings of the
Committee as observers. In 1984 the following organizations were represented:
UN, UNDP, GATT (now WTO), UNCTAD, IFAD, AfDB, ASDB, IDB, ABEDA,
AFESD, CEC, EIB, the Commonwealth Secretariat, OECD, DAC, ISDB, and the
OPEC Fund for International Development. In 2003 there will be over 25
observer organizations attending the Development Committee meetings.

The matters which claimed the Committee’s early attention related to the
economic crisis of 1973-1974, which seriously affected some of the least
developed countries. The Committee lent its full support to the creation of a new
temporary lending facility of the Bank, the "Third Window," to provide subsidized
interest loans to developing countries supported the establishment of a Trust
Fund to be administered by the IMF to provide additional concessional resources
to meet the balance of payments needs of the low-income countries. The
Committee paid special attention to the subject of concessional flow to
developing countries. The level and quality of official development assistance
and its effective use have been a topic of constant review. The Committee has
reviewed the lending operations of multilateral development institutions and their
capital base, private capital flows, access to capital markets, and to cofinancing
with official and non-official agencies. An extensive and detailed study has been
undertaken on the importance and the role of private foreign investment in
developing countries.




The Committee has also undertaken a serious and thorough review of a large
number of the recommendations made by the Brandt Commission, and the
Development Committee’s document Program of Immediate Action has
highlighted steps for economic growth.

Other subjects that have evoked the special concern of the Committee are
related to the linkages between trade and the promotion of development with
particular emphasis on the rollback of protectionism and the restoration of
openness to markets. Attention has also been devoted to the external debt
situation of developing countries.

The Development Committee, with its broad responsibilities, its compact size, its
representative character, its association with the Bank and the Fund and the
expertise of its members, provides an appropriate forum to promote international
consensus and decisions on a number of vital development issues of interest to
the developing and developed countries.
