Fifth Annual Meetings of the Boards of Governors of
the WBG and the IMF, Paris, Sept 1950

NUMBER 062
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: SEPTEMBER 2008




                             January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
Fifth Annual Meetings of the Boards of Governors of the WBG and
the IMF, Paris, September 1950

The Boards of Governors of the International Monetary
Fund and the World Bank Group meet once a year in
the fall to discuss the work of their respective
institutions. The Annual Meetings, which take place in
Washington, DC on October 13th this year, have
traditionally been held in Washington, DC for two
consecutive years and in another member country
every third year.

The 5th Annual Meetings were held in Paris at the
Annex of the Bank of France from September 6-14,
1950. The President of the French Republic, Vincent
Auriol, addressed members of the Boards and the
public on September 6 followed by a formal joint                  Mr. Auriol, President of
session of the Boards, to begin the conference's                 France, leaving the Bank
proceedings.                                                       of France Annex after
                                                                  delivering the opening
                                                                  address, September 6,
“…it is only through a trusting cooperation between all
people, in all fields, that men may be assured of
                              prosperity and peace. It was this very belief which
                              brought the Allies to meet in Bretton Woods in July
                              1944, while still fighting together on all fronts, in order
                              to set the foundations of financial and economic
                              cooperation between people.? (From the Address by
                              the President of the Republic of France, Vincent
                              Auriol, to the Governors of the Bank and Fund,
                              September 6, 1950)

                              Chintaman D. Deshmukh, Chairman of the Boards of
                              Governance and Finance Minister of India presided.
                              Eugene Black, World Bank President, presented the
                              Bank’s Fifth Annual Report to the Bank’s Board of

Governors on                                                 September 8.
                               Mr. and Mrs. Black leaving
                               the Comedie Française on
"Up to the present time,       their way to a reception at   we have made loans
which total nearly a            the Ministry of Finance in   billion dollars to 17
countries in widely              the Louvre, September,      separated parts of the
                                          1950
world. We can already begin to see the fruits of these loans; to mention but a few
examples, Bank financing is helping to produce steel in Western Europe, to
increase timber yield in Eastern Europe, to enable Indian Railways to break
bottlenecks which had interfered with the effective distribution of goods, to
augment substantially the output of hydroelectric power in the Western
Hemisphere, and to expand food production in a number of countries." (From
the Address by Eugene Black, President of the Bank, in presenting the Fifth
Annual Report of the Bank to the Board of Governors, September 8, 1950)




         Fifth Annual Meetings participants at the session, Paris, September 1950

During the remaining days of the Annual Meetings, the Governors met in closed
session to discuss the annual reports and other items on the agenda. The Bank’s
schedule also included three informal panel discussions of its operations, policies
and activities.

The Fund’s schedule included discussions by the Governors of exchange,
monetary and fiscal problems faced by the member countries at that time.

Meeting Agenda

The Paris meeting agenda included:

      Fifth Annual Report
      Financial Statements and Annual Audit
      Administrative Budget for Fiscal Year Ending June
       30, 1951
      Establishment of Reserve and Disposition of Surplus
      Advisory Council of the Bank
                                                                           Summary
      Third Regular Election of Executive Directors                   Proceedings of the
      Loan Regulations Nos. 3 and 4 of the Bank                          Fifth Annual
      Place and Date of Sixth Annual Meeting                           Meetings, Paris,
      Election of Officers and Procedures Committee for                September 1950
1950-51
