The Annual Meetings


NUMBER 002
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: JULY 2002




                          January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
The Annual Meetings

The Articles of Agreement of the IBRD states
that "The Board of Governors shall hold an
annual meeting and such other meetings as
may be provided for by the Board or called by
the Executive Directors." At these Meetings
the Boards of Governors of the World Bank
Group and the International Monetary Fund
meet to discuss various matters, including the
Annual Reports and the finances of the Bank
Group and the Fund. In addition the
Meetings:

      Provide a forum for the exchange of views between individual member
       countries and the managements and staffs of the Bank and the Fund on
       economic and monetary conditions and the policies in those countries.

      Provide a forum for exchanges of views among member countries and
       between the countries and the managements of the Bank and the Fund on
       global economic and monetary conditions and the policies and operations
       of the institutions. In this connection, the meetings can provide a forum for
       international cooperation and enable the institutions to learn how to serve
       their membership better.




      Facilitate interaction between the private sector, including potential
       investors and non-governmental organizations, and other meetings
       participants.

      Facilitate the regular and effective interaction among member countries
       required for the formation and work of constituent groups.
      Provide an effective forum for explaining to the public directly and through
       the media the tasks, objectives and relevance of the Bank and the Fund.
       In this manner the Meetings make a major contribution to openness.

The Annual Meetings are held in September or
October, and every third year it is held outside
Washington, D.C., at the invitation of a member
country. The Annual Meetings have been held
every year since 1946.

All member governments of the Bank and the Fund
are represented on the Boards of Governors.
About 10,000 people attend the Annual Meetings,
including about 3,500 governors and their
delegations, more than 5,000 visitors and special
guests, mainly from private business, the banking community, and non-
governmental organizations, and about 1,000 representatives of the media. In
addition, Bank and Fund staff attend meetings with officials of government
delegations, and representatives of the banking community and other
participants.

It Was Different in Those Days…

             The first Annual Meeting, in 1946, cost a total of $136,000.

             To travel to the Annual Meetings held in London in 1947,
              transportation by sea was the norm. International Bank Notes (the
              Bank's in-house publication) reported that "an advance party will
              leave New York on the Mauritania on July 11." It was later
              reported that "the second advance party sailed Saturday, August
              16, on the Queen Elizabeth. The largest group of Executive
              Directors and staff members will sail from New York on the Queen
              Elizabeth on September 3."

             At the 1954 Annual Meetings something happened that did not
              figure on the schedule. A vote was taken in the opening meeting
              in which every delegate appeared to abstain. The chairman was
              puzzled by this awkward and unprecedented position - until he
              realized that not a single delegate actually heard the question on
              the floor.
   With so many pieces of paper to
    organize and keep track of, staff
    members working on documents
    and records hold their breath and
    hope no serious errors occur. One
    year an official document went out
    with a page missing. The person
    in charge of documents and
    records, and the head of the print
    shop, knew it was missing, but there was no time to have it
    rewritten and re-run. Only one alert staff member caught the
    omission, and that was several months after the conference.

   At the 1958 Annual Meeting in New Delhi, 120 cars were assigned
    to handle transportation requirements. At the time President
    Eugene Black's party arrived at the airport a number of other
    delegations were also arriving and all 120 cars were in use taxiing
    back and forth between the airport and the hotels. When the
    confusion of arrival had subsided it was discovered that Mr. Black's
    personal luggage was missing. Airlines were contacted, planes
    searched in Bombay and Calcutta, all guest luggage rechecked and
    baggage rooms searched, but still no luggage. Mr. Black took the
    news philosophically, remarking that he would like to try getting
    through the week of meetings with just the clothes he had on.
    Fortunately this experiment wasn't necessary. The next morning
    someone had the good idea of lining up all 120 automobiles and
    opening up all 120 trunks. Mr. Black's suitcase was discovered in
    the fiftieth trunk!
