Senn Nuclear Power Plant Project for Italy,
September 16, 1959

NUMBER 063
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: SEPTEMBER 2008




                            January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
Senn Nuclear Power Plant Project for Italy, September 16, 1959

The Bank had been considering the development of nuclear power on a
commercial basis since 1955. In June 1956 the Bank issued a report examining
the status of nuclear power development at that time. It concluded, based on the
information then available, that there were good prospects that power could be
produced by a nuclear plant at costs competitive, or close to competitive, with
power produced by a conventional plant.




                                                     On the left is the gigantic sphere, which
  In the foreground is the main station, with
the giant sphere for the nuclear reactor in the    houses the nuclear reactor. On the right is
       background, 1961. Photo: SENN                the powerhouse to contain the generators
                                                   and the water tower. In the foreground are
                                                  the specially welded stainless steel pipers to
                                                      convey steam from the reactor to the



The Bank examined several locations where a nuclear power plant might be
considered. The conditions in southern Italy appeared favorable. In July 1957,
the Government of Italy and the Bank agreed to sponsor a joint study, known as
ENSI (Energia Nucleare Sud-Italia), of the possibilities of a nuclear power station
in Southern Italy. The Bank also set up an International Panel to provide advice
and guidance on the nuclear aspects of the Project ENSI study.

The site selected for the construction of the nuclear power plant was on the
Garigliano River, between Rome and Naples. The site was chosen not only
because of good supply of cooling water and favorable conditions for the release
of waste gasses and disposal of radioactive waste, but also because the plant
could be easily linked with the extensive generation and distribution system of
the utility shareholders of Societa Elettronucleare Nazionale (SENN). SENN was
designated by the Italian Government as the company which would own and
operate the nuclear plant. General Electric Company was responsible for the
design and construction of the nuclear aspects of the plant, supply of equipment
and fabrication of fuel.




        Packing nuclear fuel elements         The photo shows the foundation of
        manufactured by the General             the giant sphere for the nuclear
      Electric Company for shipment to         reactor in the background, 1960.
      Garigliano nuclear power station,                   Photo: SENN
      December 1962. Photo: General
                   Electric



The plant incorporated a boiling water-cooled and -moderated nuclear reactor
fueled by enriched uranium. A huge steel sphere housed the nuclear section of
the plant, including the steam vessels, With a diameter of 160 feet —greater than
that of St. Peter’s in Rome—the sphere served both as a pressure chamber for
the reactor and to contain any radioactivity which might result from a nuclear
accident. Great care was therefore taken to ensure that the sphere was
completely airtight.
 Boiling water reactor vessel arriving at the     Italy’s first nuclear power plant is under
  Garigliano site, December 1962. Photo:        construction on the Garigliano River, March
              General Electric.                                      1962.

The plant began operation in 1964. In August 1978 it was shut down due to
damage to one of the two secondary steam generators. In March 1982 the Italian
Electricity Generating Board declared the plant to be out of service. While the
Bank has continued to monitor developments in the field of nuclear energy, the
loan to Italy for the nuclear plant on the Gargliano River remains its only loan for
that form of energy.
