The Bank’s Headquarters Building


NUMBER 010
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: FEBRUARY 2003




                          January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
The Bank’s Headquarters Building

Ever since the World Bank opened for business on
June 25, 1946 the address of its headquarters has
been 1818 H Street N.W., Washington, D. C.
During the first Board of Governors meeting in
Savannah, Georgia, in March 1946, the city of
Washington was chosen as the future site of the
World Bank. John Maynard Keynes of the British
delegation had argued strenuously for New York,
but the Americans insisted on Washington and
carried the day.

As it happened, a survey of downtown Washington
was made to locate satisfactory quarters for the
Bank and the Fund prior to May 1, 1946. The
results of this survey showed that the 1818 H Street    Entrance to Bank and Fund
building (what became the A building in the Old          headquarters, late 1940s
Main Complex) contained the most satisfactory
space that could be made available. The building had originally been constructed
in 1941 for the U.S. Surgeon General, and in 1946 it was occupied by offices of
the U.S. State Department.

In seeking this office space, the Public Buildings Administration of the U.S.
Government was contacted, and in cooperation with the Executive Offices of the
White House (including a direct appeal to President Truman from World Bank
President Eugene Meyer) space was assigned in the building for the Bank and
the Fund. The tenth floor, having a total of 12,199 square feet, was allocated to
the Bank, and the ninth floor to the Fund. The Bank and Fund eventually leased
the entire building on December 6, 1946, for a period of five years, with a rental
of $386,277.72 per annum, although the State Department continued to occupy
some offices for a while longer.

However, as time went on, it became clear that the building at 1818 H Street
would not be sufficiently large to accommodate anticipated future growth of the
Bank and the Fund. In the December 1986 issue of The Caravan, the newsletter
of the Fund’s retirees, Albert S. Gerstein and Phillip Thorson tell the story of a
search for alternative accommodations, in which they were both involved.
According to the article, the managements of the Bank and Fund established a
Joint Committee on Bank and Fund Building to study the question and to make
recommendations.
With the help of real estate agents, the Committee looked into suitable sites for a
new structure. The site that most attracted their interest was a tract comprising
about 14 acres south of Virginia Avenue and due east of the Potomac River. The
property had been the central gas generating plant of the Washington Gas Light
                              Company.

                              As described in the proposal prepared in August
                              1950 by the Public Buildings Service (PBS), "The
                              proposed site is located at 27th Street and New
                              Hampshire Avenue, N. W., a particularly beautiful
                              part of Washington. Nearby are the Titanic
                              Memorial, the memorial to Abraham Lincoln, and
                              the Arlington Memorial Bridge spanning the
                              Potomac River. To the west, across Georgetown
                              Channel, is Theodore Roosevelt Island, which will
                              be developed; and it is expected a monument to
                              that President will be erected there at some future
                              date. The entire area is quite open, with pleasing
                              vistas in several directions, and a wide view of the
                              Potomac River and the Virginia shore line.
Bank and Fund headquarters,
        late 1940s           "The suggested site contains approximately 290,000
                             sq. ft.; it is a trapezium in shape. It is bounded by
26th and 27th Streets on the east and west respectively, and Virginia and New
Hampshire Avenues on the north and south. It is proposed that G and F Streets
will be closed to form New Hampshire
Avenue to the Parkway. The site slopes
gently toward the west, and is considered
adequate for both the building and the
landscape treatment. It is easily
accessible to the public."

In early 1950 the Committee approached
the owner of the site and was eventually
told that it could be purchased for $1.9
million. The Joint Committee
recommended to the managements that       Plans of proposed Bank-Fund building,
such a price should be given serious                 Washington D.C.
consideration. In addition, the U.S.
Government—as the government of the host country—was consulted, and had
no objections.
The U.S. Secretary of State authorized the PBS to have their architects begin
work designing a new headquarters for the Bank and the Fund. In August 1950
the PBS delivered a set of outline drawings and cost estimates for a building that
                                       would provide 382,000 sq. ft. of floor
                                       space, or more than twice what the Bank
                                       and the Fund were then using. The
                                       estimated cost was $14 million for the
                                       structure and $2 million for the land.

                                         In its description of the proposed building
                                         the PBS wrote, "Inasmuch as there are
                                         two distinct organizations, the Fund and
                                         the Bank, conducting business in the one
                                         structure, it was decided to divide the
                                         building vertically rather than horizontally.
 Plans of proposed Bank-Fund building,   A central lobby will provide access for
            Washington D.C.
                                         passenger elevators, and other means of
                                         communication, between the two
                                         separate but inter-related organizations."

The design also provided for a 750 seat auditorium; a cafeteria seating 400
persons with two serving lines for complete meals and a snack bar, as well as
two large and four small private dining rooms;
and a library with a capacity of 10,000 volumes.
The basement would contain a garage for 165
vehicles, and there would be additional reserved
parking area outside the building.

According to The Caravan article, the
managements of the Bank and the Fund
reviewed the PBS proposal and suggested some
reworking. The main reason, as reported to the
Joint Committee, was that the management of
the Bank in particular wanted to avoid any
semblance of a "monumental" structure. The PBS
then submitted designs for a somewhat smaller
structure costing $4 million less.
                                                         Present headquarters (in red)
In March 1951, the Joint Committee prepared a            and location of site considered
"Report on Bank and Fund Building" and                  for Bank-Fund building (in blue)
submitted it to the two managements. It
recommended proceeding with the construction of the new headquarters along
the lines of the PBS proposal. The report noted the effect on the Korean War
(which had begun in 1950) on the availability of steel and concrete and an
adequate supply of labor. Nevertheless, it recommended that site acquisition and
design of the building should go forward immediately for two principal reasons:
perfecting designs, drawing up plans and specifications, letting contracts, and
other preliminaries would in any case require a minimum of two years; and
barring a substantial worsening of the international situation, it seemed
reasonable to believe that the situation at that time warranted a decision to
                                          proceed.

                                        Yet the site was not acquired and the
                                        building was not constructed. Gerstein
                                        and Thorson write that the files contain
                                        no specific information as to the exact
                                        reasons for this, but note that in addition
                                        to the expressed concern about the
                                        effect of the continuing Korean conflict,
                                        some other considerations had arisen.
                                        One was that the Vice-President of the
                                        Bank, Robert L. Garner, preferred that
                                        the Bank be located in New York, which
  Sketch of proposed Bank-Fund building
                                        was then the exclusive market to the
                                        sale of the Bank’s bonds. Also, it was
reported that Mr. Garner had indicated a preference for a separate headquarters
for the Bank (something that would not happen until 1973, when the Fund moved
across 19th Street to its new headquarters).

In addition, a senior Fund staff member noted that there were no restaurant or
shopping facilities convenient to the proposed site. As well, the Fund’s Deputy
Managing Director had been given to understand that U.S. Treasury officials
considered it "inadvisable" to proceed with the proposal at that time, given
conditions prevailing as the result of the Korean War.

The Caravan article reflects that instead of having a headquarters with twice the
floor space that they were then using, as well as a superbly situated 14 acres of
land on which to expand, the two institutions ultimately paid many times the $1.9
million that the Gas Company had asked in order to accommodate more staff for
the organizations’ increasing activities. A mere 4 acres of the gas works property
was sold a few years later for double the price available to the Fund and the
Bank for the entire property.
And what ultimately happened to that 14 acre tract? The Kennedy Center now
occupies the southern portion, and the Watergate apartment complex occupies
the northern part.
