Into the Jet Age


NUMBER 020
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: MAY 2003




                          January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
Into the Jet Age


The mid-1950s saw the introduction of jet aircraft into commercial aviation. The
World Bank played a significant role in this process, helping both Qantas and Air
India to procure jet aircraft for their national airlines.

Qantas

Qantas Empire Airways (now Qantas
Airways Limited) began as a small internal
carrier in 1920 as the Queensland and
Northern Territory Aerial Services Limited
(QANTAS). It initiated its first overseas
service in 1934. After the end of World
War II Qantas expanded its services and
acquired new equipment to meet the
increasing demand for air transport. By
1956 the Qantas network of flight services
extended 60, 150 miles, including long-                Qantas Airways jet liner
haul routes from Australia to Europe and
the U.K., Hong Kong – Japan, the west coast of the U.S.A. and Canada, South
Africa, the South Pacific Islands. It also conducted short-haul routes from
Australia to Papua and New Guinea, as well as internal routes within Papua and
New Guinea. In 1956 the Qantas fleet consisted of 33 aircraft, of which thirteen
Super-Constellations constituted the core of the fleet. Qantas carried about 63
percent of the air-borne passenger traffic between Australia and the overseas
                                       world. The Sydney-London service was the
                                       most important route for Qantas.

                                    In order to handle the expected growth of
                                    traffic between 1956 and 1962 the company
                                    planned to invest the equivalent of over
                                    $60,000,000 in the replacement of a number
                                    of its aircraft with larger and more efficient
                                    jets, in adding new propeller-driven aircraft
                                    and in providing for the necessary ground
                                    installations.

                                    This program would equip Qantas by 1960
                                    with a fleet of aircraft whose ton-mile
      Qantas Airways jet liner
capacity would be twice that of its fleet in 1956, with most of the propeller aircraft
replaced on the main overseas routes (from Sydney to London, San Francisco-
Vancouver, Tokyo, and Johannesburg) by faster, larger jets operating at lower
unit costs, and would provide Qantas with essential ground facilities for the new
craft and the enlarged fleet. The Boeing 707-138 jet—the acquisition of seven of
which formed the centerpiece of the project—had twice the carrying potential of
the Super-Constellation it replaced, taking account of speed, payload and range.
The new jets would reduce the Sydney-London transit time from 48 hours to 27
hours, and transit time across the Pacific from 28 hours to 16 hours. Four
additional propeller-driven Super-Constellations were also acquired.

In addition to the aircraft, Qantas enlarged and modernized its ground
installations in Australia. This included the construction of hangars, storage
sheds and other buildings, and the provision of new equipment for repair shops
and of additional equipment for ground transport at airfields.

The loan from the World Bank for this project amounted to $9,230,000 and was
signed on November 15, 1956.

The Boeing 707-138 aircraft were delivered between July and September 1959,
ahead of every other airline outside the U.S. Boeing 707-138 services to the U.S.
began in July 1959. Two months later the service was extended to London via
New York. Sydney-London services via India began in October 1959.

Air India

Scheduled airline services in India can be
said to have begun on October 15, 1932,
when J.R.D. Tata, the Father of Civil
Aviation in India and founder of Air India,
took off from Karachi in a tiny, light, single-
engine aircraft on his flight to Bombay via
Ahmedabad. The airline grew over the
years, and Tata Airlines was converted
into a public company under the name of
Air-India in August 1946.

In late 1947 an agreement was reached            Air India International VT-JN Boeing 707

with the Government of India for the
formation of Air India International Limited to operate international services. Air
India International, which was registered on March 8, 1948, inaugurated its
international services on June 8, 1948, with a weekly flight from Bombay to
London via Cairo and Geneva with a Lockheed Constellation aircraft. (The word
'International' was dropped in 1962. Effective March 1, 1994, the airline has been
functioning as Air-India Limited.)

The early '50s saw the financial condition of various airlines operating in India
deteriorate to such an extent that the government decided to nationalize the air
transport industry. Accordingly two autonomous corporations were created on
August 1, 1953. Air India International was responsible for all long-range
                                                international services under the
                                                Indian flag, and Indian Airlines
                                                was responsible for all domestic
                                                services, plus some short-range
                                                services to nearby countries.

                                                   Air India and Indian Airlines had a
                                                   monopoly of scheduled air
                                                   transport "from, to, in or across
                                                   India." Air India carried about two
                                                   thirds of the passenger traffic
                                                   between India and overseas, and
                                                   had a flight network of 22,100
                                                   route miles. It connected Bombay,
                                                   Calcutta, Delhi and Madras with a)
                                                   London via Cairo, Rome, Geneva
Signing of the loan agreement for Loan 0161 to Air
                                                   and Paris; b) London via Karachi,
   India on March 5, 1957. Present were (left to   Beirut/Damascus, Zurich and
    right): Honorable H. Dayal of the Embassy of   Dusseldorf/Prague; c) Tokyo via
 India; President Eugene Black of the World Bank,  Bangkok and Hong Kong; d)
   and Mr. E.T. Warren on behalf of the borrower
                                                   Sydney via Singapore and
                                                   Darwin; and e) Nairobi via
Aden/Karachi. In 1957 the fleet consisted of eleven Super-Constellations. Air
India had also placed a contingent order for the prompt delivery of two new
Super-Constellations, conditional on Lockheed’s finding a prompt buyer at a
satisfactory price for the three Constellations.

However, Air India needed more aircraft to cope with growing traffic, and to
maintain its business share on international routes. It was determined that three
new Boeing 707 jets would have the same service capacity as ten Super-
Constellations. On January 31, 1957, Air India signed a contract with Boeing for
three Boeing 707-437 jets. In addition to the aircraft, the Air India jet project
included radio, galley, and other aircraft auxiliaries; nine spare engines; other
initial spares and stores; some overhaul facilities, a test cell and other special
equipment; and a flight simulator. The loan from the World Bank for $5.6 million
was signed on March 5, 1957.

The first Boeing 707-437 was received in February 1960. This marked the
airline’s entry into the jet age. It also enabled Air India to extend its Bombay-
London service to New York in May 1960. This was a major step in the airline’s
steady expansion into new markets.
