Early Mission to Austria


NUMBER 033
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: AUGUST 2003




                           January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
Early Mission to Austria

It is often forgotten today that in the aftermath of the Second World War the Bank
undertook a considerable lending program in what are now very prosperous
countries in Western Europe. In this excerpted article, which appeared in the
March 1954 issue of “International Bank Notes,? Bank staff member Victor
Umbricht gives us a snapshot of Austria during the period when it was a borrower
from the Bank.

One forgets quickly how serious the Austrian
situation was before [U. S. Secretary of State]
General George C. Marshall made his historic
speech at Harvard University in 1947, where he first
publicly articulated the idea of what became known
as the Marshall Plan, and before Marshall aid came
to the rescue of Austria. Indeed, in the immediate
post-war period the country was near chaos. The
economy was severely disrupted, there was great
political unrest, the currency was sliding down like
an avalanche, and all this was accompanied by a
black market, the dimensions of which were
unheard of before. The country was not able to
raise sufficient food for her 7 million inhabitants and
was thus an easy prey for any subversive influence.
History will tell that it was Austria's good fortune and     Victor Umbricht
her salvation that at this time General Marshall's
ideas became reality and resulted in generous aid to Austria through various
assistance programs. Her people were thus saved from starvation.

And today [1954?] what the foreign visitor meets is a people who have found
almost complete happiness again, with a prosperous economy and, what is just
as important, with their old Viennese humor, and still that touch of their traditional
Schlamperi-taking nothing very seriously, not even the difficulties of their own
existence.

Our mission, which visited Austria towards the end of 1953, consisted of Messrs.
Prud-homme, Spottswood, Oppenheimer and myself, not to forget the charming
Mrs. Prud'homme, and Mrs. Boesch, the secretary from our Paris Office. We
were all struck by the friendly and hospitable reception accorded us by the
Austrians-as if they had been waiting for old friends.
                         The purpose of our mission was to have a look at the
                         financial and technical aspects of a power project in
                         Carinthia, called Reisseck-Kreuzeck, for which Austria
                         had requested Bank assistance. Some members of the
                         mission went up there to inspect the project on a frosty
                         weekend in late November. Altitude: about 7500 feet.
                         The project has a particular significance on the ground
                         that its power production will be shared with Italy. If
                         Reisseck-Kreuzeck contributes to overcome the
                         psychological obstacles to a coordinated European
                         power economy, it will have been a very rewarding
                         venture.
 Franz M. Oppenheimer

                            Our daily work afforded us an opportunity to meet people
from all walks of life, in Vienna as well as in the country. Vienna is still the
glorious city of the golden days when Pilsner beer was alcohol. The tower of St.
Stephen's cathedral, though still surrounded by unavoidable construction
scaffoldings, continues to be the landmark of the city. The State Opera is there
too, but badly damaged by the war and out of action. The shops are plentiful and
not too expensive, contrary to the hotels, which, at least in Vienna, charge
excessive prices. This, in any case, was the mission's experience. Some of the
better hotels are, incidentally, still requisitioned by the four occupying powers.

We did not see very much of the occupation troops.
The Allied soldier has practically disappeared, and the
Russians are very seldom met on the street. We saw
only very few of them in the Soviet-occupied zone,
where we found a superb ingenuity of the people to
give vent to their views. They possess the great art of
shutting their mouths before they are told to, but they
express their feelings in a meaningful way. For
example, we saw an advertisement (in English!) in one
of the store windows announcing “dresses sold for
ridiculous figures.?
                                                              Hector Prud'homme
The occupation burden still weighs heavily upon the
Austrians. They are longing for a State Treasury and
for complete independence, and use every opportunity to make this
understandable feeling known, particularly in the theaters. If a passage in a play
refers to Austria's historic mission and independence or if an old Austrian battle
flag goes up, there is immediate stormy applause.
One of the greatest treasures that Austria offers to the visitor who has a few
hours to devote to less earthly things is her music. Viennese performances of
operas and operettas cannot be matched anywhere. Tickets are cheap and the
houses always full. Surprising is the enormous attendance by young people.
Don't miss any performance when you go there. It is about the best standard in
music and Viennese glamour that can be found. When we went to see the
Zigeunerbaron we heard two rather loquacious ladies in front of us saying “here
comes my favorite song, let's not even talk now.?

Our working relationship with the Austrians was very satisfactory and frank. Two
things struck me in this respect. First, the decent bureaucracy, which may still be
                                                                       one of the remnants
                                                                       of the old
                                                                       Habsburgian days.
                                                                       The typical Austrian
                                                                       bureaucrat, the
                                                                       Ministerialrat,
                                                                       impressed all of us
                                                                       by his serious and
                                                                       competent handling
                                                                       of all matters, and
  Typical of difficult construction at high altitudes is the Reisseck- by his courtesy
   Kreuzeck Project in the Alps of southern Austria. This artificial
 reservoir near the mountain peaks is pumped full in the summer,
                                                                       towards the public.
 using low-cost summer power, to ensure a flow of water through        Secondly, many
                   the turbines in the winter months                   appointments in
                                                                       administrative
                                                                       offices, and in other
divisions, are not primarily made according to aptitude but according to the
political requirement of proportionate representation between the Christian
Democrats (Catholics) and the Social Democrats.

The country has made striking political and economic progress since 1945, in
spite of the moral and material strain of the occupation. Their two main political
parties, the Christian Democrats and the Social Democrats, have achieved a little
miracle in that their coalition since the end of the war has survived many strains
and divergences of opinion. But above all, the people have been able, with their
resolute patience, to withstand all attempts of infiltration of foreign creeds,
despite their exposed geographical location. This is as much the merit of their
political wisdom and moderation as of their democratic integrity.
