Origins of the International Finance
Corporation (IFC)

NUMBER 012
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: MARCH 2003




                             January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
Origins of the International Finance Corporation (IFC)

The world was a different place when the
International Finance Corporation (IFC) was
established in 1956. No one spoke of emerging
markets. There was no worldwide trend toward
privatization, no communications revolution, no
globalized economy. World population was less
than half of what it is today. The economies of poor
countries were still in very early stages of
development, lacking the human resources,
physical infrastructure and sound institutions
needed to raise incomes and improve living
standards. The responsibility for development was
almost universally assigned to the public sector.
Private sector investment in developing countries
                                                             Robert L. Garner, first
was small, and not much thought was given to                   President of IFC
increasing it. It was into this environment that IFC
was born.

For several years officials of the World Bank had been supporting the creation of
a new and different entity to complement their own. The Bank had been founded
to finance post-World War II reconstruction and development projects by lending
money to member governments, and had been doing so effectively. Yet in its
initial years, some senior staff had seen the need for creating a related institution
to spur greater private sector investment in poor countries.

Major international corporations and commercial financial institutions at the time
showed relatively little interest in working in Africa, Asia, Latin America or the
Middle East. Entrepreneurs in these regions had few domestic sources of capital
to draw upon and even less from abroad. They needed a catalyst.

At the 1944 Bretton Woods Conference that led to the creation of the Bank and
the International Monetary Fund, initial proposals for this kind of support had
been made—and rejected. These proposals would have given the Bank the
ability to meet some of these goals by lending to private companies without
government guarantees. Then, in the late 1940s, the concept was greatly refined
by Bank President Eugene R. Black and his Vice President, former U.S. banker
and General Foods Corporation executive Robert L. Garner.
Garner was an ardent believer in the role of private enterprise. Addressing the
Inaugural Meeting of IFC’s Board of Governors on November 15, 1956, he said,
"I believe deeply that the most dynamic force in producing a better life for people,
and a more worthy life, comes from the initiative of the individual—the
opportunity to create, to produce, to achieve for himself and his family—each to
the best of his individual talents. And this is the essence of the system of
competitive private enterprise—20th century model—as it has been developed
by the most enlightened and successful business concerns. It holds the promise
of rewards according to what the individual accomplishes. It is based on the
concept that it will benefit most its owners and managers if it best satisfies its
customers; if it promotes the legitimate interests of its employees; if in all regards
it acts as a good citizen of the community. It is moved by the desire to earn a
profit—a most respectable and important motive, so long as profit comes from
providing useful and desirable goods and services. It is my belief that the best
                                            services and the best profits result from
                                            a competitive system wherein skill and
                                            efficiency get their just reward."

                                             Garner worked with his assistant
                                             Richard Demuth and others to create a
                                             new private sector investment arm
                                             affiliated with the Bank, rather than
                                             having it lend directly from its own
                                             resources to the private sector. This new
                                             multilateral entity, at first internally
                                             termed the International Development
                                             Corporation, would be owned by
                                             governments but act like a corporation
    (Left to Right) Eugene Black, Robert     and be equally comfortable interacting
 Garner, and Richard Demuth were pictured    with the public and private sectors. It
 in this cartoon published in the April 1955 would lend money, take equity positions
   issue of International Bank Notes. The
                                             and provide the technical expertise in
   caption reads: "The note says the child
    should grow up to be a credit to us."    appraising private investment proposals
                                             in developing countries, as the Bank
                                             was doing for public sector projects. It
also would work alongside private investors, assuming equal commercial risks. In
the process of removing some of the major barriers to new private investment in
developing countries, it would encourage the domestic capital formation needed
to create jobs, increase foreign exchange earnings and tax revenues, and
transfer knowledge and technology from north to south.
The idea received its first official backing in the March 1951 report of a U.S.
development policy advisory board headed by Nelson Rockefeller. This panel
conceived of a package to add considerable value to the Bank’s own product by
encouraging the growth of productive private enterprises that would contribute
many key components to development.

One such component, Garner wrote, was entrepreneurship—"that elusive
combination of imagination to see an opportunity and to mobilize the necessary
resources to seize it." Another was the mobilization of new capital from private
investors willing to take substantial risks in return for potentially large rewards.
Others included job creation, new labor skills, management capacity and
technological advances. In the process business owners in developing countries
would "successfully transmute machines, labor and capital into a dynamic going
concern, producing at a competitive cost goods of a quality that the market will
accept."

Garner actively marketed the concept. After the 1952 presidential elections, the
United States reduced its support for the idea, eventually endorsing a modified
proposal two years later that left IFC to start business with no equity investment
powers (this provision was changed in 1961). Other nations then came aboard,
and the formal Articles of Agreement were drafted by the Bank in 1955.

IFC’s Articles of Agreement

The IFC Articles of Agreement came into
force on July 20, 1956, when the requisite
number of at least 30 member countries
subscribing at least $75 million to IFC’s
capital was attained. The initial total
authorized capital was $100 million. The first
thirty-one member countries as of July 20,
1956 were: Iceland, Canada, Ecuador,
United States, Egypt, Australia, Mexico,
Costa Rica, Ethiopia, Peru, Dominican
Republic, United Kingdom, Panama, Ceylon,
Haiti, Guatemala, Nicaragua, Bolivia,            Eugene R. Black (left), President of the
Honduras, India, El Salvador, Pakistan,             IBRD, and Robert L. Garner (right),
Jordan, Sweden, Norway, Japan, Denmark,           first President of the IFC, at the 1956
Finland, Colombia, Germany and France.                        Annual Meeting
On that date the capital subscriptions
amounted to $78,366,000.
IFC’s Articles of Agreement enshrined three critical principles. The founders
insisted that IFC adopt a business principle, taking on the full commercial risks of
its investments, accepting no government guarantees and earning a profit from
its operations; be an honest broker, using its unique abilities as a corporation
owned by governments to "bring together investment opportunities, domestic and
private capital, and experienced management," and; play a catalytic role,
investing only in projects for which "sufficient private capital is not available on
reasonable terms."

IFC is Launched

Robert L. Garner was appointed President of IFC by its Board of Directors on
July 24, 1956. He holds the distinction of being the only person to hold the
position of President of IFC without also being President of the World Bank. All of
Garner’s successors have been titled "Executive Vice President", with the
                                       President of the Bank being President of
                                       IFC also.

                                          Garner opened IFC’s inaugural press
                                          conference the next day by saying that IFC
                                          was the first inter-governmental
                                          organization which had as its main
                                          objective the promotion of private
                                          enterprise. He believed private enterprise to
                                          be the most effective and dynamic force for
                                          economic development. IFC would benefit
                                          not only the underdeveloped but also the
                                          industrial countries. There was increasing
                                          interest in overseas investment and
Robert L. Garner, President of IFC (left) expansion on the part of established
 and John C. Beevor, Vice President of    companies in the developed countries.
              IFC (right)                 Private enterprise was the only weapon the
                                          free world possessed which the
communists did not. That was one of the reasons, Garner said, why he
welcomed the establishment of this new organization, after several years of
preparation.

IFC Staff

Garner appointed John G. Beevor to be Vice President of IFC, Richard H.
Demuth, who had done much to foster the establishment of IFC, to be Assistant
to the President, and Davidson Sommers to be General Counsel. Beevor had
been engaged in preparatory work on the organization of IFC since March 1956,
when he was released from his position as Managing Director of the
Commonwealth Development Finance Company Limited of London to join the
staff of the Bank. Demuth was Director of the Bank’s Technical Assistance and
Liaison Staff, and Sommers was the Bank’s General Counsel. Both Demuth and
Sommers had been associated with the Bank since 1946, and would continue to
hold their positions in the Bank while serving in IFC. The Treasurer, Secretary,
Director of Administration and Director of Information of the Bank were appointed
to the same positions in IFC.

Apart from its management, IFC’s own staff consisted at the outset of an
Engineering Adviser, with one assistant, and of eight operations officers, of six
different nationalities. IFC also had its own administrative assistants.

Initial Inquiries

IFC received a large number and variety of inquiries and proposals with
reference to possible investments in many of its member countries. As was
inevitable with a new type of international financial organization, many inquiries
were based on a misunderstanding of its purpose, which is to use its funds for
investment in private enterprises, and not to finance transactions such as export
credits, installment sales, ship mortgages, and the like.

Other inquiries involving commercial or agricultural projects were declined in view
of IFC’s policy to confine its activities, in the earlier years, to the field of industrial
enterprise, which includes processing of agricultural products and mining.

A number of investment proposals which at first appeared promising showed,
after investigation, weaknesses of various types making them unsuitable for IFC
financing. On the other hand, several proposals on which considerable work was
done were postponed or withdrawn by the sponsors for various reasons. Some
decided to do the entire financing themselves; some secured financing from
other sources. A few were withdrawn because of inability to agree on financial
terms.

First Operations

On June 20, 1957 IFC reached agreement for a $2 million investment in Siemens
do Brasil Companhia de Electricidade. This investment, together with the
equivalent of $8.5 million being invested by Siemens of Germany, was to be
used to expand the plant facilities and business of Siemens do Brasil for the
manufacture of electric generating equipment, switchgear, transformers, large
motors and accessories for utility and industrial application as well as telephone
equipment. This was the first integrated plant for manufacture of such a broad
range of heavy electrical apparatus in Brazil.

On August 13, 1957, IFC reached agreement for an investment equivalent to
$600,000 in Engranes y Productos Industriales, S.A., a Mexican company owned
by Mexican and American stockholders. The investment would help to expand
the plant facilities and business for the manufacture and sale of a variety of
industrial products and components, to include the addition of machine tooling for
the manufacture of automotive and other mechanical parts, a forge shop, and an
electric steel furnace.

Other investments soon followed. IFC was up and running.
