First Loan for Pollution Control, Brazil


NUMBER 050
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: APRIL 2006




                              January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
First Loan for Pollution Control, Brazil

About the Project

On May 18, 1971, the World Bank
approved its first loan (0758) for
pollution control. The loan was
approved for the Sao Paulo Water
Supply and Pollution Control projects
to improve the water supply and
sewerage services in and around the
city of Sao Paulo.

Pollution control had become a
                                               Constructions of a reservoir in Sao Paulo,
necessity in this large metropolitan                             1973
area. In this regard the World Bank
developed a long term program aimed
at abating the severe pollution of the rivers around Sao Paulo. The pollution
resulted from the discharge of largely untreated domestic and industrial waste
into the rivers.

This project was the first comprehensive action taken by the World Bank to
                             restore the ecological balance in rivers.

                                Purpose of the Project

                               The purpose of the project was to provide two million
                               people with piped water, improve service in the
                               overloaded sections of the pipe networks, and
                               improve sewage collection and disposal.

                               The project involved construction of sewage
                               interceptors, pumping plants and the reconstruction
  Workmen installing water
                               of a major sewage treatment works. It was hoped
  lines at Sao Paulo, 1973     that this would clear the rivers of its biochemical
                               pollutants and contribute to the development of
                               higher forms of aquatic plants and fish.
Outcomes of the Project

By the end of the project, the existing
water services of the metropolitan area
of Sao Paulo were improved and the
number of people served by sewage
disposal systems was increased.

Although not all of the project's original
objectives were met, it became an
important step taken by the World
                                             Construction of a reservoir in Sao Paulo, 1973
Bank in its effort to abate river
pollution around the world.
