James D. Wolfensohn – Ten Years as
World Bank Group President

NUMBER 041
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: MAY 2005




                          January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
James D. Wolfensohn – Ten Years as World Bank Group President

James D. Wolfensohn became the World Bank
Group’s ninth president on June 1, 1995, after a
distinguished career as an international investment
banker and involvement in global development and
environment issues. The Bank’s Board of Executive
Directors unanimously endorsed Mr. Wolfensohn’s
appointment to second five-year term, which began
June 1, 2000. He thus became the third World Bank
Group president to be reappointed to a second term of
office.

During his tenure Mr. Wolfensohn visited more than             James D. Wolfensohn
120 countries. His first trip – to Africa – took place only
two weeks after he took office. Traveling to the field allowed him to gain first-
hand experience on the Bank’s development projects and understand the
challenges facing the organization.

Global poverty reduction and achievement of the UN’s Millennium Development
Goals were among the highest priorities during Mr. Wolfensohn’s presidency.
                                         The Bank became the largest external
                                         financier for primary education, health,
                                         HIV/AIDS programs, the environment
                                         and biodiversity sectors and there was
                                         greater emphasis placed on finding
                                         lasting solutions to these and other
                                         development challenges.

                                             In 1996 Mr. Wolfensohn introduced the
                                             Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
                                             Initiative (HIPC). This comprehensive
                                             debt reduction program, launched by
James Wolfensohn and H.E. Amadou Toumani     the Bank and the International
   Toure, President of Mali, June 26, 2003   Monetary Fund, addressed the needs
                                             of the world’s poorest countries by
                                             providing them with substantial debt
                                             relief.

The Strategic Compact, launched by Mr. Wolfensohn in 1997 addressed the
institution’s effectiveness and helped transform the World Bank into a Knowledge
Bank. After the Bank’s global communications network was launched distance
learning centers were established in client countries around the world. Another
technological innovation included consolidating numerous business systems into
a single enterprise system that greatly enhanced the institutional efficiency.

Advocating a holistic approach to development Mr.
Wolfensohn presented the Comprehensive
Development Framework in 1999. The CDF
emphasized the interdependence of all elements of
development, including country ownership of poverty
reduction strategies as well as partnerships among
governments, the private sector and civil society.

Mr. Wolfensohn advocated continuous dialogue and
trust building among the Bank’s clients, the private
sector, NGOs, and civil society. He helped to
strengthen partnerships between the Bank and these
groups. His commitment to empowering stakeholders
expanded the Bank’s traditional cooperation with its
                                                               James Wolfensohn
clients to include their participation in decision-making    performs with Bank/IMF
processes.                                                  Choral Group at Christmas
                                                                  Concert, 2004
During Mr. Wolfensohn’s presidency the Bank
expanded its participation in post-war reconstruction
and conflict prevention. He encouraged the thorough exploration and
understanding of linkages between social and economic stability and peace.

On January 3, 2005 James D. Wolfensohn announced his decision not to seek
another term as World Bank Group President and retire at the end of his term on
May 31, 2005. A few months later, in April 2005, Mr. Wolfensohn announced his
appointment as Special Envoy for Gaza Disengagement (duties effective June
1), thereby continuing his involvement in public service after leaving the Bank.
