Start of the Young Professionals Program


NUMBER 048
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: FEBRUARY 2006




                           January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
Start of the Young Professionals Program

Richard Van Wagenen, Dean of the
Graduate School of American
University, was invited by the Bank to
assist in the creation of the
program. He joined the staff of the
Bank in November 1962, and
immediately started screening
applicants, both within the Bank and
also externally.                            First Group of Young Professionals, October
                                                               1963

“We made our need known, mainly to
universities in various parts of the world, by announcements and by a few visits,
the latter chiefly outside the U.S. We also examined applications already in the
Personnel files from those who were “too young and inexperienced? to be
appointed directly to the staff. What were we looking for? A superior education in
some field relevant to a career in development work, with a top-notch academic
record, was essential for those recently out of graduate school,? said Van
Wagenen. (International Bank Notes, October 1973)

                                           The application process began with
                                           the paper applications. After the first
                                           round of elimination, the remaining
                                           applicants were narrowed down
                                           through a series of interviews with
                                           Bank staff members. Despite initial
                                           skepticism, the success of this
     Young Professionals, October 1966
                                           program was acknowledged as more
                                           than 200 professionals applied during
                                           the first year. By 1972, the ratio was
44 applicants for every one appointment.

The Junior Professional Recruitment and Training Program began with an
orientation consisting of three weeks of special lectures and a full-time course of
two months in applied development economics. This was followed by an
eighteen month probationary period with three rotating assignments. However,
the two month formal course was abandoned in September 1964 due to the
exemplary performance of the first two groups. They proved to be outstanding
staff members even during training.
“One day in the corridor, the Bank’s
leading Transportation Economist
asked about two of the YPs who had
been working with him for a few
months after their probationary
period. In that short time, he told me in
an astonished tone of voice, they had
become two of the very best
Transportation Economists anywhere
in the Bank,? said Richard Van                 Young Professionals, October 1967
Wagenen. (International Bank Notes,
October 1973)

During their career at the Bank, many Young Professionals obtained high
positions in the organization such as resident representatives, department
directors, and Vice Presidents. The program was, and remains, a very important
tool for bringing into the Bank young and motivated individuals from all over the
world to join the fight against poverty.
