The Bank’s First Development Loans


NUMBER 022
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: MAY 2003




                          January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
The Bank’s First Development Loans

The World Bank’s official name upon its
establishment was (and with the addition of
IDA still is) the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development. As the
name indicates, reconstruction came first:
On May 9, 1947, an agreement was signed
granting a reconstruction loan to France in
the amount of $250 million. In August 1947
there were additional reconstruction loans:
to the Netherlands, Denmark and
Luxembourg. These were important sources
of funds for Western Europe until the
Marshall Plan took over the burden of
reconstruction in 1948. This freed the Bank
to turn its attention more fully to
development.

On September 30, 1946, the Corporacion de              One of the World Bank’s first
Fomento de la Produccion and the Chilean               development loans was to the
State Railways applied to the Bank for a             Corporacion de Fomento and the
loan of $40 million to finance the foreign-        Empresa   Nacional de Electricidad of
                                                  Chile. This loan financed construction
exchange costs of various projects in the            of two hydroelectric plants at Los
fields of electric power, forest industries,     Molles and Los Cipreses and helped to
railway electrification, urban and suburban     purchase equipment for the third plant,
transportation and port mechanization. On           the Pilmaiquen Hydroelectric plant
                                                              (pictured here.)
November 21, 1947, the original application
was amended to include an additional $5
million for the purchase and importation into Chile of agricultural machinery.
These applications were supported by the Chilean Government.

The Bank concluded that projects for power and agriculture had a high priority
and after prolonged negotiations, made two loans on March 25, 1948: one for
the development of electric power and water resources and the other for the
importation of agricultural machinery and equipment. These were the Bank’s
first development loans.

The first development loan (Loan 0005) of $13.5 million, or its equivalent in
other currencies, was made to the Corporacion de Fomento de la Produccion
and its subsidiary Empresa Nacional de Electricidad S.A. (Endesa) as co-
borrowers. The loan agreement was signed subject to the guarantee of the
Chilean Government. Legislation authorizing the Government to give its
guarantee was not enacted until January 19, 1949, and the guarantee was
                            given on March 23, 1949. The loan became
                            effective on April 7, 1949.

                                 Chile’s potential hydroelectric capacity was
                                 estimated at a total of 6 million kw. At the end of
                                 1942, when Fomento formulated its power
                                 expansion program, the country's total installed
                                 capacity for the generation of electric power
                                 amounted to approximately 50,000 kw, of which
                                 only 145,000 kw was hydro power.

                                 Fomento, through Endesa, prepared a program of
                                 electrification based on an estimate that the over-
                                 all demand for power in the country would
                                 increase by a cumulative 8 percent per annum
                             from 1942 to 1955. The program was divided into
Maintenance workers erecting two phases. The first phase involved an increase
    and connecting 66KV
                             of 196,000 kw by 1948, thus raising the total
transmission lines to link the
  Los Cipreses hydroelectric installed capacity to 646,000 kw. Of this increase,
 power plant with the Sauzal 128,000 kw were installed by Endesa, the rest by
 hydroelectric plan and otherprivate companies. The second phase of the
         substations.
                             program involved an increase of approximately
                             340,000 kw of installed capacity by 1955. Of this
increase, 250,000 kw was to be installed by Endesa of which approximately
86,000 kw being financed with the
assistance of the Bank loan.

The proceeds of the Bank loan were to be
used to purchase equipment, supplies and
services required for the development or
expansion of four electric power projects
and for incidental irrigation.

The project, as originally designed, fell
under the following main headings:

(a) Copiapo Diesel Electric Plant.                  The Los Molles hydroelectric plant took
Replacement of a 151 kw diesel unit by a               four years to build and went into
                                                        production in December 1952.
new unit of 585 kw at the Copiapo Plant in northern Chile.

(b) Los Molles Hydroelectric Plant. Construction of a hydro plant with a
                             generating capacity of 16,000 kw to serve an area
                             about 400 km north of Santiago, and the erection
                             of six substations and connecting transmission
                             lines.

                                 (c) Los Cipreses Hydroelectric Plant. Construction
                                 of a hydro-electric plant to serve Santiago and the
                                 surrounding areas, generating capacity planned
                                 originally at 54,000 kw. The project included
                                 construction of sixteen substations and 490 km of
transmission lines.

                                  (d) Pilmaiquen Hydroelectric Plant. Installation of
 A new generator installed in    a fourth unit, capacity l0,800 kw at the Pilmaiquen
 the Pilmaiquen hydroelectric    Plant (previous capacity 13,500 kw) in the south
 plant in South Central Chile.
                                 central region of Chile.

(e) Secondary electrical distribution lines and
Equipment. Installation of approximately 500 km of
electrical distribution lines and necessary equipment
to provide for the distribution of electric power to rural
consumers in the territory served by the Los Molles
and Los Cipreses plants.

(f) Mechanical Irrigation Equipment. Installation of
2,000 H.P. in electric motors, water pumps, and other
irrigation equipment to utilize excess capacity during
off-peak hours from plants in the central region of
Chile. It was planned to irrigate in this way an area of
at least 4,000 hectares.

(g) Construction equipment. Importation of
construction equipment required for several
engineering works for the above mentioned projects. After completion of the
projects, the construction equipment could be used in Chile for other purposes.

The second development loan (Loan 0006) was signed on the same day as the
Endesa loan. It was for $2,500,000 to the
                                                              A view of the power plant,
                                                             panstocks and cable railway
                                                                of the Los Molles power
                                                                plant, as seen from the
                                                             bridge over the Molles River.
Corporacion de Fomento for the purchase of agricultural machinery. The
guarantee of the Chilean Government was given on March 23, 1949, after the
Chilean Congress had finally enacted the necessary legislation. The loan
                               became effective April 7, 1949.

                                   The project consisted of a program for the
                                   purchase and importation by Fomento of
                                   agricultural machinery to increase the
                                   productivity of Chilean agriculture. It was part of
                                   a large-scale program of agricultural
                                   mechanization initiated by Fomento
                                   immediately after the war years, in order to
                                   offset shortages of local production of foodstuffs
                                   resulting from under-utilization of arable land.
                                   The first stages of the program had already
                                   been financed by the Export-Import Bank.

                               The machinery to be imported included tractors,
threshing machinery, harvesters, ploughing machines, land clearing and earth
moving equipment and irrigation equipment. The project provided that the
machinery should be used or disposed of by Fomento under either of the
                               following plans:
  American tractors and other
agricultural equipment have been
    imported into Chile by the   Sale Plan—Machinery allocated to this plan
   Corporacion de Fomento to     was to be sold by Fomento to farmers either
  increase Chilean agricultural  directly or through distributors representing
            production.
                                 Fomento. Contracts for the sale of the
machinery could provide that all or part of the payment be made in Chilean
currency, that payments could be made in installments over a maximum period
of six years and that purchasers could be asked for security.

Service Plan—Fomento was to retain title to machinery utilized under this plan
and to establish equipment pools. The machinery was to be operated by trained
employees of Fomento and its services sold to farmers for payment in Chilean
currency.

The Loan Agreement gave Fomento complete discretion to transfer any part of
the machinery from one of the above plans to the other. The machinery imported
by Fomento out of the proceeds of the lean was all distributed to farmers, and
none retained for employment in equipment pools.
