Dedication of the Eugene R. Black
Auditorium

NUMBER 018
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: APRIL 2003




                           January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
Dedication of the Eugene R. Black Auditorium

On December 9, 1963 the auditorium in the
newly-constructed C Building was dedicated to
Eugene R. Black in his presence.

The dedication address was given by the
Honorable Douglas Dillon, Secretary of the
Treasury of the United States. Below are some
excerpts from that address:

"It was a little over a year ago that Eugene Black
addressed the Annual Meeting of the Board of
Governors of the World Bank and announced
that he was attending his last such meeting as an
‘active participant.’ And it was in response to that    Mr. Eugene R. Black, President of
unhappy news that the late Per Jacobsson                    the International Bank for
[Managing Director of the International Monetary        Reconstruction and Development,
Fund], in saluting his achievements assured him          (World Bank), Washington 25,
                                                                       D.C.
‘that he will always be welcomed and honored
whenever we assemble in the future.’

"This auditorium that we dedicate today is a tangible symbol of that assurance—
a permanent and public recognition that the name and accomplishments of
Eugene Black will be remembered and honored for as long as the Bank itself is
                                      alive in the affairs or memories of men.
                                      For it is impossible to think of the World
                                      Bank—what it has been, is, and will
                                      become—without being aware that, more
                                      than any other man, it was Eugene Black
                                      who gave it shape and direction during its
                                      critical, formative years.

                                           "Eugene Black’s career with the World
                                           Bank began in 1947 when he was
                                           selected as the American representative
   Former World Bank President Black       on the Executive Board. The Bank had
addresses the audience at the dedication
                                           opened for business only the year before,
of the Eugene R. Black Auditorium in the
     "C" Building, December 9, 1963        and the problems that it faced were
                                           enormous. By the end of 1947, the Bank
                                           had invested almost all of its available
resources in postwar reconstruction loans to countries in Western Europe. The
Bank needed funds. It had to open up avenues of credit to the world’s investment
markets, particularly the market in this
country. That task fell primarily upon the
capable shoulders of Eugene Black.

"His success was phenomenal. Largely as
a result of his efforts and skill, the Bank
very quickly became accepted in the
capital markets of the world as a sound
and viable institution. Mr. Black’s brilliant
role in that achievement led to his
selection, in 1949, as President of the
Bank—a position he held for some
fourteen years.                                    Mr. and Mrs. Black (left), with Mr. And
                                                  Mrs. George Woods (right), greet guests
                                                  at the dedication of the Eugene R. Black
"It was quite apparent, when Eugene Black              Auditorium, December 9, 1963
assumed the presidency, that the task of
erecting a new Europe upon the ashes of
the old would require resources on a far grander scale than those available to the
World Bank. The Marshall Plan took on that enormous burden while the World
Bank began to turn its eyes and its efforts toward those lands and peoples just
then struggling to enter the age of industrial technology and achievement. As
events have since proved, the Bank could have made no more fortunate choice
                             for all mankind—nor could its efforts have been
                             guided more wisely or more effectively than by
                             Eugene Black.

                            "The Bank’s two affiliates—the International Finance
                            Corporation and the International Development
                            Association—are particularly impressive testaments
                            to his vision and persuasive intelligence. For no one
                            played a more decisive role in the creation of those
                            two institutions than did Eugene Black. He saw—and
                            he worked unceasingly to help others to see—that
                            the needs of the less-developed countries were
                            much too large, and their available resources far too
                            small, to be served by international loans on
                            conventional terms. In speeches, in talks with leaders
                            here and abroad, he argued eloquently and cogently
for the creation of a new mechanism designed to help meet the overwhelming
                                Demolition of C Building
                                    begins, 1990
needs of these countries. His efforts bore
fruit in the IDA.

"The great unfinished business that the
Bank began under the direction of Eugene
Black …will continue in the same spirit of
idealism tempered with practicability that
characterize Eugene Black as well as the
Bank he guided and nurtured in its most
crucial years…."

Following the dedication ceremony there        Eugene Black Auditorium as seen from
was a reception for some 400 invited                     the stage, 1975
guests.

The Eugene R. Black Auditorium was located on the 11th floor of the C Building.
Its room designation was C 1114.

As designed, the Eugene R. Black Auditorium had a seating capacity of
approximately 400, with concealed sliding doors permitting division of the space
                                      into smaller rooms. The seats were
                                      removable and the carpeted floor had a
                                      twenty by thirty foot section which could be
                                      taken up for dancing. The walls were
                                      covered with grass cloth. There was a
                                      stage sixteen feet deep and thirty-two feet
                                      wide with velour curtains and backdrops.
                                      Projection machines for both 16mm and 35
                                      mm were installed. The auditorium was the
                                      scene of many meetings, concerts, blood
                                      donation drives, and other gatherings of
 Eugene Black Auditorium as seen from staff. The original Eugene R. Black
               the rear               Auditorium was demolished along with the
                                      rest of the C Building to make way for the
                                      New Main Complex.

On Monday, however, the auditorium in the H building was officially renamed in
honor of Eugene R. Black. President Wolfensohn inaugurated the auditorium at a
function attended by Black’s daughter-in-law, Susanne Black, and his
granddaughter Julie Taylor, and a number of Bank staff.
