The Pearson Commission


NUMBER 030
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: JULY 2003




                          January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
The Pearson Commission

In August 1968, Former Canadian Prime Minister
Lester B. Pearson accepted an invitation from
Robert S. McNamara, then President of the World
Bank, to form a commission to review the previous
20 years of development assistance, assess the
results, and make recommendations for the future.
Pearson was a former diplomat and Nobel Peace
Prize winner who had played an active role in UN
affairs. On September 15, 1969, slightly more than
a year after McNamara’s invitation, Pearson and
seven colleagues on the Commission on
International Development—which became known
as the Pearson Commission—delivered their
report, "Partners in Development."
                                                              Lester B. Pearson

The initiative for the Commission came from
McNamara’s predecessor, George D. Woods. Amid concern about flagging
enthusiasm among rich countries for making resources available for
international development, Woods spoke to the Swedish Bankers’ Association
in Stockholm on October 27, 1967. Referring to developing countries, he said,
"The need is for exceptional action on a sufficient scale. The need is to launch a
… movement in which growth feeds saving, saving generates more growth, and
both together help two-thirds of humanity over the next two critical decades—
critical because although population increase will only begin to slacken over the
next 20 years, the groundwork can be laid for successful modernization and
greater stability later on…

"We are ready at the World Bank, together with interested governments, to help
to select and finance … a group of experts. I am ready to put at their disposal all
the information and statistical material the Bank has accumulated and, if
requested, to second staff to their service. Such a Grand Assize—judging the
world’s record and prospects of growth—should in any case precede any
attempt to round off our faltering Decade of Development with a genuine
reformation of policy."

The work of the Pearson Commission was described by Peter M. Kilburn, a
Commission Staff Assistant, in an article in the December 1969 issue of
"International Bank Notes", from which the following is excerpted:
The major contribution of the report is undoubtedly the comprehensive view it
takes of development as a complex of domestic and external factors (trade, aid,
private investment), as well as the reasons it adduces in favour of enlarging
                                                       present aid programs.

                                                            What was basically
                                                            required of the
                                                            Commission at its
                                                            creation just over a year
                                                            ago was that it elaborate
                                                            an aid strategy based on
                                                            a convincing rationale,
                                                            that could be used to
                                                            attack effectively the
                                                            wariness of will so
                                                            increasingly evident. For
                                                            various reasons, some
                                                            having to do with
   First meeting of the Pearson Commission. Left to right:  domestic problems and
     Roberto de Oliveira Campos (Brazil), Douglas Dillon    balance of payments
 (United States), Saburo Okita (Japan), Sir W. Arthur Lewis
 (St. Lucia), Rt. Hon. Lester B. Pearson (Canada), Rt. Hon.
                                                            difficulties, some relating
  Sir Edward Boyle (U.K.), Robert Ernest Marjolin (France), to the public’s judgments
                and Wilfried Guth (Germany).                about "waste and
                                                            corruption", a number of
the major donor countries were decreasing their foreign aid appropriations. In
doing so, they were (and are) endangering the very viability of an international
political idea that, until 1961, supported a rapidly increasing flow of concessional
development finance from the richer to the poorer countries. In 1968, for the first
time, there was a diminution in the total flow of official (government) aid. Who
can doubt that if the large donors do not revive their aid programs, the
debilitation will pass on down the line?

Because of this crisis in aid, the Commission decided that its report should be
made available as early as possible. In fact, the whole operation was completed
in eleven months. During that period, the full Commission met four times in
order to direct the staff’s work, to make decisions about the argument and
conclusions, and to write the report. Between meetings, the Chairman,
accompanied by one or more members of the Commission, attended seven
meetings on four continents (Santiago de Chile, Abidjan, Kampala, Rawalpindi,
New Delhi, Singapore, Ankara), with representatives of the governments of
some seventy less-developed countries. In a parallel series of visits to the
capitals of the industrialized nations, Pearson discussed aid questions with
officials of most of the DAC member governments. Apart from its reliance on the
World Bank to meet its expenses, the Commission was in every way
independent of the IBRD, just as its members were not representatives of their
respective governments.

Having placed more than half a million miles of reservations on our behalf over
an 11 month period, the Travel Office requires no reminders … that the
Commission has now written finis to both its travels and its work.

The Commission of course investigated a wide variety of topics, including the
volume and terms of aid, the debt burden of developing countries, technical
assistance, trade, private investment, population, the structure of aid giving,
etc., etc. Perhaps it would be useful to list here some of the major themes of the
report.

The record of the past twenty years clearly shows that the economic
development of the less-developed
countries is feasible. In fact, in
recent years more than 30 such
nations have enjoyed growth rates
higher than anything experienced
by Western countries in
comparable stages of their own
growth.                                Members of the Pearson Commission with Pope
                                                 Paul VI (center, in white).

Development assistance, it is also
clear, has contributed significantly
to this advance. Though the
overwhelming proportion of growth
has been due to the efforts of the less-developed countries themselves, the role
of aid has been critical in such areas as savings and imports, and has provided
an essential risk-absorber for industrial and agricultural enterprise.

If a rationale for aid can gain some support from the record, it remains that more
compelling reasons must be adduced. There are at least two such. The first is a
moral reason and is based on the universally accepted proposition that it is the
duty of the fortunate to help those who need. Enlightened national interest,
expressed in terms of an interdependent world community, is the second
reason. It suggests the necessity for partnership. As the report asks, Who can
now ask where his country will be in a few decades, without asking where the
world will be?"

A much-increased flow of aid will be required if most developing countries are to
aim for self-sustaining growth by the end of the century. This means specific aid
targets, of which the Commission sets two: total aid should amount to 1 percent
of GNP, and official aid, 0.70 percent of GNP by 1975.

Multilateral aid should constitute a growing proportion of the total flow of
development assistance. Effective partnership requires that the actions of both
sides be subject to scrutiny, and it is in the multilateral setting that this process
is most likely to develop.

The fields of trade and private investment, although not substitutes for aid, must
be understood by governments as essential parts of the development process.
It is futile, for instance, to nullify the effects of increased aid by inconsiderate
trade policies.

Beyond the specific recommendations of "Partners in Development", beyond
the lists of problems and the proofs of progress, there lies the all-embracing
theme of "World Community", which appears as clear in print as it is hazy in
practice. But without such a vision, the practice of international cooperation for
development is in danger of frittering itself into a pittance of conscience money.

Now that the work of the Commission has been completed, the support staff of
about 30 has dispersed from the offices furnished for them at 1900 L Street. A
number on secondment from their permanent positions in various countries have
now returned to their regular work. Some others hired especially for the
Commission have transferred to permanent work in the Bank and a few others
lent from the Bank to the Commission on a temporary basis have also returned to
regular full-time duties with the Bank.
