Improving the E ectiveness of TalentCorp’s
                Initiatives
Assessment of Returning Expert Programme & Residence Pass - Talent




        Social Protection and Labor Global Practice




                      Document of the World Bank
                             June 2015
Contents


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS                                                               4
OVERVIEW OF THE REPORT                                                         5
 Summary of the Research                                                       6
       1.     REP impact evaluation and RP-T assessment                        6
       2.     The Workforce Dashboard                                          9
       3.     The Heat Maps                                                   12
REP AND RP-T: MEASURING THEIR EFFECTIVENESS IN ATTRACTING AND RETAINING TALENT 24
 I.         Assessing the Effectiveness of the REP                            24
       1.     Introduction                                                    24
       2.     The REP                                                         26
       3.     Data and Preliminary Evidence                                   29
       4.     Regression Discontinuity Design                                 34
       5.     The Fiscal Impact of REP                                        51
       6.     Concluding Remarks and Recommendations                          54
 II.        Assessing the Effectiveness of the RP-T                           56
       1.     Introduction                                                    56
       2.     The RP-T Program                                                56
       3.     Data and Description of the Applicants                          57
       4.     Assessment of the Approval Process                              61
       5.     Assessment of Quality of Applicants: Talented or Not?           64
       6.     Concluding Remarks and Recommendations                          71
ANNEX                                                                         73
REFERENCES                                                                    75
                                              FIGURES
Figure 1: Trade-offs Considered in the Design of the Workforce Dashboard                       10
Figure 2: Back-end Architecture for Malaysia’s Dashboard                                       11
Figure 3: Home Screen of Malaysia’s Workforce Dashboard                                        12
Figure 4a: Distribution of Malaysians in the United States                                     15
Figure 4b: Number of Malaysians in Twenty U.S. Metropolitan Areas                              15
Figure 4c: Proportion of Malaysians in the US with Tertiary Education                          16
Figure 4d: Proportion of Malaysians in the US with Tertiary Education                          16
Figure 4e: Median Annual Income of Malaysians in the US                                        17
Figure 5a: Malaysians in Australia                                                             17
Figure 5b: Number of Malaysians in Ten Australian Metropolitan Areas                           18
Figure 5c: Proportion of Malaysians with 12th grade (or equivalent) and above                  18
Figure 5d: Main Cities Where Well Educated Malaysians Live                                     19
Figure 5e: Median Annual Income of Malaysians in Australia                                     19
Figure 6a: Number of Malaysians in Canada                                                      20
Figure 6b: Number of Malaysians in Canadian Metropolitan Areas                                 20
Figute 6c: Proportion of Malaysians with Postsecondary Education in Canada                     22
Figure 7a: Number of Malaysians in the U.K.                                                    22
Figure 7b: Location of Malaysians in the U.K. Metropolitan Areas                               22
Figure 8. Emigration Rates of the Highly Skilled to OECD Countries (Aged 15 Years and Above)   25
Figure 9a: REP Eligibility Criteria for 2011 - 2012                                            27
Figure 9b: REP Eligibility Criteria 2011 and 2012 – Experience Abroad Thresholds by Education 27
Figure 10a: Discontinuity in REP Acceptance Probability by Normalized Work Experience Abroad,
Monthly Bins.                                                                               36
Figure 10b: Discontinuity in REP Acceptance Probability by Normalized Work Experience Abroad,
Quarterly Bins.                                                                             36
Figure 11a: Probability of an Existing Employment Offer in Malaysia by Normalized Work
Experience Abroad, Monthly Bins.                                                               37
Figure 11b: Mean Age (minus 25) by Normalized Work Experience Abroad, Monthly Bins.            39
Figure 11c: Mean Income Abroad by Normalized Work Experience Abroad, Monthly Bins.             39
Figure 12a: Number of Applicants by Months of Experience Abroad (Seven- year Interval)         39
Figure 12b: Number of Applicants by Months of Experience Abroad (Seven- year Interval)         40
Figure 13a: Probability of Return by Normalized Work Experience Abroad, Monthly Bins.          42


                                                      1
Figure 13b: Probability of Return by Normalized Work Experience Abroad, Quarterly Bins.   42
Figure 14a: REP Applicants Reasons for Originally Moving Abroad                           47
Figure 14b: REP Applicants Original Expectation of Duration Abroad                        49
Figure 15a: Trips to Malaysia Per Year (in %)                                             49
Figure 15b: Links to Malaysia                                                             49
Figure 16a: Reason for REP Applicants to Return                                           49
Figure 16b: How Important was REP Approval for Return Decision? (in %)                    50
Figure 17: Most Important Incentive for Decision to Return                                50
Figure 18: Benefits of the RP-T Program and Eligibility Criteria                          57
Figure 19: Gender Breakdown of Applicants and the Global Talent Pool                      59
Figure 20: Education Breakdown of Applicants                                              59
Figure 21: Geographic Matters: Country of Origin and Locality Preference                  59
Figure 22: Work Experience Total and in Malaysia                                          60
Figure 23: Economic Sector and Firm Type                                                  60
Figure 24: Monthly Wages of RP-T Applicants                                               61
Figure 25: Increase in Probability of Approval                                            63
Figure 26: Shares in the Analysis of Comparably Skilled Groups                            66
Figure 27: Wage Differentials by Economic Sector                                          67




                                                  2
TABLES
Table 1: Number of Malaysians by Country, State/City, Sectors and Key Professions               14
Table 2. Malaysians in OECD Countries by Educational Level in 1990, 2000 and 2010               23
Table 3: Descriptive Statistics (Main Sample = 1,654)                                           30
Table 4: Comparison of the REP with ACS                                                         31
Table 5: Approval and Return Decision                                                           32
Table 6: Correlation between REP Approval and Return Probability, LPM                           33
Table 7: Approval and Return Decision by Existing Job Offer                                     33
Table 8: Impact of REP Approval on Return Probability, Full Sample, Two Stage Least Square
Estimates                                                                                       44
Table 9: Impact of REP Approval on Return Probability, Sample of Applicants with Job Offer, 2 Stage
Least Square Estimates                                                                           45
Table 10: Impact of REP Approval on Return Probability, Sample of Women Without Malaysian
Spouse, 2SLS Estimates                                                                          46
Table 11: Fiscal Costs and Benefits of REP per Applicant (in RM)                                53
Table 12: Decomposition Results                                                                 69
Table 13: Estimates with the New Point System, by Education and Designation                     70
Table 14: Estimates with the New Point System, by Sector and Occupation                         70




                                                 3
                                ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This report was prepared by a team composed of (in alphabetical order) Ximena Del Carpio
(Task Team Leader); Harry Moroz (Economist-ETC); Caglar Ozden (Lead Economist); Mauro
Testarverde (Economist-ETC); and Mathis Wagner (Economist-STC); in close collaboration
with the Talent Corporation Malaysia Berhad (TalentCorp) team and the Institute of Labor
Market Information Analysis (ILMIA) team. The authors wish to specially mention the
contribution of Jeevakumar Govindasamy, Nurul Adibah Mat Kamal, Sivakumeren A
Narayanan, Visvapurna Mahadevan, Wan Munirah Wan Mohamad, Shamili Vellapandian
Yim Jian Leon and Johan Mahmood Merican from TalentCorp and Lee Chee Sung, Mahuran
Sariki, and Nursyazwani Binti Zulhaimi from ILMIA. Excellent research assistance was
provided by Rosella Calvi.

The team thanks TalentCorp management team for their guidance and support throughout
this engagement. The team also thanks Amir Omar, Director of ILMIA under the Ministry of
Human Resources; Dr. Mohd. Gazali Abas, Director of Human Capital Development in the
Economic Planning Unit; and Ms. Sa’idah Haji Hashim from the Department of Statistics of
Malaysia for their valuable contributions throughout this engagement.

The work was conducted under the general guidance of Xiaoqing Yu (Global Practice
Director) and Jehan Arulpragasam (Practice Manager). The team is grateful for the excellent
advice provided by three peer reviewers, Kathleen Beegle and Philip Schellekens (at concept
stage) and Mohamed Ihsan Ajwad (at final stage); for very useful comments provided by
other World Bank colleagues, especially Frederico Gil Sanders, Truman Packard and Claudia
Zambra; and to attendees of the technical seminar at the Center for Global Development and
the World Bank Social Protection and Labor seminar series.

The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this document are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the executive directors of the World Bank,
the governments that the executive directors represent, or the counterparts with whom the
authors consulted or engaged during the study.




                                              4
                             OVERVIEW OF THE REPORT

As part of the country’s strategic plan to become a high-income economy, the government of
Malaysia designed a Talent Roadmap, which focuses on leveraging the talents of all
Malaysians—living in the country or abroad—and highly educated expatriates, to meet its
growth objectives and development goals. The roadmap included the creation of Talent
Corporation Malaysia Berhad (TalentCorp) with the mandate to assess and fulfill Malaysia’s
talent needs. Given this clear objective, TalentCorp has two major initiatives that attract and
retain global talent (including the Malaysian diaspora) to fill the country’s human capital and
skill needs.

The information contained in this summary report reflects the analysis and assessment that
have been undertaken beginning January 2013 mainly to assess the effectiveness of
TalentCorp’s efforts to attract and retain global talent through its Returning Expert
Programme (REP) and Residence Pass-Talent (RP-T). The initial research included various
activities aimed at improving the client’s ability to meet its mandate. The main activities
completed were as follows: (1) creation of a platform to identify and monitor local labor
market conditions and human capital/talent needs; (2) creation of a profile of the Malaysian
diaspora living abroad; (3) creation and implementation of two surveys—both surveys
focused on gauging the attractiveness of working in Malaysia and were targeted at the
Malaysian diaspora and foreign talent living in Malaysia; (4) an impact evaluation of the REP,
which aims to facilitate highly skilled members of the Malaysian professionals abroad back
to Malaysia; and (5) an assessment of the effectiveness of the RP-T Program, which aims to
retain foreign talent in Malaysia. In both the impact evaluation and the assessment, the main
questions investigated are whether these programs effectively attract/retain talent.

Various support activities and capacity-training activities were completed as part of this
research to support TalentCorp in fulfilling its mandate. Apart from creating the workforce
dashboard, the World Bank team conducted various training sessions to replicate the
diaspora heat maps as well as to manage and update the contents of the workforce
dashboard. Another support input was a policy note reflecting the main lessons learned in
this research (mid-way) and featured in the December 2014 Malaysia Economic Monitor. A
third example is the undertaking of a multi-stakeholder workshop, where experts from
various countries were invited to share their experiences of improving the quality of
technical skills in the Technical and Vocational Education and Training (TVET) systems in
their countries. The Bank team helped to present to the Government evidence to support the
creation and management of a critical skills list to be used to better coordinate the
Government’s talent interventions. This proposal was accepted and mandated to ILMIA and
TalentCorp in the recent 11th Malaysia Plan.




                                              5
Summary of the Research

   1. REP impact evaluation and RP-T assessment
The main activities conducted under this research included the creation and implementation
of two surveys used to assess the effectiveness of the two TalentCorp programs that aim to
attract to and retain talent (Malaysians abroad and expatriates) in Malaysia. The rest of the
report presents the technical details, findings, and recommendations of two analytical
exercises that aim to measure the effectiveness of two of TalentCorp’s most important
programs.

It is important to note that there are different ways to measure whether TalentCorp’s
programs effectively meet their objectives; in the following sections, two approaches are
used. The first is an impact evaluation of the REP, and the second is an assessment of the RP-
T program. In the case of the REP impact evaluation, the data available and the application
process allow for the use of a methodology that establishes a causal relationship between
the program and the outcomes observed. In other words, the results obtained establish
whether the program affected (or caused) the decision of highly skilled/educated Malaysians
to return to Malaysia.

On the other hand, the application process and data available for the RP-T program limited
the empirical techniques that can be used to assess the program. It is not possible to measure
whether the program caused talent to apply to the program because of the way data were
collected and the program was administered. The empirical technique used cannot discard
other factors outside the program that contributed to people’s decision to apply. However,
the analysis is able to assess whether the current selection system correctly accepts highly
skilled expatriates or not and also what factors within the selection process most accurately
predict whether the expatriates is highly skilled or not. The bottom line is that regardless of
the technique used, both approaches have merits and both analytical exercises yield results
that provide insight into the functioning of the programs, which can be used to make
operational improvements to them.

The impact evaluation of the REP, which offers certain services and fiscal incentives to the
approved Malaysian professionals who return to Malaysia to work, investigates two guiding
questions: first, whether the program affects the return decision of Malaysian professionals
living abroad and, second, whether the program is cost-effective. In response to the first
guiding question, the evaluation finds that the REP is in fact effective in attracting
people with the skills that Malaysia needs, but it is most effective for individuals who
already have a job in Malaysia when they apply. This group is over 40 percent more likely to
return as a result of the program. With respect to the cost-effectiveness question, the
analysis shows that there are large net benefits to the REP; in monetary terms, the net
fiscal benefits are about RM 27,000 ($9,000) per applicant who returns to Malaysia. This
estimate is pure fiscal benefit and does not include the positive economy-wide externalities
generated by the presence of a highly skilled and educated workforce.




                                              6
     The assessment of the RP-T program, which allows skilled expatriates to work in Malaysia
     and offers them a set of benefits, answers two guiding questions: first, whether the
     beneficiaries of the program are genuinely talented expatriates who potentially fill skill gaps
     in Malaysia and second, whether the selection process can be streamlined to be more
     effective.

     In response to the first question, the RP-T assessment reveals that individuals approved
     by the program are genuinely talented global professionals. Analysis between RP-T
     beneficiaries and comparable Malaysians shows that there is a significant wage difference of
     about 4.3 times between these groups. This gap implies that foreign talent earns over four
     times more than comparable professionals in Malaysia. Occupations in the oil, gas, and
     energy (OGE) sector; business services; and manufacturing sectors offer the highest wage
     premiums of all the economic sectors active in Malaysia. Further (decomposition) analysis
     reveals that even though some of the wage premiums can be attributed to the individual’s
     characteristics, a large part of the wage premium is a result of factors that are tangible to
     employers but not easily observable and measurable with standard administrative data. One
     can speculate that part of the premium is likely to be derived from having experience in
     foreign labor markets. Many of these professionals gained their experience in developed
     western countries and Asia. By virtue of being a global asset with international exposure to
     global markets, new technologies, and broader know-how, they are perceived as being more
     likely (than locals) to contribute to the profitability of the firm.

     With regard to effectiveness, the analysis reveals that the RP-T is effective in retaining
     genuinely talented individuals. However, only some of the observable characteristics
     included in the eligibility criteria and accounted for in the selection criteria are actually used
     in the decision-making process. This indicates that the seemingly rigid selection criteria are
     adaptable to changing needs in the economy (and labor market). This is arguably a positive
     finding. However, it is unclear what the country gains from having rigid and detailed criteria
     that appear to prioritize aspects that are not prioritized in practice. The assessment
     proposes an adjusted approach to processing and approving applications to the program.
     For example, the current criteria stipulates a minimum of 3 years experience in Malaysia to
     be eligible for RP-T, whereas years of experience in Malaysia is less relevant to the evaluation
     of an applicant’s talent. The Government can enhance the effectiveness of the RP-T by
     expanding eligibility to expatriates applying from abroad, who have the skillsets the
     economy is in acute shortage of.

     Overall, the analysis concludes that both REP and RP-T are successfully attracting
     individuals who are filling some of Malaysia’s skill gaps; moreover, these individuals
     tend to earn a wage premium in the labor market, which is further evidence of their
     value to employers in terms of experience and expertise. The analysis also revealed a
     set of lessons and policy implications for consideration that could improve the effectiveness
     of both programs in the future.

I.      Connecting talent (in-country and abroad) to job opportunities in Malaysia: Both
        Malaysian and foreign talents are highly mobile and responsive to job opportunities. As
        such, to improve the effectiveness of TalentCorp’s programs, there needs to be a greater

                                                     7
      and improved focus on connecting talent to attractive job opportunities by tackling
      information barriers and facilitating interactions between applicants and recruiters. This
      is particularly relevant for the REP program. Potential measures to be considered are:

         a. Structured, permanent channels of communication between employers,
            skill providers and job seekers are essential, such as a jobs portal, making
            applicants’ CVs available to employers, or even career fairs abroad.

         b. Given that Malaysians abroad are well networked, TalentCorp should optimize
            these information channels, reaching out to families in Malaysia, as well as
            diaspora associations abroad.

         c. Expedited applications and prioritized approvals for individuals with existing
            job offers, particularly those in areas of skills shortages.

         d. Engage all REP applicants, including those rejected, providing them labor
            market related information and connecting them where relevant with both
            employers and executive search firms.

         e. Continuous refinement of the approval criteria for both REP and RP-T to
            better align with the talent Malaysia needs, adapting to the changing demands
            of the market and economy.

II.   Developing a common platform to identify and monitor skills shortages: While both
      the REP and RP-T programs have achieved positive results so far, they would benefit from
      the development of a common platform to identify skills shortages. An example of the
      skills shortages list is featured in the Annex section of this report. Countries such as
      Australia and the UK have already embarked on this effort, and some of the main lessons
      learned about well-functioning skills monitoring systems are the following:

         a. Transparency is crucial for the system to be widely accepted. As such, the skill
            gaps identification exercise needs to be data-driven and rigorously evidence-
            based (top-down analysis), paired with a “bottom-up” system of consultations.

         b. Involvement of key stakeholders such as top employers, as well as SMEs, is
            important to ensure that the skills monitoring system reflects the needs of the
            whole economy (bottom-up approach). A broad consultation system, coupled
            with a top-down approach, would help identify gaps across the skills spectrum.

         c. Regularity of the process is fundamental to guarantee that the monitoring
            system reflects the current situation in the labor market and, as such,
            partnerships with all the different providers of labor market data is key in order
            to ensure a timely release of the shortage list.

         d. Similarly, program eligibility criteria should be continuously refined or
            adapted to evolving labor market demands.


                                                8
III.      Meeting broader family needs: International experience shows that countries
          successful in attracting talent adopt measures to ensure that the needs of talents’ families
          are met. As such, TalentCorp should facilitate the integration of approved applicants’
          family members into the Malaysian labor force and society more broadly; in other words,
          they should ensure that the benefits allotted to returning families or foreigners actually
          translate into full integration into Malaysian society, For example, enabling non-
          national spouses to work and facilitating schooling for children are essential to
          retaining expatriate talent as well as returning Malaysian professionals.

          2. The Workforce Dashboard
       Stakeholders such as jobseekers, future workers, employers, the government, and
       institutions of higher learning have limited labor market information to make
       decisions and monitor their progress. To address this concern, the Bank team, under this
       research, worked closely with the ILMIA and TalentCorp to develop a labor market
       information platform, known as the workforce dashboard. Similar tools exists in other
       countries. The Australian Labor Force Information Portal is one example; it is geared to give
       employers a broad set of labor market information to help them get an overview of the
       workforce. The United States has various examples, many of them at the subnational level.
       At the national level, it has the Myskillsmyfuture portal, which is geared to provide an insight
       to job seekers looking for occupational information (for example, types of skills required for
       a specific job and wage rates). This portal links to the subnational portals. The United
       Kingdom’s National Statistics office has Nomis which is the official labor market statistic
       system. The United Kingdom’s Center for Economic and Social Inclusion has a parallel system
       that relies heavily on featuring labor market information on geographic maps. This one is a
       comprehensive system of employment-related information.

       The Malaysian workforce dashboard was created using a variety of databases,
       including employer surveys, administrative surveys, and individual surveys. Its design
       considered trade-offs such as specificity of content (versus simple content) and ease of use
       (versus sophisticated use) (see figure 1). The final product contains as much specific
       information as is available and the interface prioritizes ease of use.




                                                      9
         Figure 1: Trade-offs Considered in the Design of the Workforce Dashboard




                    Source: World Bank.

The Bank team identified over a dozen distinct workforce dashboards across the world and
extracted lessons from them to be applied to the beta version for Malaysia. For instance, the
Malaysian dashboard provides something for everyone by making many indicators available.
It also includes on-site visualizations and allows (some, very limited for now) downloading
for further analysis. The data presented are well-defined and explained in plain terms. In
some cases, data sources and cautionary phrases are included. To further enhance the
dashboard, it was proposed to revise the back-end architecture design for uploading
information and managing the contents going forward (see figure 2). The current beta
platform is structured using a version of this approach.




                                             10
                    Figure 2: Back-end Architecture for Malaysia’s Dashboard




Source: ILMIA & TalentCorp.

The workforce dashboard had a soft launch in December 2013. ILMIA continues to improve
it; and the Bank has offered its continued assistance to keeping up the dashboard. In its
current form, students can use the tool to make career decisions and institutions of higher
learning can use the tool to modify curricula, update programs to reflect labor market needs,
and, to some extent, rationalize programs. The workforce dashboard tool is meant to help
various stakeholders continuously improve their responsiveness to labor demand.
Students can select a career that is in demand and institutions of higher learning can offer
courses aligned with market demand. Employers can also use it to have a clearer picture of
the skills available in the workforce and wage details in their sector and to identify skills in
deficit. Academics wanting to do research can use the labor market information that is
provided in the dashboard. Lastly, government agencies can monitor critical labor
market information using the dashboard and use the contents as a source for
evidence-based decision-making in planning. Figure 3 shows the main screen of the
dashboard.

The creation and launching of the workforce dashboard under this research is a great
achievement. However, going forward, many challenges remain to fully benefit from the
usefulness of this tool. For instance, it will be imperative to regularly update the content of
the information system, market it broadly across potential users, and use it to evaluate the
effectiveness of distinct educational courses/programs and make necessary reforms. Also,
the dashboard currently contains information on labor markets; going forward, new content
should be added. For instance, currently the tool contains some (but limited) information on
the actual skills in demand and details on the supply or information on the quality of
educational and training institutions (for example, rankings). Continuing to add such
                                              11
information, and regularly updating the content, will help stakeholders wanting to reduce
skill gaps in Malaysia, especially TalentCorp, ILMIA and the Ministry of Education, to meet
their objectives.
                    Figure 3: Home Screen of Malaysia’s Workforce Dashboard




Source: ILMIA website.

   3. The Heat Maps
Diaspora can be strictly defined as people from a given source country who have
emigrated and are living abroad. However, in development literature, the definition is
more nuanced to include all emigrants and their descendants who keep ties with their
country of origin and ancestry. Diaspora groups can become potential sources for an
important and diverse set of investments and skill flows back to the country of origin. In fact,
many developed and developing countries such as South Korea, China, and India have
benefited from contributions from their diaspora around the world. Among the examples of
diaspora externalities are transmission of technical and professional expertise from abroad,
transfer of physical and intellectual investments, mentoring of compatriots and providing
them with opportunities abroad, serving as ambassadors of their country, and sending
monetary and other types of remittances back home. Diaspora contributions are not
necessarily dependent on the physical return of diaspora members back to their home
country; in fact, many see themselves as citizens of the world and prefer to live abroad while
keeping ties with and providing help to their home country.

One of the mandates of TalentCorp is to reach out to the Malaysian diaspora and keep
them engaged with their home country. In fact, TalentCorp conducts many regular
outreach events with skilled Malaysians in key countries and cities around the world, where
they introduce TalentCorp and make them aware of career opportunities for them to
consider in Malaysia. Embassies, consulates, and formal diaspora organizations are among
the main conduits of information that TalentCorp uses to plan their outreach campaigns and
                                              12
disseminate information. However, these institutions and organizations only have data on
people who are formally registered with them, possibly missing large numbers of people not
linked through formal means.

The Bank’s assistance was sought to use other sources of data (and techniques) to get a
better measure of the number of Malaysians in key countries (and cities). The Bank was also
asked to provide better information on professional, personal, and occupational profiles of
the diaspora members. To that end, the Bank developed heat maps of Malaysians living
in four key countries: United States, United Kingdom, Australia, and Canada.

In most countries, the Bank team used the population censuses and labor force survey data
to identify where Malaysians live and analyze their profile. The census for the United States,
Australia, and Canada provide the best basis for constructing heat maps. Table 1 presents a
summary of some of the data obtained about the Malaysian diaspora in these four countries,
by metropolitan area (cities with the largest Malaysian populations), sector, and occupation.

As seen in Table 1, the U.S. census identified over 60,000 Malaysians. Figures 4a and 4b show
the distribution of Malaysians in the United States, and the main cities in the United States
where Malaysians live. Over 75 percent of them have tertiary education. As shown in Figure
4c, a large segment of Malaysians in the US are highly educated. Even in states such as
Montana, North Dakota and West Virginia, Malaysian inhabitants have high levels of
education and high income levels, indicating that they are most likely living in those states
because of the work opportunities. The main cities where Malaysians with tertiary
education are concentrated are San Jose-Santa Clara and Sacramento in California, Dallas
Fort worth-Arlington in Texas, and Minneapolis-St. Paul and Bloomington in Wisconsin. As
for professions, many of Malaysians in the US work in managerial or professional
occupations; over half of them are female; and many live in California, New York, and Texas.




                                             13
     Table 1: Number of Malaysians by Country, State/City, Sectors and Key Professions
   Country     Total Number     Selected State/ City           Key Sectors           Key Occupation
               of Malaysians
      US       61,765            New York – 10,413        Professional and        Managerial and
                                 Los Angeles – 5,833       Related Services –       Professional
                                 San Francisco –           15,593                   Specialty
                                  3,660                    Manufacturing –          Occupations –
                                 San Jose, CA – 2,387      5,667                    23,926
                                 Washington – 2,362       Finance, Insurance
                                 Others – 37,110           and Real Estate –
                                                            3,731
                                                           Business and Repair
                                                            Services – 3,616
   Australia   116,193             Melbourne – 37, 840    Healthcare and          Professionals –
                                   Sydney –24,170          Social Assistance –      30,010
                                   Perth – 23,942          12,346                  Managers – 7,886
                                   Brisbane –9,233        Professional,           Technicians and
                                   Adelaide – 6,691        Scientific and           Trade Workers –
                                   Others – 14, 317        Technical Services –     5,353
                                                            9,582                   Community and
                                                           Financial and            Personal Service
                                                            Insurance Service -      Workers – 4940
                                                            5,147
   Canada      23,530            Ontario –9,905           Professional,           Business, finance
                                 British Columbia –        Scientific and           and administration
                                  8,550                     Technical Services –     occupations -3,315
                                 Alberta – 3,695           1,820                   Management
                                 Quebec – 845             Healthcare and           occupations – 2,010
                                 Manitoba – 370            Social Assistance -     Natural and applied
                                 Others – 165              1,820                    sciences and related
                                                           Finance and              occupations – 1,955
                                                            insurance – 1,480       Occupations in
                                                           Manufacturing -          education, law and
                                                            1,250                    social, community
                                                                                     and go government
                                                                                     services – 1,425
      UK       69,939            London –18,000        Not available              Not available
                                 South East – 11,000
                                 East of England –
                                   5,000
                                 Scotland – 5,000
                                 North West – 4,000
                                 Others – 26,939
Source: World Bank Analysis, American Community Survey 2007-2011*, Australia Census 2011, Canadian
2011 National Household Survey (NHS), 2012 UK Annual Population Survey




                                                   14
               Figure 4a: Distribution of Malaysians in the United States




 Source: World Bank calculations using the U.S. census, 2007–2011.

        Figure 4b: Number of Malaysians in Twenty U.S. Metropolitan Areas




Source: World Bank calculations using the U.S. census, 2007–2011.




                                             15
         Figure 4c: Proportion of Malaysians in the US with Tertiary Education




  Source: World Bank calculations using the U.S. census, 2007–2011.


         Figure 4d: Proportion of Malaysians in the US with Tertiary Education




Source: World Bank calculations using the U.S. census, 2007–2011.




                                               16
                    Figure 4e: Median Annual Income of Malaysians in the US




     Source: World Bank calculations using the U.S. census, 2007–2011.

The Australian census includes around 120,000 Malaysians; and they are mostly living in the
South East and Western part of the country (Figure 5a), in cities such as Perth, Melbourne
and Sydney (Figure 5b). Patterns in Australia are similar to the United States.

                                   Figure 5a: Malaysians in Australia




     Source: World Bank calculations using the Australian census, 2011.




                                                   17
             Figure 5b: Number of Malaysians in Ten Australian Metropolitan Areas




      Source: World Bank calculations using the Australian census, 2011.

Over 70 percent have completed secondary education or above; well over half work in
professional or managerial occupations. Malaysians living in South Australia, Tasmania and
Victoria have among the highest levels of education levels (Figure 5c). As shown, Malaysians
with higher levels of education live in cities such as Adelaide, Hobart, Melbourne and
Canberra, but also in the western city of Perth (Figure 5d).

         Figure 5c: Proportion of Malaysians with 12th grade (or equivalent) and above




Source: World Bank calculations using the Australian census, 2011.

                                                      18
                  Figure 5d: Main Cities Where Well Educated Malaysians Live




     Source: World Bank calculations using the Australian census, 2011.

As shown in Figure 5e, Malaysian inhabitants in cities such as Perth, Melbourne, Canberra,
Sydney, Brisbane and Darwin have relatively high levels of earnings; those living in Hobart
(Tasmania) and the Gold Coast have lower earnings.
                  Figure 5e: Median Annual Income of Malaysians in Australia




     Source: World Bank calculations using the Australian census, 2011.


                                                   19
The Canadian 2011 National Household Survey (and the Canadian metropolitan census)
includes around 25,000 Malaysians (Figure 6a). Most live in British Columbia (Vancouver)
and Ontario (Toronto) (Figure 6b).

                             Figure 6a: Number of Malaysians in Canada




  Source: World Bank calculations using the census of metropolitan areas, 2011.
               Figure 6b: Number of Malaysians in Canadian Metropolitan Areas




  Source: World Bank calculations using the census of metropolitan areas, 2011.



                                                   20
Patterns in Canada are similar to the United States and Australia. Over 70 percent have
tertiary education; 35 percent work in business or finance professions or managerial
occupations; over half are female. Figure 6c shows that among those that live in British
Columbia and Ontario (where the largest metropolitan areas are located) a high share have
postsecondary education. The share of Malaysians with postsecondary education living in
the most Eastern parts of the country is even higher, indicating that Malaysians in that part
of the country are most likely working in jobs and sectors which require higher education
level.

     Figure 6c: Proportion of Malaysians with Postsecondary Education in Canada




Source: World Bank calculations using the census of metropolitan areas, 2011.

For the United Kingdom, the dataset used to draw up the heat maps was derived from
aggregated numbers from the census instead of drawing them from raw numbers from the
census, as was the case in the other three countries. Therefore, the profile information is
limited compared to the other three countries. Most Malaysians in the United Kingdom live
in London and the South East. Figure 7 shows the main cities/localities where they are
concentrated; Westminster, Lancashire, and Kent emerge as the most populated localities.




                                                    21
                Figure 7a: Number of Malaysians in the U.K.




   Source: World Bank calculations using the U.K. annual population survey
Figure 7b: Location of Malaysians in the U.K. Metropolitan Areas




Source: World Bank calculations using the U.K. annual population survey

                                      22
   Tapping into the highly educated Malaysian diaspora could help to fill the skills gap.
   The creation of the heat maps and profiles provides a solid foundation, of content and a
   methodological approach, for TalentCorp to locate Malaysia’s skilled diaspora in key
   countries and plan its outreach efforts accordingly. However, going forward, many
   challenges remain to fully benefit from the usefulness of the heat maps.

   Approximately half of more than 300,000 Malaysians living in OECD countries in 2010
   had completed tertiary education or a higher level of study (World Bank Group et al,
   2011). Through the heat maps, it has been shown that Malaysia’s diaspora is a rich human
   capital resource for filling skill gaps. As mentioned, leveraging their diaspora is a possible
   way for countries to try and meet their needs for skilled labor. As a share of total emigration,
   the rate of tertiary educated migration has been stable over the past decade, falling slightly
   from 56.5 percent in 2000 to 54.5 percent in 2010 (Table 2).1 Moreover, many Malaysians
   abroad still retain close ties to the country. One survey of the diaspora shows that nearly half
   of the respondents visit Malaysia three to five times a year, while 41 percent are members of
   a diaspora association, an indication of their interest in the country despite being abroad
   (TalentCorp, 2014).

         Table 2. Malaysians in OECD Countries by Educational Level in 1990, 2000 and 2010
                                 1990                                        2000                                         2010
                  Total        Tertiary       Percent          Total       Tertiary        Percent          Total       Tertiary       Percent
    Canada       12,150         8,480          69.8%          17,150        12,170          71.0%          23,530        14,240         60.5%
  Australia      44,984         35,366         78.6%          56,961        38,620          67.8%         116,193        65,554         56.4%
        UK       31,130         15,328         49.2%          38,146        12,898          33.8%          69,939        39,631         56.7%
        US       17,725         13,745         77.5%          36,995        24,085          65.1%          61,765        34,508         55.9%
Other OECD       15,101         6,265          41.5%          21,516        8,710           40.5%          39,418        15,545         39.4%
    TOTAL
                121,090         79,185         65.4%         170,767        96,483          56.5%        310,845        169,478        54.5%
      OECD
                  Source: Global Bilateral Migration Database (World Bank Group et al, 2011), World Bank staff calculations


   Going forward, it will be imperative to regularly update the heat maps using censuses and
   surveys. It will also be very important to add other key countries, such as Ireland and China,
   and countries in the United Arab Emirates. It is also important to recognize that census data
   and survey data alone do not provide the full picture; therefore, it will be important to
   complement the information with other data sources already used by TalentCorp, such as
   embassy and consulate records. Lastly, these maps can be most useful to increase the
   efficiency of TalentCorp if they are used as a basis for undertaking digital virtual
   engagements and planning physical outreach events.




   1Table does not include migration to Singapore due to the absence of reliable data. The Department of Statistics of Singapore states that
   approximately 691,000 Malaysians were residing in Singapore in 2010, approximately a fifth of whom are tertiary-educated. However,
   data is not publicly available on the country’s 1.3 million-odd non-residents/migrants, many of whom are presumably Malaysian. Since
   Singapore is one of the main destination countries for Malaysian migrants, it is difficult to provide a complete picture of the skilled
   Malaysian diaspora at this time.

                                                                     23
REP AND RP-T: MEASURING THEIR EFFECTIVENESS IN ATTRACTING AND
                      RETAINING TALENT

The REP with an income tax incentive and RP-T programs were introduced in 2011 and are
managed by TalentCorp. TalentCorp was keen to know whether these programs are effective
in attracting and retaining the right talents and skills needed in the country.

The Bank undertook to assess whether these programs work effectively and whether any
changes can be made to their structure to improve their effectiveness. To that end, new data
were collected in 2013–14 to assess the effectiveness of the programs and to assess how they
contribute to complementing the Malaysian workforce. The new data are used extensively
in the two analytical exercises presented in the following two technical sections of the report.

    I.       Assessing the Effectiveness of the REP

    1. Introduction
Brain drain, the emigration of high-skilled workers, is one of the central challenges
facing developed and developing countries alike. Most countries face large-scale
emigration of high-skilled workers (see figure 8). The United States, Canada, and Australia
are among the main exceptions and are the most important magnets for highly skilled
migrants. While emigration of talented workers is a major concern for source countries,
there is growing evidence that it also represents long-term opportunities. In particular, there
is mounting evidence that return migration of high-skilled workers, otherwise known as
‘brain circulation’, has considerable economic benefits.2 Thus, encouraging return migration
may be one of the most promising ways to ameliorate the effects of brain drain and indeed
for origin countries to benefit from international labor mobility. Among the main challenges
to effective design of policies to encourage ‘brain circulation’ is a complete lack of evidence
on the efficacy of potential policies (McKenzie and Yang 2015).3

This analysis presents the first evidence, globally, on the efficacy of a comprehensive
program designed to encourage the return migration of high-skilled individuals. The
Malaysian REP targets Malaysians abroad who are at the top end of the skill/education
distribution and provides them with fiscal incentives and legal benefits to return to Malaysia.
The key features of the program during the period of review are a 15 percent flat income tax
rate on employment income for five years, the purchase of two tax-free locally assembled
cars, and eligibility for permanent residency status for a foreign spouse and children within
six months.


2 Return migrants come back with physical and human capital earned abroad (Dustmann and Kirchkamp 2002
and Mesnard 2004) may transfer skills and knowledge gained abroad (Dos Santos and Postel-Vinay 2003). See
also Gibson and McKenzie (2012) and Thom (2010).
3 This analysis is related to a small literature on tax-induced mobility of people. On international mobility, see

Kleven et al. (2013) on professional football players and Kleven et al. (2014) on the impact of tax reductions
for high-skilled foreigners in Denmark. On tax-induced mobility within a country, see Liebig et al. (2007) for
Switzerland and Bakija and Slemrod (2004) and Young and Varner (2013) for the United States.

                                                       24
In the period 2011–2013, the program processed applications from approximately 4,000
people; this represents a substantial fraction of high-skilled Malaysian migrants. For
example, using information from the American Community Survey (ACS), the analysis shows
that on average 565 high-skilled Malaysians migrate to the United States annually, while the
REP on average attracts 122 applicants from the United States per year.

          Figure 8. Emigration Rates of the Highly Skilled to OECD Countries (Aged 15
                                       Years and Above)




Source: Global Migration Database 2010.

Once the basic criteria for approval to the REP have been satisfied (the applicant is employed
abroad, is under no obligation to return, and has been continuously residing and employed
abroad for the last 3 years), the key determinant for approval is whether the applicant has
had sufficient work experience abroad (which varies according to education level). To
identify the overall impact of acceptance to the REP, the analysis uses the probability of
acceptance into the program, which increases discontinuously at a (education dependent)
threshold that depends on the total years of work experience abroad.

Despite the fact that the eligibility requirements for the REP are to a large extent public
knowledge, there is sufficient uncertainty in the application process to ensure that marginal
applicants (just below the work experience threshold) cannot fully predict whether they will
be accepted or not. The analysis finds no evidence of discontinuities in other observable
characteristics or of sorting of applicants around the threshold. These observations suggest
that the REP can be evaluated using a special technique known as a fuzzy regression
discontinuity (RD) design.

Since months of work experience abroad (the so-called assignment variable) are measured
discretely, the analysis uses a two-stage least squares technique to identify the (local) effect

                                              25
of approval to the REP on the probability that applicants will return. In the full sample of
applicants, the estimated effect of the program is positive in every specification considered,
but the point estimate is never statistically significant. However, the evidence suggests that
the REP is likely to be most effective for those applicants who already have an
employment offer in Malaysia when they apply. The other group for whom REP approval
is particularly salient is female applicants either single or married to a foreign spouse. For
these groups, the analysis finds that the causal impact of approval is about 40 percentage
points, in other words, the probability of returning increases by around 40 percentage
points.

The analytical exercises conclude with a cost-benefit estimate of the fiscal impacts of the
program. The fiscal costs of the REP arise from the fact that a lot of people would have
returned even in the absence of the REP, but they can still take advantage of the flat tax
offered. The fiscal benefits arise from the fact that some additional people return to Malaysia
due to the REP and pay income tax and consumption tax. The results show a net benefit in
present discounted value of, based on the 2SLS estimates, about RM 27,000 ($9,000) per
applicant. In other words, the REP offers a positive monetary value to Malaysia rather
than a cost.

    2. The REP
The REP is administered by TalentCorp and targets high-skilled Malaysians abroad
who are interested in returning to employment in Malaysia. Figure 1 provides the basic
eligibility criteria for the REP benefits as depicted on the program website.

As shown in Figure 9a, first level eligibility for the REP requires that an individual (i) is a
Malaysian citizen, (ii) has been residing and employed abroad continuously for at least the
past three years at the time of the application submission, (iii) is under no obligation to a
company or government agency to return, and (iv) has no outstanding scholarship bonds or
loans from the Malaysian government. The application has to be submitted while the
applicant is still residing and employed abroad and remains an employee of the foreign entity
while abroad. There are several other dimensions considered during the evaluation of the
application. These are meant to determine whether the individual can be considered high
skilled with sufficient work experience abroad in high-priority national key economic areas
(NKEA)4 or sectors.




4According to the Economic Transformation Program of Malaysia, there are 12 NKEAs in Malaysia which
comprise economic sectors with opportunities for private sector to drive the economy to high income levels.
They are: OGE; Palm Oil and Rubber; Financial Services; Tourism; Business Services; Electrical and
Electronics; Wholesale and Retail; Education; Healthcare; Communication, Content, and Infrastructure (CCI);
Agriculture; and Greater Kuala Lumpur.

                                                    26
                            Figure 9a: REP Eligibility Criteria for 2011 - 2012




       Source: TalentCorp

The key element of the eligibility criteria is that the individual needs to have some
education beyond high school completion and a sufficient number of years of work
experience abroad. The required years abroad vary by the highest education obtained by
the individual as presented in figure 9b. For the sample used in this analysis, the applicants
in 2011 and 2012, the minimum experience thresholds were two years for those with a PhD,
four years for people with a masters or professional qualification, six years for people with
a bachelor (or first) degree, and ten years for people with a diploma.5

The work experience abroad by education threshold is not the only determinant for
approval. Applicants can also be approved if their skills are considered vital to the
Malaysian economy such that they are designated as an ‘expert’ in a high-value area.
This designation depends on the applicant’s industry, profession, income, and any other
criteria that TalentCorp takes into consideration during the evaluation process.
              Figure 9b: REP Eligibility Criteria 2011 and 2012 – Experience Abroad
                                     Thresholds by Education




            Source: TalentCorp.



5 These work experience criteria have been enhanced effective April 2014 as a more holistic criterion of
income level as well as working experience in Malaysia (prior to going abroad) has been introduced.

                                                     27
After the approval, applicants have a two-year window during which to find a job,
return to Malaysia, report to TalentCorp, and exercise the benefits. Only upon their
return and employment can they take advantage of four incentives provided through the
initiative. First, they can use the optional 15 percent flat tax rate (instead of the standard
progressive tax schedule) on employment income for the next five years. Second, there is a
tax exemption for all personal effects brought back to Malaysia. Third, the purchase of two
locally assembled Complete Knocked-Down (CKD) cars. Fourth, foreign spouses and children
are eligible for permanent residency status within six months.

The value of these benefits, of course, depends on the characteristics of the recipient.
The top marginal income tax rate in Malaysia is currently 25 percent. To benefit from the 15
percent flat tax, an applicant would have to earn more than RM 135,000 annually, which is
about US$45,000. The tax exemption on the import of personal effects is unlikely to have
substantial monetary benefits but is likely to reduce the bureaucracy considerably. The tax
exemption on cars is potentially very valuable since Malaysia has one of the highest import
taxes on foreign cars in the world in an attempt to support local car manufacturing, with
taxes in excess of 100 percent on most vehicles. Finally, Malaysia has restrictive citizenship
laws as Malaysian citizenship is normally only acquired by birth while permanent residency
is granted mainly to very high-skilled individuals. Thus, the permanent residency for foreign
spouses and children born abroad is potentially an important benefit of the program.

      3. Data and Preliminary Evidence
      3.1 Data

Administrative data on the applicants to the REP have been provided by TalentCorp. The
data contain applicant characteristics that are relevant to the approval process as well as the
application status, and return status (only for approved). Available personal information on
applicants includes their work experience abroad in months, education, income while
abroad, industry, profession, job title, marital status, nationality of spouse, number of
children, whether the applicant has an existing job offer in Malaysia, and salary in Malaysia
(for those with a job offer and those who eventually return).

Administrative data on the applicants for the years 2011–2014 are available. However, as
mentioned earlier, approval of the application is valid for two years. The applications from
2013 to 2014 still have an unexpired validity period to return. Hence, the focus of this
analysis is on the applications that were processed in 2011 and 2012.

Applicants who do not fulfill the basic eligibility requirements (as far as it can be determined)
are excluded from the analysis. Most importantly, the analysis excludes people who (i) have
already returned to Malaysia when applying, (ii) are under an obligation to return as part of
their employment contract abroad, (iii) are not Malaysian citizens, and (iv)have not been
abroad for an uninterrupted period of three years.6


6   TalentCorp carefully checks whether an applicant has received income in Malaysia in the past 3 years.

                                                       28
Crucial for the analysis is determining whether those who were not approved by the
REP returned to Malaysia or not. This information is critical since the impact of REP
approval on return likelihood is basically determined by comparing the return rates of the
approved and rejected applicants. This information was obtained by calling every applicant
who was not approved at his or her contact numbers in Malaysia and abroad (provided at
the time of application) up to three times to ask them about their return status. For the
remaining applicants who could not be contacted through the telephone, the team searched
for them on LinkedIn (which is very popular in South East Asia, more so than in the United
States) and if their account appeared active, the team verified whether they were in Malaysia
or not. In this manner, return information for 96.2 percent of the entire sample of applicants
and information on 85.6 percent of individuals whose application was not approved was
obtained.7

        3.2. Descriptive Statistics

The final sample includes everyone for whom key variables necessary for the analysis were
available. These key variables are approval and return status, education, and months worked
abroad. Given that more information was needed, a complementary online survey was
undertaken in 2013; applicants were emailed and asked to fill in the additional information.
The new survey provides additional information, which is very useful in getting more details
about the individuals and their motivations. Table 3 provides statistics for the final sample
of 1,654 applicants.

Applicants are typically male (76 percent); have a bachelor or master degree (89 percent);
are on average 38 years old; have 7.3 years of experience working abroad; are in their
current job (abroad) for an average of 3.2 years; and have an average annual income of
US$61,269 when abroad and US$59,924 when in Malaysia.8 Most applicants are married (88
percent) and around half of them have a foreign spouse.

Only 19 percent of individuals apply with an existing job offer in Malaysia. More than a third
of applicants work in business services. Being in an engineering profession is the most
common (28 percent), followed by finance and banking (14 percent). About half of the
applicants are categorized as technical experts.




7 The observed characteristics of those whose return status was not determinable are nearly identical to the
overall sample, suggesting that a representative sample was obtained.
8 Since the measurement error in salaries are of concern, the top and bottom 5 percent income observations

(abroad and Malaysia) are excluded. As a consequence, median salaries are only somewhat higher than mean
salaries.

                                                     29
                      Table 3: Descriptive Statistics (Main Sample = 1,654)
                                          %                                          %

     Diploma                              4            Business Services             35

     Bachelor                             47           CCI                           13

     Master                               42           Healthcare                    11

     PhD                                  7            OGE                           11

                                                       Electronics & Electrical      9

     Female                               24           Education                     7

     Married                              68

     Foreign Spouse                       52           Engineering                   28

     Job offer in Malaysia                19           Finance/Banking               14

                                                       Accounting                    11

                                        Mean           Medical/Healthcare            11
                                                       Information and
     Age (years)                         38.4          Communication Technologies    10
                                                       (ICT)
     Foreign work exp. (years)           7.3           Building/Construction         10

     Current job duration (years)        3.2

     Foreign Salary                   US$61,269        Technical Experts             51

     Malaysian Salary                 US$59,924        Top Management                11
   Source: REP administrative data.

To assess how representative applicants to the REP are of the high-skilled Malaysian
diaspora, table 4 shows a comparison of the characteristics of applicants from the United
States with those of Malaysians in the ACS (used in the creation of the heat maps shown in
the overview section of this report). The sample is limited to those with more than high
school education, are at least 25 years of age, have been in the United States for at least three
years, and do not have American citizenship.




                                                  30
                           Table 4: Comparison of the REP with ACS

                                             REP (U.S. Origin)       ACS
                                                      %               %
              Female                                  30              48
              Married                                 47              70
              Bachelor                                43              47
              Master                                  33              38
              PhD                                     12               8


              Years in the U.S. (mean)                7.2            13.7
              Age (mean)                              36             39.1
              Income (mean)                     US$82,036         US$76,096
              Income (median)                   US$72,000         US$63,957
              Business Services                       32.5           26.3
              Other (Manufacturing)                   9.4            23.4
              Education                               8.1            13.7
              Electronics & Electrical                10.6           11.4
              Healthcare                              10             10.9
              Wholesale and Retail                    2.2            10.5
              CCI                                     14.1            1.9
              OGE                                     10.3            1.6
              Total                                  368            10,690
             Source: REP administrative data and ACS.

In line with the objectives of the REP, applicants have higher income than comparable
Malaysians in the United States, with mean (median) annual incomes of US$82,036
(US$72,000) compared to US$76,096 (US$63,957), respectively. This is despite the fact that
REP applicants from the United States are somewhat younger on average (36 years
compared to 39.1) and have spent less time in the United States (7.2 years compared to 13.7
years).

The education profiles of the two groups are quite similar though REP applicants are slightly
more likely to be PhD holders than the average Malaysian diaspora in the United States.
Applicants are much less likely to be female; 30 percent compared to 48 percent in the ACS.
There are also some differences in the industry profiles of the two samples (though many
differences are not statistically significant). Applicants are disproportionately in business
services, OGE, and CCI; they are less likely to be in retail services and the ‘other’ category,
which includes manufacturing.

                                                 31
        3.3. Preliminary Evidence

Table 5 shows the number (and fraction) of applicants who returned to Malaysia, by
approval status. In terms of approvals, around 20 percent of the applicants are rejected by
TalentCorp. It should be emphasized that this is the rejection rate after the sample is
restricted to individuals who seem to meet the minimum eligibility requirements stated
inFigure 9a, except for the total duration abroad. More specifically, they meet the criteria of
having been employed abroad, are under no obligation to return, and have been abroad for
at least 3 years. The overall return rate of all applicants is very high at 72 percent. This is
evidence that people tend to apply to the program only if they are seriously considering
returning to Malaysia. The return rate of the approved applicants is 73 percent while it is 64
percent for those rejected. In other words, those approved by the REP are about 9 percent
more likely to return than those rejected, suggesting that the program may increase
the likelihood that high-skilled Malaysians from abroad return to Malaysia.

                              Table 5: Approval and Return Decision

                                          Not Approved       Approved         Total
                      Not Returned             122              350            472

                                               36%             27%             29%
                      Returned                 215              969           1,184

                                               64%             73%             71%
                      Total                    337             1,319          1,656

                                             100%              100%
                     Source: REP administrative data.

The correlation between approval and return status of applicants is robust to the inclusion
of a large set of covariates as shown in Table 6. Only two additional covariates, of the large
set available, predict whether an individual will return to Malaysia and affect the correlation
between approvals and return status. First, having an existing job offer in Malaysia at the
time of application to the REP increases the probability of return by about 22 percent.
Second, older applicants are less likely to return with each additional year of age (at a
decreasing rate). Since those approved by the program are less likely to have a job offer and
more likely to be older than those rejected, the inclusion of these controls in the linear
probability model (LPM) increases the correlation between approval and return status to 12
percent.9




9Results from a probit specification are nearly identical. In light of the later RD design which uses a local
polynomial specification in a two-stage least squares model, the ordinary least square results are presented
here.

                                                      32
                  Table 6: Correlation between REP Approval and Return Probability, LPM
                                               (1)             (2)        (3)            (4)             (5)         (6)

  REP Approval                            0.093***        0.107***     0.129***       0.126***         0.126***    0.120***
                                           (0.026)        (0.025)       (0.026)        (0.029)         (0.029)     (0.031)
  Job Offer                                               0.216***     0.223***       0.238***         0.238***    0.225***
                                                          (0.020)       (0.020)        (0.021)         (0.021)     (0.022)
  Age (years)                                                           - 0.008*      - 0.009*         - 0.010**   - 0.010*
                                                                        (0.004)        (0.005)         (0.005)     (0.005)
  R-Squared                                 0.008          0.043         0.049          0.06            0.062       0.078
  Controls:
       Education                             No                No         No             Yes             Yes         Yes
       Experience Abroad                     No                No         No             Yes             Yes         Yes
       Income                                No                No         No             Yes             Yes         Yes
       Personal Characteristics              No                No         No             No              Yes         Yes
  Industry and Occupation                    No                No         No             No               No         Yes
Source: REP administrative data.
Note: *, **, and *** indicate statistically different from control mean at the 10, 5 and 1 percent levels
respectively.

Table 7 depicts, by approval status, the number (and fraction) of applicants who returned
to Malaysia for those individuals who at the time of their application already have an
employment offer in Malaysia compared to those who do not have an offer. Irrespective of
the approval decision, applicants with an existing job offer are considerably more likely to
return to Malaysia than those without an offer. Return rates are 76 percent and 60 percent,
respectively, among the group not approved by the REP.

                  Table 7: Approval and Return Decision by Existing Job Offer
                                        With Job Offer                       Without Job Offer

                             Not Approved            Approved         Not Approved            Approved

          Not Returned             18                    17                104                   333

                                  24%                    7%                40%                   31%

          Returned                 56                    231               159                   738

                                  76%                    93%               60%                   69%

          Total                    74                    248               263                 1,071
        Source: REP administrative data.




                                                          33
More importantly, approval status is correlated with a particularly large increase in
the likelihood of return for those with an existing job offer. REP approval is associated
with a 17 percent increase (from 76 percent to 93 percent) among those with a job offer, as
opposed to a 9 percent increase (from 60 percent to 69 percent) among those without a job.
These differences presumably reflect the fact that undertaking the costly process of
searching for and finding a job is a good indicator of an individual’s unobserved motivation
to return to Malaysia. They also reflect the less than perfect probability of finding an
attractive job in Malaysia within the two years that the REP approval is valid. Specifically,
the return rate of those approved by the REP is 93 percent for those with an existing
employment offer and only 69 percent for those without. This suggests that the rate at which
applicants find attractive job offers in Malaysia within two years is around 74 percent (the
range is between 69 percent and 93 percent) while 7 percent of these offers are still rejected
for other reasons.

   4. Regression Discontinuity Design
The key concern with a causal interpretation of the preliminary findings is that there may be
unobserved characteristics of applicants that are correlated with both the return and
approval decisions. Most importantly, an applicant’s individual desire to return to Malaysia
is not observed in the data. The unobserved propensity to return may be correlated with the
approval decision. For example, those who are eager to return may make additional efforts
to be approved, resulting in a spurious positive correlation between approval and the return
decision. Alternatively, since applying is costly (with regard to time and effort) only highly
motivated applicants will apply if their probability of acceptance is low, thus resulting in a
spurious negative correlation between approval and return. This and other endogeneity
concerns are addressed using a technique known as RD design. In this section, the analysis
first demonstrates the existence of discontinuities in the likelihood of acceptance at certain
thresholds based on years of work experience abroad. Then these discontinuities are used
to estimate the causal effect of acceptance to the REP on the return decision. Two seminal
papers by Imbens and Lemieux (2008) and Lee and Lemieux (2010) provide excellent
overviews of the latest research and advances on the RD technique and evaluation designs
using this technique. This analysis follows their proposed approach to establish whether the
impact of the program causes the Malaysian diaspora to return.

       4.1. Discontinuities in the Probability of Approval

The eligibility requirements for the REP are to a large extent public knowledge, available to
the applicants on the website through which they submit their application to the
program.However, the application of the assessment criteria (see figure 9b) provides for the
REP Committee to exercise discretion to accept or reject marginal candidates. Lee (2008)
shows formally that even when individuals have some control over the likelihood of
acceptance they will be accepted into the program (or treated), as long as this control is
imprecise, the consequence will be local randomization of the treatment. Such an approach
can be properly used in this case as it precisely describes the approval process for the REP.




                                               34
Once the basic criteria for approval have been satisfied, the key determinant for
approval is whether the applicant has had sufficient work experience abroad.
Applicants have to provide extensive details on all their educational attainment and work
experience abroad and TalentCorp invests considerable effort into verifying the accuracy of
an applicant’s declarations. The eligibility threshold, in years of experience abroad, depends
on the applicant’s educational attainment, as discussed above and presented in figure 9b.

Even though these thresholds are public knowledge, in practice TalentCorp does not rigidly
adhere to them, especially for those people who are just below the cutoffs. First, it gives most
applicants some leeway on the assumption that they will continue working abroad until they
actually relocate to Malaysia. Based on the data, it seems as though, on average, applicants
get up to six months leeway though there is considerable variability. Second, a major source
of this variability is the determination whether an applicant whose skill set is determined to
be particularly important for the Malaysian economy can be considered an ’expert’. This
determination is intrinsically judgmental and creates subjectivity in the application process.

Figures 10a and 10b plot the probability of approval to the REP against the applicant’s
months of work experience abroad, normalized by the education dependent threshold
(minus six months leeway). Consequently, the threshold for acceptance for all applicants has
been normalized to zero. In Figure 10a, the data is by months of experience and a locally
weighted scatterplot smoothing (LOWESS) has been fitted. In Figure 10b, experience is
measured in quarters and a linear best-fit line is included.

The figures show clear evidence of a considerable discontinuity in the probability of
acceptance at the threshold. Above the threshold, the probability of acceptance is nearly flat
at around 94 percent. Just below the threshold, the probability of acceptance is still a very
high 60 percent and then drops rapidly to around 10 percent for applicants whose work
experience is two years below the threshold.




                                              35
 Figure 10a: Discontinuity in REP Acceptance Probability by Normalized Work
                      Experience Abroad, Monthly Bins.




Source: World Bank


 Figure 10b: Discontinuity in REP Acceptance Probability by Normalized Work
                      Experience Abroad, Quarterly Bins.




Source: World Bank



                                 36
There are no corresponding discontinuities in the observed characteristics of applicants.
Figures 11a and 11b depict the mean probability of having an existing job offer and the mean
age (minus 25) by months of experience, respectively. Recall that these are the only two
variables that predict the return probability. Figure 11c depicts mean income abroad by
months of experience. The threshold is normalized to zero for each education group, and the
figures include a quadratic best-fit line. None of the figures show any statistically significant
discontinuities at the threshold.10

              Figure 11a: Probability of an Existing Employment Offer in Malaysia by
                       Normalized Work Experience Abroad, Monthly Bins.




             Source: World Bank




10This is formally tested by running a least squares regression of the approval probability on a dummy for
the threshold and separate quadratic polynomials of months of experience on either side of the threshold.
Including different order polynomials does not affect this result. Also, discontinuities are not found in any of
the other observable applicant characteristics.

                                                       37
Figure 11b: Mean Age (minus 25) by Normalized Work Experience Abroad,
                             Monthly Bins.




   Source: World Bank
Figure 11c: Mean Income Abroad by Normalized Work Experience Abroad,
                            Monthly Bins.




Source: World Bank



                              38
While there are no discontinuities at the threshold in observable characteristics, the primary
concern is that there are discontinuities in unobserved characteristics that affect the return
probability. McCrary (2008) suggests that a way to test for discontinuities in unobserved
characteristics is to look for evidence of sorting around the threshold. Recall that each
individual is likely to have imprecise control over whether they will be admitted to the REP
or not, in which case both observed and unobserved characteristics should be continuously
distributed across the threshold. This cannot be tested directly, but an intuitive test of this
assumption is whether the aggregate distribution of the applicants by months of experience
abroad is discontinuous at the threshold.

Figures 12a and 12b depict the number of applicants by months of experience abroad. Figure
12a depicts the distribution for all individuals between two years below the threshold and
five years above. The distribution is hump-shaped with a particularly high density of
applicants around half a year above the threshold (which corresponds to the formal
eligibility requirements). Visually it looks like there may be some sorting around the
threshold with many applicants just above the threshold and fewer below. Figure 12a
magnifies the distribution around the threshold by only considering observations on one
year either side of the threshold. In Figure 12b, sorting around the threshold is no longer
seen.

         Figure 12a: Number of Applicants by Months of Experience Abroad (Seven-
                                      year Interval)




                Source: World Bank




                                              39
         Figure 12b: Number of Applicants by Months of Experience Abroad (Seven-
                                      year Interval)




                  Source: World Bank

Following McCrary (2008), a test for sorting around the threshold was undertaken. Since
months of experience are discrete, the analysis does not use a non-parametric test but rather
runs a least squares regression of the approval probability on a dummy for the threshold and
separate polynomials of months of experience on either side of the threshold. There is no
statistically significant evidence of a discontinuity in the number of applicants around the
threshold in any of numerous specifications.

The fact that there is no evidence to suggest sorting around the threshold is not surprising
given the design of the program. In particular, the eligibility criteria are fuzzy such that 60
percent of applicants who fall just below the acceptance threshold are still approved (see
figure 10b).

       4.2. Empirical Model

The discussion in the previous section suggests that the REP can be evaluated as a fuzzy RD
design. Formally, the fuzzy RD design can be described by a two-equation system:

                               =  +  + ( − ) + , (1)

                               =  +  + ( − ) + , (2)

where Y, D, and T are binary variables; X is the months of experience abroad (the assignment
variable); and  is an error term independent of X. Y is equal to 1 if the applicant returns to
Malaysia, D is equal to 1 when the application is approved, and T is equal to 1 when the

                                               40
assignment variable X is greater than the threshold c (T = 1[X ≥ c]).

The probability of treatment changes discontinuously at c:

                       lim Pr( = 1| =  + ) ≠ lim Pr( = 1| =  + ) .
                       ↓0                                  ↑0

Since the probability of treatment jumps by less than 1 at the threshold, the treatment effect
can be recovered by dividing the jump in the relationship between Y and X at c by the increase
in the probability of treatment at the threshold (the discontinuity jump in the relation
between D and X). In this setting, the treatment effect can be written as:

                                     lim E(| =  + ) − lim E(| =  + )
                                     ↓0                       ↑0
                               =
                                     lim E(| =  + ) − lim E(| =  + )
                                     ↓0                       ↑0

A technical paper by Hahn et al. (2001) shows that the interpretation of this ratio as a causal
effect requires the same assumptions as in the paper by Imbens and Angrist (1994). One
must assume ‘monotonicity’, that is, approval of the application cannot decrease the
probability that any individual returns to Malaysia, and ‘excludability’, that is, X crossing the
threshold cannot affect the return probability other than by affecting the probability of
approval. Monotonicity is a very natural assumption in the context of the REP; it is hard to
conceive of a situation in which the approval of the application dissuades an individual from
returning to Malaysia.11 The previous section presented extensive evidence in support of the
excludability assumption, that is, there are neither discontinuities in other observable
variables nor in the frequency of X (the number of applicants) around the threshold.

In a fuzzy RD design it is not treatment (the approval decision) that is randomized, but rather
the ‘intent to treat’ (whether an individual is above or below the threshold) that is locally
randomized. Figures 13a and 13b depict the intent-to-treat effect by showing scatter plots
of the probability of return plotted against the assignment variable (months of work
experience). Figure 13a uses month bins and figure 13b quarterly bins and both figures
include a linear best-fit line. It is clear that the data is very ‘noisy’, making it very difficult to
see whether there is a discontinuity in the probability of returning to Malaysia at the
threshold, that is, an intent-to-treat effect.




11Unless, of course, Oscar Wilde was to apply since he did claim that “I would never join any club that would
have me as a member.”

                                                        41
Figure 13a: Probability of Return by Normalized Work Experience Abroad,
                               Monthly Bins.




    Source: World Bank


Figure 13b: Probability of Return by Normalized Work Experience Abroad,
                              Quarterly Bins.




    Source: World Bank



                               42
Hahn et al. (2001) suggest estimating the treatment effect using two-stage least squares,
where equation (2) is the first stage and equation (1) is the outcome equation. The
instrumental variables estimate can be interpreted as the weighted average treatment effect
for the subpopulation affected by the instrument, that is, a weighted local average treatment
affect. The weights reflect the likelihood that an individual’s X is near the threshold. Hahn et
al. (2001) also suggest local linear regressions as an alternative nonparametric way to
estimate the treatment effect. These two estimation techniques have become the standards
in the literature (Imbens and Lemieux 2008; Lee and Lemieux 2010). However, our
assignment variable is discrete (it is measured in months) and as Lee and Card (2008)
discuss extensively, this makes it impossible to compare observations ‘just above’ and ‘just
below’ the treatment threshold. This requires us to choose functional forms for the
relationship between the treatment variable and the outcome of interest and hence
constrains us to use two-stage least squares.

There are two central issues in using two-stage least squares to estimate the treatment effect.
First, a decision on the order of the polynomials f(.) and g(.) needs to be made. Note that in
every specification, the regression function is allowed to differ on both sides of the threshold
point by including interaction terms between D and X (Imbens and Lemiuex 2008). Second,
a decision needs to be made on the range of X to include in the estimation, specifically to
what degree to exclude the X that are far from the threshold.

The analysis follows Lee and Lemieux (2010) on how to choose the optimal polynomial
model. Month dummies are added to the polynomial regressions (1) and (2) and to jointly
test the significance of the bin dummies. It includes up to order six polynomials, and the
findings are corroborated by the Akaike Information criterion. Five different samples are
considered: a sample where all the available data are included12 and samples where the
analysis drops 10, 25, 50, or 75 percent of the X at the tails on either side of the threshold,
respectively.

The tests provide clear guidance on the order of the polynomial of X to include in the
regressions. A linear first-stage regression, equation (2), fits the data best, as is clear from
figures 10a and 10b, with no additional benefit to higher-order polynomials. Indeed, a zero-
order polynomial fits the data best above the threshold. In the outcome regression, equation
(1), a first-order polynomial provides the best fit, except when 75 percent of the X are
dropped in which case there is a marginal improvement with a second-order polynomial.
The main problem with higher-order polynomials is that they ‘over fit’ the data. This results
in systematically very large treatment effect estimates, frequently above 1. Following the
recommendation of Imbens and Lemieux (2008), the same order polynomial as in the first-
and second-stage regressions are included as well as either side of the threshold. This also
has the advantage that standard errors are easier to calculate.

It is standard practice in RD designs to use heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors to
account for the different number of observations for each X. In the case of a discrete
assignment variable, Lee and Card (2008) recommend using cluster-consistent (clustering

12   One percent of the observations at the extremes of either side of the threshold are dropped.

                                                        43
on the individual values of X) standard errors to correct for measurement error. However,
the cluster-consistent standard errors obtained are practically always smaller than the
heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors and consequently, only the robust standard
errors are reported.

           4.3. Fuzzy Regression Discontinuity Results

The two-stage least square results are presented in table 8. Results are shown without
additional covariates and with a full set of covariates13 and for the five different samples of
X (where X that are far from the threshold are excluded). The first stage is highly significant
in every specification though the first-stage F-statistic naturally decreases as the sample size
decreases. While the estimated treatment effect is positive in every specification, it is never
statistically significant. Including second-order polynomials of X leaves the point estimates
nearly unchanged though they remain statistically insignificant (not presented here).

        Table 8: Impact of REP Approval on Return Probability, Full Sample, Two Stage
                                   Least Square Estimates

                               Full Sample    90% Sample       75% Sample       50% Sample      25% Sample
                                                               No Covariates

     REP Approval                  0.089          0.107           0.123             0.206             0.345

                                   (0.096)       (0.125)         (0.161)            (0.231)           (0.360)

     First-stage F-statistic        115            65               40                19                8



                                                           Full Set of Covariates

     REP Approval                  0.091          0.145           0.152             0.225             0.353

                                   (0.102)       (0.132)         (0.167)            (0.246)           (0.416)

     First-stage F-statistic        118            68               43                20                8

     Observations                   1656          1487             1231              813               412
Source: REP administrative data.

The key source of heterogeneity among applicants, as discussed in section 3.3, is whether
they have an employment offer in Malaysia before applying to the REP. It is worth
emphasizing that the REP benefits can be claimed only if the applicants receives a job offer
in a related field and area of expertise within two years of being approved by TalentCorp and
they return to Malaysia. The data suggests that the chances of finding an attractive job offer
are around 75 percent for those approved (see section 3.3), resulting in correspondingly


13The covariates are income while abroad, duration in the current job, age, a dummy for an existing
employment offer, marital status, female, year, and education and industry fixed effects.

                                                     44
smaller expected impact of the REP on the return probability. Furthermore, those with an
existing job offer tend to return to Malaysia far more quickly after approval than those
without such an offer. The considerable lag between approval and the return decision for
applicants without an existing job offer further dilutes the impact of the REP.

Table 9 presents the estimated treatment effects for those with an existing employment offer
in Malaysia. Results without additional covariates and with a full set of covariates are
shown14 and for the five different samples of X. The first stage is highly significant in every
specification. The estimated causal impact of the program on the return probability is large
and statistically significant (except for the smallest sample). The point estimates increase as
the sample size reduces, suggesting that the return migration decision of applicants close to
the threshold is more sensitive to whether they are approved. The inclusion of a large set of
covariates does not substantially affect the estimates; it does reduce the variability of the
estimates as the sample size decreases.

     Table 9: Impact of REP Approval on Return Probability, Sample of Applicants with
                         Job Offer, 2 Stage Least Square Estimates
                                 Full Sample     90% Sample        75% Sample       50% Sample        25% Sample

                                                                  No Covariates

     REP Approval                  0.400**          0.527**          0.596**            0.702*              0.797

                                   (0.163)          (0.210)          (0.272)            (0.364)         (0.633)

     First-stage F-statistic         36               25                17                11                 5

                                                               Full Set of Covariates

     REP Approval                 0.474***          0.560**          0.565**            0.631**             0.663

                                   (0.182)          (0.226)          (0.264)            (0.310)         (0.440)

     First-stage F-statistic         31               24                19                13                 9

     Observations                    322              280              216               137                 70
Source: REP administrative data.
Note: *, **, and *** indicate statistically different from control mean at the 10, 5 and 1 percent levels
respectively.

The point estimates suggest that approval to the REP increases the probability of
returning to Malaysia by 40 to 70 percent for those individuals who have an existing
employment offer in Malaysia. This is clearly a huge impact though applicable to only 19
percent of the REP applicants. Recall that the unconditional return probability of approved
applicants in this group is 17 percent higher than those not approved (see table 5).



14The covariates are income abroad, duration in the current job, age, a dummy for the marital status, female,
year, and education and industry fixed effects.

                                                        45
Larger Instrumental Variable (IV) estimates suggest that there is a negative correlation
between the approval and return probabilities. This is consistent with the idea that
individuals with low acceptance probabilities only apply if they have a high probability of
returning to Malaysia (for reasons other than the REP).

The other groups for whom we find a statistically significant treatment effect are
female applicants who are either single or married to a foreign spouse. 15 Female and
male applicants return under considerably different circumstances, which may explain why
the program is more salient for women. First, the spouses of 70 percent of female applicants
are employed while the same is true for only 34 percent of male applicants. Hence, the fact
that the REP provides a spouse with permanent residency status and hence the ability to
work is likely more important for female applicants. Second, women on average experience
wage losses on returning to Malaysia, unlike men, which may make the financial incentives
inherent in acceptance to the REP more important for women.

Table 10 presents the estimated treatment effects for female applicants without a Malaysian
spouse. As before, results without additional covariates and with a full set of covariates are
shown and for the five different samples of X. The first stage is highly significant in every
specification. The estimated causal impact of the program on the return probability is large
and statistically significant (except for the smallest two sample). The point estimates
increase as the sample size reduces, suggesting that the return migration decision of
applicants close to the threshold is more sensitive to whether they are approved. The
inclusion of a large set of covariates does not substantially affect the estimates; it does reduce
the variability of the estimates as the sample size decreases. The point estimates suggest that
approval to the REP increases the probability of returning to Malaysia by over 40 percentage
points for this sample.
     Table 10: Impact of REP Approval on Return Probability, Sample of Women Without
                             Malaysian Spouse, 2SLS Estimates

                                 Full Sample      90% Sample        75% Sample       50% Sample          25% Sample

                                                                   No Covariates
     REP Approval                  0.427**          0.596**          0.624**             0.524             1.086
                                   (0.195)           (0.275)          (0.325)           (0.453)            (1.040)
     First-Stage F-Statistic          43                23               16               8.2                2.0
                                                             Full Set of Covariates
     REP Approval                  0.516**          0.668***        0.662**          0.534                  1.286
                                   (0.215)          (0.257)         (0.294)         (0.416)                (1.280)
     First-Stage F-Statistic          31               22              16             6.9                    1.5



  Observations                        248              220              189               122                64
Note: *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent significance levels respectively .


15The point estimates of the treatment effect for these two groups are very similar, but separately are not
statistically significant. Thus we present results were we pool the two groups. Note that 54 and 72 percent of
female and male applicants respectively are married.

                                                         46
       4.4. REP Applicants Migration Experience and Return Motivation

The REP works, it increases the probability that applicants return to Malaysia. What is
not clear from the results so far is why it works. The survey conducted among REP applicants
sheds some light on this question, as well as providing an overview of their overall migration
experience and motivations.

Most REP applicants originally migrated abroad for work–related reasons, see Figure
14a below (categories are not mutually exclusive). Initially they did not intend to return to
Malaysia soon, see Figure 14b. However, only one third were considering an indefinite length
of stay abroad.

                Figure 14a: REP Applicants Reasons for Originally Moving Abroad




                            72%



          24%
                                                                19%
                                              9%                                  11%
  EDUCATION/TRAINING      CAREER       FAMILY RELOCATION      LIFESTYLE        CHILDRENS'
                       OPPORTUNITIES                                           EDUCATION

Source: World Bank




                                             47
             Figure 14b: REP Applicants Original Expectation of Duration Abroad
                                                      < 1 year
                                                                 1-3 years
                                                         1%
                                                                   15%

                       Did not know
                            33%




                                                                       3-10 years
                                                                          39%
                               >10 years
                                 12%


Source: World Bank

While not intending to return soon, REP applicants remained heavily engaged with
Malaysia even while abroad. Nearly 60 percent become members of a Malaysian diaspora
organization, and overwhelmingly returned to Malaysia at least once a year (see Figure 15a).
The links to Malaysia go far beyond visits (see Figure 15b). Nearly half continued to own
property in Malaysia, a little less than 40 percent retained investments in Malaysia and
continued to foster a professional network there. Only 25 percent had no significant links
beyond family.

                              Figure 15a: Trips to Malaysia Per Year (in %)

                                  Infrequently, 9.7




                     5 or more, 23.6
                                                                             1-2 Times, 44.9




                                 3-4 Times, 21.8

Source: World Bank


                                                       48
                                          Figure 15b: Links to Malaysia

                None

             Property

 Professional Network

         Consultancy

     Alumni Activities

          Investment

   Board Membership

         Remittances

                         0%   5%    10%     15%    20%    25%    30%     35%     40%         45%     50%

Source: World Bank

The eventual interest in a return to Malaysia was primarily precipitated by a combination of
family (85 percent) and professional (40 percent) reasons, see Figure 16a. The REP’s
influence on the eventual return decision was, according to returnees, at leas t “moderate”
for 75 percent of return migrants.

                              Figure 16a: Reason for REP Applicants to Return
                         0%   10%   20%      30%    40%    50%     60%     70%         80%         90%

 Professional Reasons

              Family

  Social Environment

                Food

             Climate

           Language

               Other


Source: World Bank




                                                    49
          Figure 16b: How Important was REP Approval for Return Decision? (in %)


     VERY HIGH


         HIGH


    MODERATE


          LOW


         NONE


                 0            5            10           15         20   25         30       35

       Source: World Bank

Among the incentives offered by the REP, the income tax incentive was considered by
over half of respondents as the important incentive impacting their return decision.
One-quarter cite the tax exemption on automotive vehicles, and a little less than 20 percent
cite the permanent residence status for a spouse / children as the incentives that were most
important to their decision.

                     Figure 17: Most Important Incentive for Decision to Return (%)
                                                Tax exemption on
                                                 belongings, 1.4

                     Tax Exemption on
                      CKDs Cars, 28.8




                                                                        15% Optional Flat
                                                                         Tax Rate, 51.2



                          Eligibility of
                          Permanent
                        Residence Status
                          of Spouse/
                         Children, 18.7

             Source: World Bank




                                                        50
     5. The Fiscal Impact of REP
The REP has a large, positive impact on the probability of an approved applicant
returning to Malaysia (at least for the subset of applicants with an existing offer of
employment in Malaysia). However, that does not necessarily mean that the program has a
positive fiscal impact since it entails considerable costs.

There are four distinct sources of costs that rise from the REP. First, there are the costs of
administering the program. Second, Malaysians who would have returned even in the
absence of the REP but still take advantage of the flat tax offered by the REP for five years.
Third, there is the tax exemption on cars. Fourth, there are additional government
expenditures as the REP attracts additional people back to Malaysia.

The fiscal benefits of the REP arise from the fact that some additional Malaysians return
to Malaysia due to the REP and pay income and consumption taxes. Moreover, the goal
of the REP is to attract individuals who can help Malaysia become a high-income nation by
2020 and so is nearly entirely focused on possible externalities from the program. The REP
attracts very high-skilled individuals, who likely also create jobs and raise the productivity
of other workers. This section only provides estimates of the direct tax impact of return
migrants. It does not attempt to assess the additional (external) benefits that may accrue as
high-skilled individuals return to Malaysia.

Income and Consumption Taxes

To construct the estimates, it is assumed that individuals work until they are 64 years of age
and that the remigration rate of returnees (from Malaysia) is 1 percent per annum.16 Further,
the assumption is made that the government discount rate is equal to the rate of economic
growth, so that the government is assumed to have no pure time preference. In practice, the
nominal of return on long-term Malaysian government bonds over the past several years has
been around 4.5 percent, significantly lower than the expected growth rate.

For the analysis of the fiscal impact of the REP, the analysis is limited to the sample of
applicants who have returned to Malaysia and for whom a wage is observed. Their initial
wage on arriving in Malaysia is observed in the administrative data. Their age-specific wage
growth is imputed using a comparable sample of individuals from the Malaysian Labor Force
Survey (LFS) (2007–10).17 Finally, the top and bottom 1 percent of wage earners are
excluded from the analysis so as to reduce measurement error in the tails of the income
distribution. The most current income tax schedule is used to calculate the fiscal impact. The
analysis assumes that 70 percent of people’s income is consumed (the savings rate for high


16 The remigration rate is found with the help of a survey conducted in 2014 in which REP applicants are
asked whether they are currently living in Malaysia. Matching the survey to the TalentCorp administrative
data allows estimation of a remigration rate.
17 The sample from the Malaysian LFS includes only individuals between the ages of 25 and 64 years, with an

educational qualification beyond high school completion, and employment in the same 3-digit occupations as
the REP applicants. The (log) wage regression includes a fourth-order polynomial in age (minus 25), a female
dummy, and education, industry, and year fixed effects.

                                                     51
income earners in Malaysia is below 30 percent) and around two-thirds of consumption is
taxed at the 6 percent sales tax.

Car Taxes

Malaysia has very high tax rates on the import and sale of motor vehicles (around 120
percent for imported vehicles and 90 percent for completely knocked down vehicles). The
average tax break provided by REP for these cars areconsiderable: on average estimated for
a CBU about RM 375,000 and for a CKD vehicle RM 73,000. Approved applicants used to be
able to take advantage of the tax break for two CKD cars (pre-April 2014). Since April 2014
they only receive tax break for one CKD/ Complete Built-Up CBU) car limited to RM150, 000
in taxes and duties. In practice, the average applicant used to take advantage of the tax break
for somewhat more than one car. These numbers do not, however, reflect the foregone taxes
to the Malaysian government.

To assess the foregone taxes from the tax exemption on vehicles one needs an estimate of
the type of car someone who is approved by REP and returns would have bought in the
absence of the tax exemption. In the absence of the tax exemption these return migrants
would have likely bought considerably less expensive cars and paid accordingly lower taxes.
In the absence of estimates of the elasticity of demand across types of cars we assume that
the total expenditure of return migrants on cars would have been the same with and without
the program (i.e. unit elastic demand). Moreover, the foregone taxes only apply to those
people who would have returned to Malaysia in the absence of the REP.

Other Costs

The REP generates two additional costs: administrative costs and government expenditures
due to those additional people who return on account of REP. A total cost of around RM
10,000 per month is estimated for the administrative cost to undertake the processing of
REP applications.18 To estimate the public expenditures on goods and services that arise due
to the returning expatriates we include all government expenditures except for defense,
education, debt service charges and transfer payments. The remaining public expenditures
amounted to around RM 2,375 in 2011. We assume that these public expenditures continue
to arise for each returnee until age 85 (provided that they do not re-migrate).

Cost-Benefit Analysis

The fiscal impact of REP depends on how many additional Malaysians return to Malaysia on
account of the program. Results based on the OLS estimate with a full set of covariates are
presented in table 4, which attributes a 12 percentage points increased return probability to
those approved by the REP. Results based on the IV estimates are presented in tables 6 and
7. The treatment effect for the two groups that are impacted by REP (those with a pre-
existing job offer women without Malaysian spouses) is on average 41 percentage points
(the estimate with the full sample and without covariates); for the other applicants a zero

18These costs do not include the overhead that accrues from the operations of TalentCorp, nor does it include
the information campaigns to disseminate knowledge about the program.

                                                     52
treatment effect is assumed. Findings on the fiscal impact of the REP are presented in table
11.

              Table 11: Fiscal Costs and Benefits of REP per Applicant (in
                                          RM)
                                                            Scenarios
                                             OLS         Two-Stage Least Squares


            Additional Taxes Due to REP (in present discounted value)


            Income Taxes                     82,958                          96,369


            Consumption Taxes                11,484                          13,340


            Total Benefits                   94,441                         109,709


            Additional Costs Due to REP (in present discounted value)


            Processing Costs


            Foregone Income Taxes            35,352                          34,573


            Foregone Vehicle Taxes           36,111                          35,315


            Public Expenditures              10,729                          12,831


            Total Costs                      82,193                          82,718


            Net Benefits                     12,249                          26,991

           Source: Author’s calculations

All costs and benefits are the present discounted value in current Malaysian ringgit. The
analysis suggests that in terms of direct fiscal costs and benefits the REP pays for itself. The
net fiscal benefits, based on the 2SLS estimates, are about RM 27,000 ($9,000) per applicant.
Recall that these are the net present discounted value of benefits, accruing on average
around 30 years, and hence this is not a lot of money. However, the purpose of the REP is
to attract high-skilled Malaysians in the hope that this will generate external benefits
for Malaysia. Hence, the fact that even in the absence of imputing such benefits that
the program seems to pay for itself is encouraging.




                                               53
   6. Concluding Remarks and Recommendations
The REP successfully seeks to encourage the return migration of highly skilled
Malaysians by offering transitionary benefit. Using a fuzzy RD design it has been found
that acceptance to the program increases applicants’ probability of return between 40 and
70 percent for those with an existing employment offer in Malaysia. However, there is no
identifiable impact on applicants without an existing job offer. Potentials recommendations
to be considered are as follows: Connecting Malaysians Abroad to Job Opportunities

The analysis shows that Malaysians abroad are highly educated, professionally
opportunistic and well networked individuals who react to career opportunities.
Based on the findings from the survey as well, applicants with an existing job offer are
considerably more likely to return to Malaysia than those without an offer. If TalentCorp
wants to ramp up the program and increase the number of successful returnees, it may want
to consider focusing its efforts toward helping to ease any job-related information barriers
that prevent Malaysian talent abroad from having job offers and facilitate the interaction
between recruiters and diaspora. Some steps in this direction have already been taken by
introducing a new an online job board called the Global Malaysians in collaboration with The
Star newspaper (myStarjob.com). As part of this initiative, employers in Malaysia have the
opportunity to advertise jobs targeted to Malaysian abroad in an online jobs board
(http://mystarjob.com/globalmalaysians). In addition, as part of the new application
process, REP applicants now can agree to share their CVs with prospective employers, hence,
further increasing their likelihood to find employment opportunities back home. A further
measure that could increase the effectiveness of the program is the introduction of a fast-
tracked application process for diaspora members who already have a job offer in Malaysia.
Allowing employers to drive the application process would be an important measure to
better (and more quickly) respond to the market needs of the private sector.

The Government should continue to review and revise accordingly the eligibility and
approval criteria of the REP to adapt to the changing needs of the labor market and to
better target talent with skillsets in shortage in Malaysia. For example, in April 2014, the
eligibility criteria for REP was revised to take into account the applicant’s work experience
in Malaysia prior to employment abroad, current salary abroad and the relevance of his/her
expertise to the priority economic sector or area of critical skill gap. Such policy refinement
is important, as the programs should continuously evolve together with the changing
demands of the market and the economy.

Developing a system for Critical Skills Shortage Monitoring

In line with efforts aimed at providing more labor market information to Malaysian talent
abroad, an important step would also be the development of a transparent and easily
accessible system to monitor skill gaps in the country. The existence of this platform
would inform diaspora members of the skills in shortage in Malaysia, thereby, giving them
the opportunity to assess whether they could fill any of those shortages. Such a platform has
proven to be successful when it is the result of an evidence-based, transparent and
participatory process. A similar approach has been adopted by the UK’s Migration Adv isory

                                              54
Committee (MAC), which combines a data-driven top down analysis with bottom-up regular
consultations. A similar mechanism could be introduced in Malaysia, leveraging TalentCorp’s
vast industry network (bottom up) and ILMIA’s labor market data collection efforts (top-
down). Initial steps in this direction have been taken by the Government of Malaysia with
the establishment of a Critical Skills Committee announced in the 11th Malaysia Plan
Document.

Meeting broader family needs

International experience also shows that family needs are important factors affecting
workers’ location decision. Ensuring that spouses can have the right to work and children
have access to quality schooling has been one of the key factors determining the success of
countries such as Singapore and Canada in attracting talent. While applicants accepted by
the REP are entitled to permanent residence status for their spouses and children,
continuous efforts are needed to ensure that these incentives ensure a full integration of
returnees’ families into Malaysian society.

On the fiscal side, despite the fact that the REP affects only a subset of applicants, the costs
of the program are clearly positive. Going forward, and aligned with the previous
recommendation, TalentCorp may want to focus its resources on connecting Malaysian
diaspora to job offers to further enhance the efficacy of the REP.

Engaging all REP applicants

Finally, it would be extremely important for TalentCorp to stay engaged with applicants
not approved by the REP. While momentarily non-eligible for the program, non-approved
applicants could be eligible for the REP in the future and should be provided labor market
related information to increase their future chances of acceptance. At the same time, in order
to regularly evaluate the program and improves its effectiveness, TalentCorp should also
start systematically collecting data on the return and employment status of applicants not
approved by the REP. The evaluation conducted by the World Bank was possible because
follow-up surveys were conducted by the World Bank team. However, going forward it
would be important that TalentCorp creates regular channels to systematically collect basic
labor market information about non-approved applicants.




                                              55
   II.     Assessing the Effectiveness of the RP-T

   1. Introduction
The labor market for highly educated/skilled professionals is more globalized, with
regard to both supply and demand. Technology advancement and ease of transport and
communication have increased the frequency of movement and facilitated the targeting of
global skills. Apart from filling skill gaps and shortages, foreign talent (and skilled diaspora)
brings other benefits. They invest, innovate, share expertise, transfer knowledge, create
social capital, increase sectoral standards, and help attract foreign direct investment.

Developed countries have long benefited from attracting foreign talent and creating
incentives for their skilled diaspora to return. Developing countries have begun to
liberalize their immigration and labor market policies to facilitate movement of
skilled workers. Many countries see it as a way to stay competitive in the global economic
environment. Recognizing these trends, Malaysia, through TalentCorp, seeks to harness the
international pool of global talent by facilitating their stay.

TalentCorp introduced the RP-T as a special program to attract and retain foreign talent to
work in Malaysia. The RP-T program is the focus of this section of the report. More
specifically, this section seeks to answer whether experts rewarded by the RP-T program
actually help fill skills gaps in the Malaysian labor market. What can TalentCorp do to make
sure that the attracted foreign talent benefits the local labor market?

   2. The RP-T Program
The RP-T was introduced in 2011 to retain top expatriate talent in the country. The
program is offered to highly qualified expatriates seeking to live and work in Malaysia on a
long-term basis. As shown in figure 14, the program offers a range of benefits. Benefits
include a ten-year pass to live and work in the country, flexibility to move from one employer
to another, eligibility for spouses to work in Malaysia (regardless of their talent status),
eligibility for under-age children to study in Malaysia, and a five-year resident pass for
dependents (children and in-laws).

As shown in figure 18, eligibility for the RP-T program is quite strict; the applicants
must be deemed an expert in their field, able to drive results in their field, and possess a
postgraduate degree (PhD, MA, or diploma) from a recognized university or professional
institute. They should have three years of work experience in Malaysia and at least five years
of work experience in total. They must be residing legally in the country, working under an
employment pass (which is a short-term permit unlike the resident pass which offers a ten-
year legal stay). Their gross taxable income cannot be less than RM 144,000 per year
(equivalent to RM 12,000 per month). Also, they must have filed taxes in Malaysia for at least
two years.




                                               56
                 Figure 18: Benefits of the RP-T Program and Eligibility Criteria




      Source: TalentCorp.

   3. Data and Description of the Applicants
As in the analysis of the REP, the administrative data on the applicants to the RP-T program
was provided by TalentCorp. The data contain applicant characteristics that are relevant to
the approval process as well as the application status. Available personal information on
applicants includes their work experience, education, industry, profession, job title, marital
status, nationality and nationality of spouse, number of children, place of work, and salary in
Malaysia.

The dataset contains information on nearly 2,000 applicants; the data were collected
throughout the life of the program (since 2011) and TalentCorp implemented a new survey
which asked beneficiaries to report their satisfaction with working in Malaysia and their
satisfaction with the TalentCorp program.

       3.1 Description of Applicants

Interestingly, or worryingly, virtually all applicants to the program are male (figure 19,
left panel). Even though the talent pool in Malaysia (figure 19, right panel), defined as
Malaysians with similar characteristics and employed, is more male (66 percent) than female
(34 percent), the bias among RP-T applicants is significantly more pronounced. In other
words, the gender of the applicant pool to the program is quite far from the gender

                                              57
breakdown of the active talent pool in the Malaysian labor market. Instead, the RP-T
applicant pool contributes to further biasing the pool in favor of males. Another interesting
feature of the applicant pool is that 77 percent are married. This feature may be related to
the experience requirements for eligibility to the program, which creates biases by age, thus
favoring relatively older people who are more likely to be married.

           Figure 19: Gender Breakdown of Applicants and the Global Talent Pool




         Source: RP-T administrative survey and LFS subsample of comparable people.


It is a requirement that applicants must have at least a post-secondary qualification from a
recognized university or professional institution; this is clearly reflected in the applicant
pool. Over half of all applicants have a first university degree, diploma, or professional
certificate. Also, a substantial share (38 percent) have a postgraduate degree (figure 20).

                         Figure 20: Education Breakdown of Applicants




                     Source: RP-T administrative survey




                                                 58
With regard to the nationalities of the applicants, there is an interesting north to south
pattern observed (figure 21, left panel). Over 41 percent of applicants come from western
OECD countries in Europe, the United States, and Australia. This is a very important and
relatively new trend observed in migration literature that seeks to understand the
motivations and trends of global talent mobility. Not surprisingly, foreign applicants apply
to work mostly in large metropolitan areas such as Kuala Lumpur, Selangor, Johor, and
Penang (figure 21, right panel). However, a non-negligible share apply to work in other parts
of peninsular Malaysia but less than two percent seek to work in Sabah or Sarawak (Borneo).

           Figure 21: Geographic Matters: Country of Origin and Locality Preference




Source: RP-T administrative survey



Applicants to the program have on average twenty years of total work experience
(figure 22, left panel); there is a clear skew to the right, indicating that a large number of
applicants have well over 30 years of experience. The mean number of years for approved
applicants is 23 years. One of the eligibility requirements is to have at least three years of
work experience in Malaysia; the right panel of figure 18 shows that applicants satisfy that
requirement easily, with 7.5 years of professional experience on average. This indicates that
most experience was acquired abroad, which is aligned with TalentCorp’s goal to bring skills
and innovation to Malaysia.




                                             59
                          Figure 22: Work Experience Total and in Malaysia




Source: RP-T administrative survey.

The largest share of RP-T applicants are in business services, OGE, manufacturing, and
other sectors. These are all (NKEA) sectors that Malaysia seeks to promote in its economy
(figure 23, left panel). Half of all applicants are employed in companies that are foreign
owned. An interesting group is the applicant pool that work in government-owned
companies; these are foreign experts working not only in health care and education
(academia) but also in state-owned enterprises (figure 23, right panel).

                               Figure 23: Economic Sector and Firm Type




Source: RP-T administrative survey.

The sectors and occupations of foreign applicants fall very well within the sectors and
occupations facing skill shortages in Malaysia. The list was derived using information
contained in the workforce dashboard; more specifically, the list is based on a combination
of indicators such as level of skill required in an occupation and changes in wage premiums
observed for that occupation in the last four years. The annex shows a detailed list of the

                                              60
specific occupations identified. Among the high-skilled categories, engineers in the OGE
sector, managers in various service sectors, medical and science professionals, and
professors in the higher-education field emerge at the top of the list. Among the medium-
skilled certificate or diploma holders, skilled technicians in the manufacturing sector emerge
clearly at the top of the skill deficit list.

Lastly, in terms of compensation, applicant salaries range widely (figure 24). The monthly
average is RM 27,500 or RM 330,000 per year; this estimate includes a subset of very high-
earning expatriates. The median is RM 17,500 or RM 210,000 per year, still well above the
required RM 144,000 per year. The RP-T applicant salaries are not only well above
average salaries earned by comparably talented Malaysians but also well above
recently arrived talented diaspora. Earnings plays a central role in subsequent analysis in
this assessment.

                             Figure 24: Monthly Wages of RP-T Applicants




              Source: RP-T administrative survey.

   4. Assessment of the Approval Process
   4.1 Formal Point System, in Theory

The ‘current’ point system used by TalentCorp to decide on whether an applicant to
the RP-T program is accepted, involves a set of points assigned to broad categories,
aligned with the eligibility criteria.

Points are distinctly assigned to each level within the broad categories, to reflect a preference
for more experience, especially in Malaysia, and higher education levels. Reflecting
Malaysia’s talent needs, a technical expert has significantly more points in that category as a
middle manager. Similarly, an applicant with a PhD has significantly more points in the
education category as an applicant with a diploma; therefore, for an applicant with a diploma


                                                    61
to be accepted he or she will need to score a lot of points in other categories to overcome the
deficit.

The point system assigns more points for applicants in economic sectors that face
greater difficulty finding skilled workers locally. NKEA sectors largely fall within the
sectors listed in the Economic Transformation Program (ETP). Those sectors and
biotechnology, aeronautics, and ICT are formally favored. So, firms in ETP sectors (or NKEAs)
and biotechnology or ICT can expect that the program will favor them because it recognizes
that the skills required by them are not likely to be in high supply locally. The same is true
for multinational firms; in the formal point system they are favored, likely because they have
stricter skill requirements.

Salary also plays a role; with higher income translating to higher points. This enables
for example experienced vocational talent with high income to compensate for earning lower
points under the education category. In contrast, university professors are among those that
get low points in the salary category but are able to compensate with high points based on
having a Phd in the expertise and education category.

Similar to the REP, the scoring system also includes an additional subjective category which
allow the selection committee and secretariat in the decision process to take into account
qualitative information that is difficult to observe through a curriculum vitae (CV).

       4.2 Determinants of Approval

As shown earlier, TalentCorp has clearly stated criteria for eligibility to the program but it is
only known to the selection committee, not the applicants. As mentioned, the approval
process takes a comprehensive approach, and the decision-making body is able to make
some exceptions around a certain cutoff point, based on exceptional cases. Using an LPM
(commonly used econometric technique), this section analyzes what characteristics best
determine acceptance into the program. The model used is as follows:

                                   Approvedi  0  1 X i   i

where Xi is a vector that includes various criteria such as salary, work experience, education,
duration working in Malaysia, and sector of designation. It also includes other individual and
work-related characteristics such as gender of the applicant, marital status, nationality, and
firm type.

Results from the linear probability model show that a 100 percent increase in salary
increases the probability of being approved by 10 percentage points. Using three years of
experience in Malaysia as a benchmark (which is the minimum required for eligibility to the
program) estimates show that for every extra (one) year of additional experience, the
probability of acceptance rises by 4 percentage points. For every five years of additional
experience, the probability rises by 13 percentage points; thereafter, the probability of
acceptance starts falling slowly again.


                                                62
As shown in figure 25, applicants from East Asian countries, western countries, and South
Asian countries have a significantly higher probability of being approved than applicants
from other regions; about 20, 17, and 12 percentage points higher, respectively. On the other
hand, there is no difference in probability between applicants from Southeast Asia.
Applicants working in foreign-owned firms and government companies have a higher
probability of approval than applicants working in joint ventures (around 6 percentage
points). On the other hand, there is no significant difference in approval rates between
applicants from nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) and local firms, and joint ventures.

                                Figure 25: Increase in Probability of Approval




        Source: RP-T administration survey.
        Note: Excluded categories are other countries, joint venture, and middle management.

Compared to all the potential expertise designations, technical experts have a higher
probability (6 percentage points) than middle managers to get approved; there is no
difference between middle managers, top managers, and junior management. This highlights
the importance placed on technical expertise that is clearly defined and sector specific. The
importance of technical expertise is also highlighted in the point system that TalentCorp
uses; the next section elaborates on this topic.

Compared to applicants working in business services, applicants employed in financial
services, electrical and electronics (E&E), communications content and infrastructure (CCI),
manufacturing, and related areas have a higher probability of approval. Education has the
highest probability of all economic sectors; about 18 percentage points higher than business
services. There is no difference between business services and OGE, wholesale and retail,
health care and tourism.

Personal characteristics about the applicant such as gender, marital status, education level,
and time and experience in Malaysia are not important determinants of approval.




                                                       63
   4.3 Point System in Practice

The probability analysis presented in the previous section reveals that the formal
point system is not necessarily applied in a straightforward manner. The data analysis
shows that some factors actually carry more weight than others. For instance, the weight for
education in holding a masters of Phd is considerably less when compared to factors such as
years of experience, economic sector, or earnings.

In fact, earnings and years of total experience, and to some extent the sector, carry the
largest weight in the selection process. With regard to the favored economic sectors, the
education sector carries the highest weight among all considered; the beneficiaries are
professors with specific expertise who are likely to be hired to teach at local universities. A
very experienced individual earning a high salary and minimally fulfilling all other criteria is
highly likely to qualify for the program. In fact, the decision committee is likely to assign most
of its leeway points to one of these two factors: salary and experience. Or in the case of
university professors, the committee is likely to push for acceptance of renowned experts as
long as they have many years of experience (and reputation) in their field.

The key lessons to emerge from this analysis are that despite a seemingly rigid point
system, the decision-making body is able to work within the given criteria to respond
to the skill needs of the country. Also, it is able to adapt its assignment of points within the
given system as needs change.

On the other hand, it is not clear what the country gains from imposing criteria that
carry limited weight. Some examples are type of firm, education level of the applicant, and
years of work experience in Malaysia. Perhaps these criteria play a signaling or political role;
however, it is clear that they carry minimal weight in the decision-making process.

The latter part of section 5 presents a potential adjustment to the point system that takes
these and other lessons into account to make the selection process more efficient.

   5. Assessment of Quality of Applicants: Talented or Not?
In a competitive labor market, employers seek to attract and retain talented
professionals who can offer high levels of productivity and contribute to their
profitability. Even in a global labor market, specialized talent is scarce, especially in some
sectors where the supply of talented people is low and the portability of that talent across
firms (and borders) is possible.

As expected, there is large heterogeneity in how talent is rewarded. In fact, wages and
wage premiums observed across economic sectors vary widely. Apart from scarcity of
specialized talent, other reasons for such large variability in wage premiums observed is the
variability in the content of a person’s skill set and the ability to scale the gains from one
individual to the whole firm. For instance, a technical expert working in research and
development in a lab or a computer programmer is able to create a product or innovation
with a lot of positive spillovers on the entire firm (and sector). The evidence shows that the
more skill biased the industry is the more a company’s productivity relies on owning the

                                               64
necessary set of skills (Autor et al. 2003). In sectors intensive in information technology,
having the required skills is necessary to be competitive. Without such specialized skills the
industry cannot survive. The biotechnology, CCI (or ICT), E&E, and health care industries in
Malaysia are good examples.

The role of talent in how compensation and contracting are structured is well documented
in business and internal organization literature. However, measuring talent is not
straightforward because the concept is partly subjective. The previous section of this report
provides evidence of this point in the RP-T applicant selection process. The empirical
estimation of talent and its relation to wages across different economic sectors is not
commonly studied because of the challenge associated with precisely observing talent. This
section empirically investigates the source of the wage premium that RP-T program
beneficiaries experience compared to local talent. The assumption is that talented people are
able to command higher wages, thus, making the wage returns of talent relatively high.

       5.1 Measuring Talent

As in all countries, the heterogeneity in the wage distribution observed across economic
sectors and talent groups likely comes from differences in wage sensitivity for talent that
employers have in Malaysia and everywhere else. A simple comparison of wages of
comparable skilled Malaysians and RP-T beneficiaries shows that wages (not total
compensation) differ dramatically, with Malaysians earning significantly lower. The
REP beneficiaries are also compared to selected RP-T beneficiaries and locals.

An artificial database, constructed for this exercise, consists of approved RP-T applicants;
approved REP applicants who returned to Malaysia (and whose wages are observed); and a
comparable sample of Malaysian professionals from the LFS. Only Malaysians in the LFS who
are employed in the same (5 digit) occupational and educational categories are kept in the
analysis. The breakdown of the samples in this database is presented in figure 26. As
expected, the largest share is the local skilled pool in the relevant occupational categories
and sectors. (There is also a small number of comparable skilled foreign workers in the
Malaysian labor force.) RP-T applicants account for 16 percent of the total pool while
returning diaspora under the REP account for 4 percent.




                                             65
                      Figure 26: Shares in the Analysis of Comparably Skilled Groups
                            REP                                            Greater KL     Oil, Gas & Energy
                            4%                                               0.05%              6.65%       Financial Services
                                                                                                                 6.59%
                                                                                                                         Wholesale and

                      RPT                                                                                          Palm Oil Retail
                      16%
                                                                           Other                                    0.42% 4.54%
                                                        Aeronautics       24.65%
        LFS-foreign                                       0.34%                                                  Tourism
            1%                                          Biotech                                                   3.12%
                                                         0.17%                                                   Electrical &
                                                                                                                 Electronics
                                                            Healthcare                                              7.00%
                                  LFS-malaysian               5.30%
                                      79%                   Agriculture                                      Business Services
                                                              1.42%           Education                           9.40%
                                                                               26.18%                     Communication
                                                                                                             Content &
                                                                                                           Infrastructure
                                                                                                               4.18%

       Source: World Bank calculations using LFS, RP-T, and REP administrative data.

To compare wages more rigorously, the analysis in this section relies on a widely used tool
in education and economics literature, the Mincer regression, which helps to explain
earnings as a function of education, experience, and other characteristics. This technique is
measured as follows:

                                           log( wagei )    X i   i

where X includes different sets of variables depending on the regression. In the first scenario,
it includes gender and marital status; in the second scenario, it includes gender, marital
status, and education level; and in the final scenario, it includes gender, marital status,
education levels, and years of work experience. These distinct sets of Xs are regressed on the
log of wages. Separate Mincer regressions are estimated for approved RP-T beneficiaries,
REP beneficiaries, comparable expatriates in the LFS, and comparable Malaysians in the LFS.

Results reveal that expatriates in the LFS (not RP-T beneficiaries) get 1.2 times the wage of
a local comparable Malaysian. REP beneficiaries earn 2.3 times more, and RP-T beneficiaries
earn 4.3 times what a comparable local earns. It is clear from this analysis that employers
are willing to compensate people who have lived abroad, expatriates, or Malaysians
with foreign work experience, significantly more than locals. Also, they do so in certain
economic sectors more than other.

Figure 27 shows that in all sectors shown, RP-T and REP beneficiaries receive a wage
premium over comparable locals. The OGE sector, business services, and manufacturing
sectors offer a wage premium that is close to five times higher for RP-T beneficiaries and two
times higher for REP beneficiaries. There are no significant differences in compensation in
NKEA sectors not shown in this figure (for example, wholesale and retail, palm oil, tourism,
and agriculture).




                                                       66
                                                                                      Figure 27: Wage Differentials by Economic Sector




       Oil, Gas Electroni Business Infrastruc Educatio Healthcar (Manufac
                                                                            REP




                                                                  turing)
                                                                   Other
                                                                            RPT
                                                                            REP

                                                           e
                                                                            RPT
                                                                            REP
                                                 n


                                                                            RPT
                                   Communi

                                    Content




                                                                            REP
                                     cation



                           Services ture
                                       &




                                                                            RPT
                                                                            REP
                                                                            RPT
                Electrical




                                                                            REP
                    cs
                    &




                                                                            RPT
       & Energy




                                                                            REP
                                                                            RPT

                                                                                  0          1         2         3        4         5    6

       Source: World Bank calculations using LFS, RP-T, and REP administrative data.
       5.2 Most-rewarded Characteristics

It cannot be disregarded that the high returns for skills observed among RP-T program
beneficiaries (and REP beneficiaries) are not driven by an actual compensation for talent but
by their selection into the highest-paying jobs in high-paying industries. However, analytical
tools can help at least partially discern why these people are so well rewarded—what
characteristics make them so attractive to Malaysian employers. Also, most importantly,
whether these characteristics can be learned or emulated by locals so that they can be
similarly rewarded when they acquire them.

In this section, the analysis uses a well-known statistical technique of decomposing inter-
group differences in the mean levels of wages into those due to different observable
characteristics or endowment across groups and those due to different effects of
characteristics or coefficient of groups. This technique is known as the Blinder-Oaxaca wage
decomposition. More specifically, it identifies which portion of the wage premium that RP-T
(and REP) beneficiaries receive is due to personal endowments such as education,
experience, and other individual characteristics (for example, age, gender, marital status)
and what portion of the premium is due to an unobservable trait, which will be interpreted
as talent.

The technique is applied as follows: the analysis first takes two groups, RP-T and local
comparable Malaysians. In the equation below, Y is the log of wages and E(YRPT) and E(YLocal)
denote the expected value of the outcome variable, and X is a set of predictors such as
education level, experience, and individual characteristics. The estimation measures how


                                                                                                           67
much of the mean outcome difference is accounted for by the group difference in the
predictors.

E(YRPT)-E(YLocal)= β XRPT - β XLocalwhere Xs are evaluated at the means for the RP-T and the
locals, respectively. The gap in Y between the RP-T and locals can be thought of as being due
in part to differences in the intercept or differences in the Xs. Estimates of the difference in
the gap in mean outcomes can be obtained by substituting sample means of the Xs and
estimates of the parameters βs into the equation. The next step is to identify how much of
the gap in wages is attributable to differences in the Xs (or the explained components) rather
than differences in the βs (the unexplained component).

The results are shown in table 12. The mean prediction of the RP-T is on the left-hand side
and the mean prediction of the REP is on the right-hand side. The groups and their difference
are shown next to the first line, Group_1 (for locals) and second line, Group_2 (for the RP-Ts,
on the left side of the table and for the REPs on the right side of the table). For locals, the
mean of log wages is 8.26. The mean log wages for the RP-T is 10.15, yielding a wage gap
between locals and the RP-T of 1.89; the mean log wage for the REP is 9.35, yielding a wage
gap of 1.09.

In the lower panel of the table, the wage gap is divided into three parts. The first part reflects
the mean increase in locals’ wages if they had the same characteristics as the RP-T
beneficiaries (on the left) and the REP beneficiaries (on the right). The increase of 0.55
indicates that differences in Xs account for about one-third of the wage gap between the RP-
T beneficiaries and locals, and for the REP beneficiaries, 0.26 indicates that differences in Xs
account for one-quarter of the wage gap between the REP beneficiaries and locals. The
interaction term measures the simultaneous effect of differences in endowments and
coefficients.

The second term is the estimate of interest in this analysis. It quantifies the change in locals’
wages if the coefficient of the RP-Ts were applied to the locals’ characteristics (or locals and
REPs). This is the unobservable characteristic which accounts for the majority of the
difference between the wages of the two groups. This is the characteristic that makes those
individuals special in the eyes of employers and is interpreted as the talent factor; the results
show that the talent factor of foreign workers justifies that their wages are 4.43 times more
than comparable locals. As for the REPs, their talent factor justifies that their wages are 2.3
times more than comparable locals.

The main finding from this analysis is that only some of the observable personal
characteristics can explain the difference in wage premiums observed between locals and
individuals with foreign experience. However, the majority of the difference is derived from
factors which are not measurable from the data. Two examples of unobservable differences
are (i) international work experience, which signals that the person’s credentials are
recognized abroad and the individual is a global asset whose wages should be competitive in
the international labor market and (ii) experience living in a different culture, which signals
the person’s ability to adapt to different cultures and potentially speak a different language.
There may be other factors that employers value, but these two are obvious and relevant.

                                               68
                                Table 12: Decomposition Results
                                        Blinder-Oaxaca Decomposition

                RP-T (compared to local)                           REP (compared to local)
                              Outcome     Exponential                           Outcome   Exponential
         Group_1 (Local)        8.26                       Group_1 (Local)        8.26
          Group_2 (RPT)        10.15                        Group_2 (REP)         9.35
                Difference      1.89                              Difference      1.09
             Endowments         0.55         1.73              Endowments         0.26       1.29
       Coefficient ‘Talent’     1.49         4.43        Coefficient ‘Talent’     0.87       2.38
               Interaction     -0.15                             Interaction     -0.03
    Source: World Bank calculations using LFS, RP-T, and REP administrative data.


   5.2 A New Approval Process

One of the interests of TalentCorp is to take some of the lessons learned from this assessment
and use it to improve their program effectiveness. One potential change to the program can
be in the point system used to evaluate candidates. Given the importance of wages and
experience as a measure of talent, the new point system can be devised so that these two
factors underlay the selection process. The current system has a stated cutoff level; however,
several exceptions occur where the selection committee can approve applicants just below
the cutoff due to qualitative factors. The suggestion is to use a point system that takes into
account lessons from the analysis including factors that contributed to the rejection of
applicants throughout the life of the program (about 13 percent since the start of the
program).

If TalentCorp seeks to retain a similar rejection rate (13 percent) to the one they currently
have, the relevant cutoff using the new point system would be significantly lower. If this new
point system was used, from all applicants accepted with the existing point system, about 73
applicants would be rejected and 149 applicants would be accepted. In fact, the new point
system would accept a few more people than the existing system, but the skills of the new
pool of accepted candidates would be more aligned with the needs identified in the skill gaps
list.

As shown in table 13, with the proposed point system, fewer people with a bachelor degree
would be accepted (23 percent versus 64 percent) but more people with a master’s degree
(34 percent versus 16 percent) or technical diplomas (23 percent versus 10 percent). More
individuals in top management (31 percent versus 4 percent) and technical expert positions
would be accepted, and fewer people in middle and entry management positions would be
accepted. As for the type of firm that applicants work in, fewer applicants working in locally
owned firms would be accepted, 24 percent instead of 30 percent. On the other hand, more
applicants from joint-venture firms would be accepted than currently are, 28 percent versus
25 percent.



                                                    69
    Table 13: Estimates with the New Point System, by Education and Designation
                  Education Level (%)                                          Designation (%)
                               New             New                                          New         New
                             Accepted        Rejected                                    Accepted     Rejected
 Secondary                      2              1.4           Technical Expert               29.5         26
                                                             Top Management
 Certificate/Diploma           22.8            9.6                                          30.9           4.1
                                                             (CEO/CFO/COO)
 BA Degree                     35.6           64.4           Middle Management               6.7          15.1
                                                             Entry Level - Junior
 Master’s                      33.6           16.4                                           1.3           1.4
                                                             Management
 Doctorate                      4              2.7           Unknown                        31.5          53.4
 Other                         0.7             5.5
 Unknown                       1.3              0
 Total                         100             100           Total                        100              100
Source: World Bank calculations using RP-T administrative data.

With respect to sectors, the sectors facing higher skill deficits would likely benefit from
having more applicants from those sectors accepted. Examples are OGE, ICT, and health care;
on the other hand, fewer applicants from non-NKEA sectors as well as education, business
service, and E&E would likely qualify. With respect to occupations, applicants from science
and engineering, and health professionals would more likely be favored by the new point
system while applicants classified as business professionals and education professionals
would see a reducing chance (Table 14).

       Table 14: Estimates with the New Point System, by Sector and Occupation
                   Economic Sector (%)                                  Occupation (%)
                                 Current      New                                        Current    New
        OGE                        16.8       1.4    Manager                              75.2      65.8
                                                     Science and Engineering
        Financial Services            3.4     1.4                                          10.7     4.1
                                                     Professional
        Wholesale and Retail          7.4     4.1    Health Professional                   2.7       0
        Palm Oil                       0      1.4    Teaching Professional                 3.4      8.2
                                                     Business Administration
        Tourism                       2.7     1.4                                          2.7      13.7
                                                     Professional
        Electrical &
                                       2      8.2    ICT Professional                      4.7      4.1
        Electronics
                                                     Technician and Associate
        Business Services             12.8    15.1                                         0.7      4.1
                                                     Professional
        CCI                            0      1.4
        Education                     7.4      11
        Agriculture                    2       0
        Health Care                    4       0
        Biotech                       2.7      0
        Aeronautics                    2      2.7
        ICT                           18.8    12.3
        Other                         18.1    39.7
        Total                         100     100    Total                                 100      100
        Source: World Bank calculations using RP-T administrative data.

                                                        70
   6. Concluding Remarks and Recommendations
The RP-T assessment reveals that individuals attracted by the program are genuinely
talented global professionals. There are large wage differentials observed between RP-T
individuals and Malaysian professionals with the same observable characteristics and work
experience. The wage differential analysis finds a difference of about 4.3 times, meaning that
foreign talent earns over four times more than comparable professionals in Malaysia.

Professionals in the OGE sector, business services, and manufacturing sectors offer
the highest wage premiums of all the economic sectors active in Malaysia. The
decomposition analysis reveals that even though some of the wage premiums can be
attributed to the individual’s characteristics, a large part of their wage premium is a result
of factors that are tangible to employers but not easily measurable. One can speculate that
part of the premium is likely derived from having experience in foreign labor markets; many
of them derived their experience in developed economies in western countries and Asia. By
virtue of being a global asset with international exposure to global markets, new
technologies, and broader know-how, they are perceived as being more likely (than locals)
to contribute to the profitability of the firm.

With respect to effectiveness, the analysis reveals that the program is effectively
retaining genuinely talented individuals. However, only some of the observable
characteristics included as eligibility criteria are actually used in the decision making
process. This indicates that the seemingly rigid selection criteria are adaptable to changing
needs in the economy (and labor market). This is arguably a positive finding. However, it is
unclear what the gains are from having rigid and detailed criteria that appear to prioritize
aspects that are not prioritized in practice.

One recommendation made to TalentCorp is to consider revising its eligibility criteria
to directly target individuals with the attributes that truly play a role. The analysis
shows that a more data-driven approach could significantly improve TalentCorp’s ability to
better target talent. For instance, the formal criteria seem to prioritize applicants with a
certain number of years of work experience in Malaysia or applicants with certain high
education levels. Both of these criteria are much less important in actuality than the
applicant’s years of work experience in priority sectors or the wage levels that these
applicants can command from employers. A selection system with less emphasis on
academic qualification and more emphasis on work experience (irrespective of where it is
obtained) would significantly improve TalentCorp’s capacity to fill skill gaps.

Another recommendation for TalentCorp would be to expand eligibility to the RP-T to
expatriates applying from abroad; in fact, the analysis suggests that there is no evidence
that expatriates already in Malaysia are more talented. Foreign talent living abroad, rather
than in Malaysia at the time of application, can be targeted based on their specific expertise
(see next recommendation on critical skill list), and to fit a specific skill demand that the
country needs for its continued development.

As TalentCorp’s main objective is to address the availability of talent in the country,
using an evidence-based and participatory approach to transparently identify

                                             71
occupation in shortage could significantly increase the RP-T effectiveness. As such,
another recommendation is to create an official systematic tool that enables TalentCorp to
rigorously identify skill shortages in the country and publish a Critical Skill Shortage List that
is visible by all, including potential RP-T and REP applicants. Countries such as Australia and
the UK have already embarked on this effort, and many lessons can be learned from these
countries to design an optimal approach for Malaysia. Four key principles to follow:

       a. Transparency is crucial for the system to be widely accepted. As such, the skill
          gaps identification exercise needs to be data-driven and rigorously evidence-
          based (top-down analysis), paired with a “bottom-up” system of consultations.

       b. Involvement of key stakeholders such as top employers, as well as SMEs, is
          important to ensure that the skills monitoring system reflects the needs of the
          whole economy (bottom-up approach). A broad consultation system, coupled
          with a top-down approach, would help identify gaps across the skills spectrum.

       c. Regularity of the process is fundamental to guarantee that the monitoring
          system reflects the current situation in the labor market and, as such,
          partnerships with all the different providers of labor market data is key in order
          to ensure a timely release of the shortage list.

       d. Similarly, program eligibility criteria should be continuously refined or
          adapted to evolving labor market demands.

The Critical Skill Shortage List can increase the effectiveness of the Government’s
various talent interventions in addressing Malaysia’s current skill shortages,
including in the short term, through TalentCorp’s initiatives targeted at foreign talent
and talented diaspora, while the education system ramps up its creation of such talent
locally. The creation of a Critical Skill Shortage List will provide an important instrument to
guide the selection of applicants to the RP-T program. Fortunately, the 11th Malaysia Plan,
(launched a month before the official launch of this report) included this initiative as part of
its overall initiative to help Malaysia transition into a high income nation. For this initiative
to yield results it will be imperative for the tool to take into account the four principles
outlined before.

Similarly to the recommendation for the REP, global talent (both Malaysian and
expatriate) is responsive to labor market opportunities, but also recognizes the
importance of family benefits. As such, continuous efforts should be made to ensure that
approved applicants’ families are provided the necessary benefits to fully integrate in to the
Malaysian labor market and society.




                                               72
ANNEX

OCCUPATIONS IN DEMAND WHERE SKILLS SHORTAGES ARE IDENTIFIED

        High Skill Occupations 5-Digit
        12121 Manager, human resource/personnel
        12212 Manager, market research / Manager, customer service
        12222 Manager, public relations / Manager, communications
        13301 Manager, production and operation/communications
        13452 Dean / Headmaster / Principal, university / Chancellor, university
        14352 Manager, security
        21131 Chemist
        21342 Biochemist / Chemist, biological / Biochemist, enzymes
        21345 Physiologists / Physiologist, neurology / Physiologist, endocrinology
        21429 Other civil engineers
        21442 Engineer, industrial machinery and tools
        21449 Other mechanical engineers, mechanical/agriculture, agricultural
        21451 Engineer, chemical
        21452 Engineer, chemical/petroleum and gas
        21491 Engineer, process
        21492 Engineer, quality control
        21512 Engineer, electrical/electric power generation
        21519 Other electrical engineer
        21613 Architect, building
        21712 Engineer, marine
        21732 Pilot, aircraft/airline
        22111 Doctor, medical
        22129 Specialist medical practicioner nec
        22623 Pharmacist, retail
        22642 Therapist, physical
        23101 Lecturer, college
        24131 Financial analyst
        25141 Programmer, computer
        25211 Designer, database




                                             73
Medium Skill Occupations 5-Digit
31133 Technician, engineering/electrical (electric power transmission)
31141 Technician, engineering/electronics
31158 Technician, hydraulic hose
31161 Technician, engineering/chemical
31172 Metallurgy assistant, physics
31312 Operator, electrical switchboard
31322 Operator, compressor
33157 Assessor, insurance
33211 Agent, insurance
33227 Analyst/executive, marketing research
33231 Buyer
33341 Agent, real estate
33435 Executive officer, statutory board
34323 Designer, interior decoration
35112 Technician, semi-conductor
35211 Cinematographer




                                       74
REFERENCES

Autor, D., F. Levy, and R. Murnane (2003). “The Skill Content of Recent Technological Change:
An Empirical Exploration”. Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (4), 1279-1333.

Bakija, Jonathan, and Joel B. Slemrod (2004). ‘‘Do the Rich Flee from High State Taxes?
Evidence from Federal Estate Tax Returns,’’ NBER Working Paper No. 10645, 2004.

Dustmann and Kirchkamp (2002). “The Optimal Migration Duration and Economic Activities
after Re-Migration,” Journal of Development Economics, 67, 351-372.

Gibson, John and David McKenzie (2012) “The Economic Consequences of “Brain Drain” of
the Best and Brightest: Evidence from Five Countries”, Economic Journal, 122: 339-75.

Hahn, Jinyong, Petra Todd, and Wilbert van der Klaauw (2001). “Identification and
Estimation of Treatment Effects with a Regression-Discontinuity Design.” Econometrica,
69(1): 201–09.

Imbens, Guido W., and Thomas Lemieux (2008). “Regression Discontinuity Designs: A Guide
to Practice.” Journal of Econometrics, 142(2): 615–35.

Imbens, G., and J. Angrist (1994), “Identification and Estimation of Local Average Treatment
Effects,” Econometrica, Vol. 61, No. 2, 467-476.

Kuschminder, Katie (2013). “Knowledge Transfer and Capacity Building Through the
Temporary Return of Qualified Nationals to Afghanistan”, International Migration.

Kleven, Henrik, Camille Landais, and Emmanuel Saez (2013). ‘‘Taxation and International
Migration of Superstars: Evidence from the European Football Market,’’ American Economic
Review, 103, 1892–1924.

Kirchgassner, Gebhard, and Werner Pommerehne (1996).‘‘Tax Harmonization and Tax
Competition in the European Union: Lessons from Switzerland,’’ Journal of Public Economics,
60, 351–371.

Kleven, Henrik, Camille Landais, Emmanuel Saez, and Esben Schultz (2014). “Mi gration and
Wage Effects of Taxing Top Earners: Evidence from the Foreigners' Tax Scheme in Denmark”,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(1), 333-378.

Lee, David and David Card (2008). “Regression Discontinuity Inference with Specification
Error.” Journal of Econometrics, 142(2): 655–74.

Lee, David and Thomas Lemieux (2010). “Regression Discontinuity Designs in Economics,”
with, Journal of Economic Literature, 48(2), 281-355.

Liebig, Thomas, Patrick A. Puhani, and Alfonso Sousa-Poza (2007). ‘‘Taxation and Internal
Migration: Evidence from the Swiss Census using Community-Level Variation in Income Tax

                                             75
Rates,’’ Journal of Regional Science, 47, 807–836.

McCrary, Justin (2008). “Manipulation of the Running Variable in the Regression
Discontinuity Design: A Density Test.” Journal of Econometrics, 142(2): 698–714.

McKenzie, David and Dean Yang (2015). “Evidence on policies to increase the development
impacts of international migration,” World Bank Research Observer, (forthcoming)

Thom, Kevin “Repeated Circular Migration: Theory and Evidence from Undocumented
Migrants,” mimeo.

World Bank Group and Ç. Özden, C. Parsons, M. Schiff and T. L. Walmsley (2011) Global
Bilateral Migration Database, 'Where on Earth is Everybody? The Evolution of Global
Bilateral Migration, 1960-2000', World Bank Economic Review 25(1):12-56




                                             76
