Administrative Circular “The President’s Food
Conservation Program?, October 13, 1947

NUMBER 054
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: SEPTEMBER 2006




                            January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
Administrative Circular “The President’s Food Conservation
Program?, October 13, 1947

About the Food Conservation
program

On October 5 1947, U.S President Harry
S. Truman announced the food
conservation program in a radio and
television address. This program was
proposed by the Citizens Food
Committee and was supported by every
department of the federal government.
                                                 A group of students removing rogue from
The idea of the program was to help        cornfields (loan 0393), Philippines, 1969
the starving countries of Western
Europe after World War II by the American people pledging to waste less food,
eat no meat on Tuesdays and no poultry or eggs on Thursdays, and forgo one
slice of bread every day.

                                The farming and distilling industries were also asked
                               to contribute by drastically reducing their use of grain.
                               This would create a surplus that could be shared with
                               the people in Western Europe. The World Bank
                               supported the program by asking its staff to join the
                               efforts of the American public.

                               International Food Day

                               In November 1979, the Member Countries of the
                               Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
                               Nations (FAO) established World Food Day. It is
                               celebrated every year on October 16th, the
  Farmers threshing and        anniversary of the founding of FAO. It is observed by
winnowing rice (loan 0393),
     Philippines, 1969
                              150 countries around the world.

                          This year’s theme, “Investing in Agriculture for Food
Security?, was chosen to reinforce the importance of agriculture against poverty
and hunger in developing countries. World Food Day brings attention to the
problem of hunger which is not yet solved: there are approximately 850 million
people in the world who do not have enough food to eat everyday.
World Bank’s Contributions

The World Bank contributes to end world hunger
through projects in agriculture and nutrition, and by
providing policy advice to governments. It is the
largest source of funds for agricultural development
for developing countries. The photographs depict the
Experimental Farm at the University of the
Philippines' College of Agriculture at Los Banos in
Laguna Province, which received financial assistance
from the World Bank (loan 0393).

In addition to agricultural projects, the World Bank
also recognizes the importance of nutrition and its         Farmers transplanting fast-
central role to reducing poverty. Eradicating extreme        growing rice (loan 0393),
                                                                 Philippines, 1969
poverty and hunger is the first of the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs). Malnutrition is
contributing not only to widespread failure to meet this goal – to halve poverty
                              and hunger – but to meet other goals in maternal and
                              child health, HIV/AIDS, education, and gender equity.

                              Nearly half of child mortality in low-income countries
                             can be linked to malnutrition. The World Bank
                             emphasizes community-and school-based nutrition
                             programs, food fortification programs, and food policy
                             reforms to target young children and their mothers.
                             The Bank is also giving increased attention to the
                             impact of nutrition on education and learning ability,
                             and early child development projects. To date, the
                             World Bank has committed nearly $2 billion to support
                             nutrition programs.

   Farmers weeding with
  rotary weeders in a rice
    paddy (loan 0393),
     Philippines, 1969
