From Typewriters to eDevelopment 1946-2005


NUMBER 047
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: JANUARY 2006




                          January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
From Typewriters to eDevelopment 1946-2005
First Technology: Keystrokes and Ribbons

For the first four decades of the Bank's operations,
office technology consisted primarily of
telephones, typewriters, and a secretarial pool.
Internal communications relied on inter-office
memos and desk-to-desk distribution services.
Carbon paper and four-part forms allowed
distribution to multiple users, and routing slips
ushered single copies through multiple recipients.

External communications were conducted through
Western Union telegrams (encoded using the
Bank's internal security code), and from the early
1970s, by telexes. Postal services and diplomatic pouch delivery provided further
external communication. Later, facsimile machines allowed more rapid sharing of
                                 individual documents.

                                In the early years of the 1960s, IBM MT/ST
                                automated typing machines were introduced in
                                the Bank, and four operators were trained to use
                                them. The MT/ST (Magnetic Tape/ Selectric
                                Typewriter) combined the features of the popular
                                Selectric typewriter with a magnetic tape drive,
                                and because magnetic tape was a reusable
                                storage medium, material could be edited without
                                having to retype the entire text. In 1977, the Bank
                                replaced its MT/ST machines with 40 Vydec word
                                processors, operated by 27 trained specialists.
                                The feel of the Vydec word processors, operated
                                by 27 trained specialists. The feel of the Vydec
machine was "so light that it would be difficult for an operator to ever go back to a
regular electric."

While the MT/ST and Vydec machines heralded the way for word processing and
computer technology, the typewriter continued to be a central component of the
Bank's communications technology until the 1980s. As recently as 1983, the
Financial Operations Department performed the Bank's entire borrowing program
on Selectric typewriters, with the exception of a single Apple II microcomputer
used for analytical work in currency swaps.
Mainframe Technology: Punch Cards and Data Tape

Processing Center with an IBM 407 accounting machine employing punch card
technology. Its first task was to transfer the Bank's financial books to the system,
enabling borrowers to see their statements in a concise and presentable form.

In the late 1960s, the Bank
recognized the pivotal role of
computers in the workplace
by installing a machine from
Honeywell; shortly after, in
December 1968, research for
large-scale computing began
with the performance testing
of Burroughs computer
equipment.

In 1972, the Joint Computer
Center opened, providing the World Bank and the IMF with mainframe
technology services. When it began operations, the Burroughs equipment
processed 2.2 million punch cards; by 1976, the computer center grew to include
13 keypunch machines, outputting more than 4.3 million cards. Primary clients
were the Controller's Department, Programming and Budgeting, and the
Economic Analysis and Projections Department.

In August 1981, large-scale computing at the Bank moved forward again with the
creation of the Information Services Center. It featured an IBM 3031 computer
system – the first vendor other than Burroughs selected for the Bank's internal
computing services – and handled functions previously performed by Tymshare,
an outside computing service bureau. The center provided computer support for
the regional departments, Central Projects Staff, IFC, Programming and
Budgeting.

In 1983, FIRM-H opened in 12,000 square feet of space, housing the IBM Facility
Center, the Office Automation Center, the Burroughs Facility Center, and the
Network Communication Center.
Personal Computers: First the Desktop, then the World

"Two Bank staff members [have] built their own mini-computers, three others
have bought them assembled, off-the-shelf; and dozens of others are on the
verge of buying one, or are looking for information on mini-computers… [These
mini-computers] offer from 4,000 to 65,000 words of directly addressable
memory."

             -
Bank Notes, June
1978, p.2

By 1979 the first
individual
computers
appeared in the
Bank, and in 1981,
when IBM
introduced the first
personal
computer, some
Bank staff began
integrating computers into their workflow—usually higher level staff using
computers for analytical work. By the end of 1983, there were more than 300
microcomputers in the Bank, a number that would grow in less than four years to
include 3,800 PCs and 600 additional workstations.

During this same period staff customarily assigned their typing work to
secretaries, who used a word processor typically shared between a group of
secretaries. The Bank launched the Institutional Workstation Program—a.k.a.
Workstations for All—with the goal of purchasing 2,000 new computers in 1987.
In early 1988, some 2,100 Zenith XT personal computers were installed
throughout the Bank, along with 200 laser printers and 600 dot matrix printers.

By 1991, there were over 6,600 desktop workstations and 6,200 printers in
the Washington, D.C office and 1,200 portables and 500 desktop computers
in country offices. At that time, the Bank began another expansion and upgrade
program—A Computer on Every Desk—with the purchase of over 1,000 386SX
computers, featuring multi-tasking operating systems capable of running more
than one program at a time.
By today's standards, the early use of PCs was limited to basic business
applications. In recent years, network technology and the Internet, along with
email and new data communication technologies, have transformed the way we
work. Today, we expect to communicate with the world from our desktop. File
sharing and information exchange are commonplace in today's business
practices; physical and geographic location no longer define the global
workplace.

These benefits, however, have produced new challenges, such as security,
reliability, and authenticity, all core concerns for people who use computers and
those responsible for managing the technology and systems we rely on.
Developments since 1996: A Comparison of Technology

Over the last ten years, IT has been integrated into virtually all of the Bank’s
business functions. Significant investments have been made in the IT
infrastructure and services to provide a robust and reliable foundation that has
enabled the Bank’s transformation goals of decentralization and integration.

This IT program (Information Systems Renewal), funded by the Strategic
Compact, required a complete overhaul of all layers of the IT business structure
including technology infrastructure, global communication, integrated enterprise
information systems and a global support center. The Bank manages its financial
position including $280 billion in loans and credits and Operational processes for
its project portfolio.

Critical financial business processes for loan disbursement, payroll, payment of
consultants, travel authorization and reimbursement, and Operational processes
for PCN and PAD rely on the 24x7 availability of IT services. Country Offices rely
on communication links for email, video and audio conferences and access to
Bank systems in all geographic locations. And Bank staff rely daily on their
desktop and notebook computers, phone systems and applications such as
email, intranet and Microsoft applications.


               1996                                      2005
                          Computing Infrastructure



      No two computers setup                   Standard Enterprise Desktop
       exactly the same                          Package at HQ and in COs.
      Daily problems with freeze-up            High reliability and user
       and re-boot                               satisfaction
      Helpdesk is 6 people, phone #,           24/7 Global Support Center
       one shift                                Enterprise virus control
      Viruses emerging as a major               program
       problem                                  Remote install and
      Every change required a visit to          management service
       the PC                                   Foundation in place for web
      Unnecessary complex solutions             services
                                                Benchmarked standardization
    inflate costs                            and competitive cost
                                            Compliance with international
                                             standard for technology
                                             services management


                              Connectivity



   Email is a weak substitute for          Global enterprise network to
    actual network                           more than 117 locations
   Separate voice and data, no             Integrated voice, data, and
    video                                    videoconferencing over high-
   Connectivity slow and capacity           speed, integrated global
    low                                      network
   Only 3 country offices                  HQ LAN speed increased by a
    connected to HQ network                  factor of 1000
   No technology for decentralized         Global link capacity increased
    Operations                               by a factor of 20
   Satellite licensing is a major          84 videoconference (VC)-
    barrier                                  equipped rooms
                                            Average 70 VCs a day with 250
                                             country links


                           Systems and Data



   100 irreconcilable databases            Consolidated corporate data
   65+ fragmented systems                   store
   Massive duplicate data entry            Commercial integrated
   Most systems are "home                   software packages
    grown"                                  Control risks reduced (also Y2K
   IS units all over the Bank               compliance)
   Country offices rely on local           Executive financial
    systems                                  management tools
   Risk exposure for controls is           Foundation in place for web
    high                                     services
                                            Off-shoring of some
   Basic Treasury Operation              development costs
                                         Single resource mgmt. system
                                          for all offices
                                         Compliance with international
                                          standard for information
                                          security management


                Information Management and Sharing



   Almost entirely paper-based          Electronic capture, storage,
   Large gaps in official business       and retrieval of documents
    records                              Business records captured in
   Information only in people’s          electronic form
    heads                                Enterprise information
   Photocopying is a major               warehouse
    industry                             Electronic shared access to
   Libraries offer traditional           documents
    services only                        Electronic library sources
   No concept of knowledge               widely available
    management                           Knowledge communities
   Manual updating of the few            developed
    electronic documents                 Central cataloguing of all kinds
   No Bank reports delivered             of information
    online                               65,000 Bank reports online
   Primitive intranet and Bank web      Begin compliance with ISAD –
    page                                  International Standard for
   Only hard copy publications           Archival Descriptions
    available for clients                Lending / partnership leveraged
   No collaborative information          with online knowledge sharing
    solutions                             networks (GDLN) and
                                          information dissemination
                                          (Development Gateway)
                                         External web 1.3 billion page
                                          views annually, 2,900 visits per
                                          hour; 150,000 content pages
A Select Timeline of Technology at the World Bank: 1960-2001

1960-1972

As early as 1960, the Bank invested in an IBM 407 accounting machine and
opened the Data Processing Center. It wasn't until several years later, in 1968,
that the Bank installed its first computer, a Honeywell. Shortly after, In December
1968, the Bank ran the first performance test of Burroughs (later Unisys)
computer equipment. The machine featured 256K processing, 4 microsec./ 192K
memory access, and 50MB total disk space.

Throughout this period, computing was a backroom function performed on large
mainframe omputers, using punch card or paper tape input technology.
Programs tended to be in FORTRAN and exclusively focused on processing
numerical data.

1972

In 1972, the Bank's technology services underwent a major reorganization. In
particular, new applications were developed, including spread sheet, accounting
and economic modeling programs capable of complex calculations, sophisticated
modeling and payroll processing. There was
even a program to analyze the 1972 reorganization efforts. These new
applications were largely written in COBOL and ran on UNIX-based Digital
equipment. Computer processing, with staff to perform the work, now
operated 24-hours a day.

The Early 1980s

With the introduction of the first personal computers at the Bank in 1981,
computer technology evolved from an exclusive mainframe environment to a
growing desktop presence. Applications focused on spreadsheet functions and
word processing.

Platforms and programs, however, were not standardized. During this period, the
Bank used eight or nine different word processing programs, including IBM
Display Write, and supported Wang, Micon, UNIX, and NBI word processing
equipment.

To address the new, expansive role technology was playing at the Bank, a
management information system was developed for each of the six Vice
Presidential Units.

1984

In 1984, PC hardware and software for support staff became available and the
Bank started dedicating technology resources for support functions. At this time,
the concept of an individual "workstation" was described - a video monitor,
keyboard, microcomputer, telephone, printer, electronic and hard copy storage,
furniture and work surfaces (desk, table) and immediate office landscaping –
lighting, ventilation, etc.

1985-1987

The middle years of the decade saw computer capacity at the Bank grow. In
1985, local area networks were introduced, using both token ring and ethernet
technology. In 1985, the Bank adopted IBM PCs as the standard desktop
platform, and in 1986, recognized WordPerfect as the application for word
processing.

Operations MIS (OPSMIS) was first built under Divinfo. for time recording, travel,
and financial consulting. And as a precursor of things to come, in 1984, the
Finance Complex initiated the use of All-In-One as a mail system and application
system.

The Late 1980s

The latter part of the 1980s marked another shift in the way technology was used
throughout the Bank. Following reorganization in 1987, network technology was
put in place and a computer was provided for every member of staff.

During this period, computer and communications technology began to make a
significant impact on the way in which the Bank interacted with its country offices.
In 1988, the first All-In-One machine was installed in Indonesia, providing point-
to-point data communications between the field and Washington, DC: electronic
mail extended beyond headquarters. Outside the Bank, email connections were
made with OECD, FAO, WHO, and IMF. In the last years of the 1980s, email
transformed office communications, doubling in volume each year, and became
the primary vehicle for operational day-to-day business decisions.

Although some of this technology sounds familiar to us today, it is important to
remember that DOS was still the interface used on workstations, and some parts
of the Bank still relied heavily on the Burroughs mainframe environment.

The Early 1990s

Networking and the development of communications systems continued to
dominate how technology affected work at the World Bank. In 1991, the
institution first joined the Internet using FTP and Telnet protocols, later adding
TCP/IP and ICP/TP. In 1993 and 1994, the Bank piloted TCP/IP in the LAC
region. Lotus Notes mail, with its ability to attach and exchange documents, was
rolled out in 1993.

Reflecting the diversity of technology in use at the Bank, the IT Center now
supported multiple networking environments, from VAX, DECnet, VMS, Novell
Netware and ethernet, to All-In-One.

Throughout the Bank, many users, preferring the graphic interface, had Apple
Macintosh computers with AppleTalk network.

Beginning in 1991, the Bank implemented an Enterprise Network project to
provide Bank-wide IT services and infrastructure.

Satellite technology also emerged as an important factor in the Bank's regional
and international communications strategy. In 1990, 1995, and 1996, the Bank
made arrangements with the UN and signed agreement for transponder capacity
on Intelsat. In the early 1990s, the World Bank also initiated implementation of
Very Small Aperture Terminal (VSAT) satellite communications technology.

New technology enabled the rate of information and data exchange to increase
exponentially, but in order to manage this growth in information, the Bank needed
a system for storing and retrieving files. In 1993, the Bank introduced its
electronic document management system software. IRIS was instituted for
electronic management of divisional files with the ability to scan documents,
capture the paper electronically, and manage information at the divisional level.

Added to this initiative, ImageBank, instituted in the Internal Documents Unit,
systematically scanned selected Bank reports for dates as far back as in the
1970s. Documents were stored centrally and available on CD-ROM as World
Development Sources.

The Late 1990s and into the New Millennium
Some of the opportunities offered by new networking and communications
technology introduced in the early 1990s, were further explored later in the
decade through global distance learning programs and the Knowledge Bank. By
2001, the Bank had established 30 Distance Learning Centers, extending training
and education around the globe.

Standardization became prominent during these years with the implementation of
the Desktop Reform Project and the Enterprise Network. In 1997, the Bank
began a program to standardize its desktop platform and establish a global
network, based on multiple access links with its country offices, including satellite
links. This network provides technology for corporate initiatives and enables the
Bank to communicate and share knowledge throughout the world.
