President Eugene Robert Black


NUMBER 016
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: APRIL 2003




                          January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
President Eugene Robert Black

During his tenure as
President of the World
Bank, Eugene Black was
perhaps the world’s best-
known banker. The Bank’s
recognized impartiality, its
determined
internationalism and its
strong links with private
finance all reflect the
predilections of its
President. As noted in the
Mason and Asher official
                                Madam Vijaya Lakshmi Pandit, India’s Ambassador to the
history of the Bank, Mr.       United States, signs the agreement for the first loan made
Black served as President        by the World Bank in Asia on August 18, 1949. Madam
for thirteen of the first      Pandit was also the first woman to sign a World Bank loan
twenty-five years of the        agreement. On her right is K.R.K. Menon, Indian Finance
                                Secretary; behind her is B. R. Sen, Indian Minister to the
Bank’s life and left his         United States; and to her right is World Bank President
imprint on all aspects of                             Eugene Black.
Bank activity. While he
was President, the Bank grew steadily in size, scope, and understanding of the
development process, and he himself evolved from master marketer of bonds to
statesman in the fields of development and development diplomacy. The
Economic Development Institute (EDI, now the World Bank Institute), the
International Finance Corporation (IFC) , and the International Development
Association (IDA) were created during his presidency. He established the Bank’s
                                       credit in the capital markets of the United
                                       States, ensured the acceptability of its
                                       bonds to the country’s institutional
                                       investors, and obtained for the Bank its all-
                                       important AAA bond rating.

                                         Eugene Black was born on May 1, 1898
                                         into a well-known Georgia banking family.
                                         He graduated from the University of
                                         Georgia, winning his Phi Beta Kappa key as
 Eugene R. Black (second from right)     a junior. During World War I he served as
 views a demonstration of the Bank’s     an officer in the U.S. Navy in the Atlantic.
           first computer.
                                         After the war Mr. Black went into finance
and eventually became a senior Vice President of the Chase National Bank.

Mr. Black’s very wide circle of friends in American banking made him a natural
choice to be U.S. Executive Director when the new and untried World Bank set
about marketing bonds in 1947. "I came to help sell World Bank bonds," he said
many times, "and the first thing I found out was that they weren’t legal for
investment anywhere." He began an intensive campaign of public speaking and
private talking to familiarize
lawmakers and bankers with the
Bank and its securities.

In 1949 Mr. Black succeeded
John J. McCloy as President of
the World Bank. Initially, he did
not want the job. "I was in
Europe," he said, "and I sent
word back that under no
conditions did I want my name
to be put up…. I made various
suggestions of other people. I
did everything on earth to
                                     Signing the first development credit (to Honduras,
prevent my taking the job. I        Credit 0001) on May 11, 1961. Among those present
didn’t want it. I wanted to make    at the signing of the Credit Agreement were (seated,
a career in [the] Chase Bank….        L to R) His Excellency Dr. Celeo Davila, Honduran
                                      Ambassador in the United States, and Sir William
                                       Iliff, Vice President of the World Bank and IDA.
"The pressure was put on me          (Standing L to R) Mr. Lempira E. Bonilla, Alternate
and the pressure was put on the         Executive Director for Honduras, and Dr. Luis
Chase Bank to release me, and             Machado, Executive Director for Honduras.
I finally took it…. Then after I got
it…I became very interested in what I was doing, and I found there was more
inner satisfaction in doing this than there was in making money. That’s why I
stuck it out…."

World Bank "Firsts" During Eugene Black’s Presidency

Loan 0017 India, Railway Reconstruction, August 18, 1949

      Bank lends $34 million to India for railway reconstruction and development
       (Loan 0017)
      First Bank loan in Asia
      First Bank loan signed by a woman
First Public Offering Outside the United States, May 17, 1951

       London banking firm of Baring Bros. and Co., Ltd. Announces preparation
       of public offering of 5,000,000 pounds sterling issue of 3.5 percent, 20-
       year Bank bonds

First Bank Reorganization, September 22, 1952

      Operational activities reorganized on geographical rather than functional
       basis
      Three Area Departments of Operations are created:
          o Asia and Middle East
          o Europe, Africa, and Australasia
          o Western Hemisphere.
      Also created are the Department of Technical Operations, the Economic
       Staff, and the Technical Assistance and Liaison Staff
  The organizational structure of the World Bank after the 1952 reorganization.

First IFC Investment, June 20, 1957

      IFC makes its first investment: $2 million in Siemens do Brasil to expand
       manufacturing
First Aid Consortium, August 25, 1958

      In the wake of a deterioration in India’s
       balance of payments, the first meeting of
       the India aid consortium takes place in
       Washington, with attendance by
       representatives of the governments of
       Canada, Germany, Japan, the United
       Kingdom and the United States
      Establishment of Indian Consortium, and       Standing: Mr. Georges R. Delaume of
       the subsequent one for Pakistan (1960),     the Legal Department of IDA. This credit
                                                    was both the first Bank Group funding
       was the beginning of the various aid           for Tunisia, as well as the first Bank
       groups and consortia                               Group funding for education.


First IBRD Capital Increase, September 16, 1959

      Bank authorized capital increased from $10 billion to $21 billion
      First of several subsequent capital increases

The Bank’s First Computer, November 1960

      The Bank opens a Data Processing Center with IBM equipment (IBM 407
       accounting machine)
      The first task was to transfer the entries on
       the Bank’s financial books to a punch card
       system of accounting
      The new IBM equipment permitted showing
       borrowers their statements of accounts in a
       much more concise and presentable form

Signing the First IDA Credit Agreement, May 11,
1961
                                                          Eugene R. Black President of the
                                                         World Bank July 1949 – December
       International Development Association (IDA)                    1962
       provides its first development credit, Credit
       0001, totaling $9 million, to Honduras for
       highway development and maintenance

First Bank Group Funding for Education, September 17,
1962




                                                                      Alice A. Brun
      Also marked the first funding for Tunisia: Credit 0029

First Female Executive Director, November 1, 1962

Alice A. Brun of Denmark becomes the first female Executive Director

Eugene Black Looks Back

In a story about Eugene Black in the May 1988 issue of The Bank’s World, Mr.
Black was asked about the most significant events during his presidency. He
talked about his involvement in the Middle East, in connection with the Aswan
Dam and the Suez Canal. "I spent a lot of time trying to work out the problems
                                  between Egypt and the British Government
                                  after the Suez Canal [nationalization by Egypt,
                                  1956]…and I was also very much involved in
                                  India and Pakistan, the Indus River dispute. I
                                  was trying to get the Indian government and
                                  the Pakistani government together so that the
                                  Indus Basin could be developed…to produce
                                  hydroelectric power. That took a very long time
                                  [1952 to 1960]. Those were the two most
                                  important things, I guess, when I was at the
                                  Bank."
  Eugene Black at bat at the 1954
        World Bank Picnic.
                                      Two Appreciations

On May 1, 1988, Eugene Black’s 90th birthday, World Bank President Barber B.
Conable sent birthday greetings on behalf of the staff. In his letter to Mr. Black he
wrote:

"We in the Bank owe you a great debt of gratitude for the pioneering role you
played in the formative years of this institution, shaping it and setting standards
                            of excellence which we strive to maintain today.

                                 "The Bank has evolved in many ways over the
                                 quarter century since you left the office of President.
                                 But the profound commitment to the cause of
                                 international development with which you imbued
                                 this institution remains unchanged and as strong as
                                 ever. This is your most treasured legacy to us."




 Eugene Black the bowler, 1954
Eugene Black passed away on February 20, 1992. The March 1992 issue of The
Bank’s World reprinted an appreciation of Mr. Black that had originally appeared
in The Independent, a U.K. newspaper, by Davidson Sommers, who had served
as General Counsel and later Vice President under Mr. Black:

"Gene brought some unusual qualities to his World Bank role. In the first place,
he was a conservative Southern gentleman—not common in international finance
in those days. His regime is sometimes criticized for having been too cautious,
but this was necessary to lay the firm foundation on which his successors have
built the powerful and widely respected organization that exists today.

"Gene’s strength was his remarkable ability to deal with people, to gain their
respect and obtain their agreement. Not an administrator nor a conventional
bureaucrat or a corporate executive, he was a genius at persuasion and
negotiation. He used to say, ‘I’m not a policy man, I’m a deal man.’ He soon
gained for the Bank the confidence of the financial markets in the developed
world, and essential task since establishing the Bank’s credit was the first step
that made all future activities possible. He also earned the confidence of the
Bank Executive Directors and of leaders in the developing world by showing real
concern for the future of their countries.

"During his tenure, Gene met with heads of government and leading citizens all
over the world, but it never changed him. He treated everyone from world leaders
to the most junior associate with the same
friendliness and charm…                                Eugene Black bids farewell to the
                                                         World Bank December 1962.

"He established an informal and warm relationship
with his staff, earning not only their respect, but also
their friendship."
