First Funding for Ghana – Volta River
Hydroelectric Project, 1962

NUMBER 060
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: NOVEMBER 2007




                            January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
First Funding for Ghana – Volta River Hydroelectric Project, 1962

Ghana signed IBRD Articles of Agreement on September 20, 1957 and became
the 64th member of the Bank. The Bank approved the first finding for Ghana on
February 8, 1962 for Volta River Hydroelectric Project (Loan 0310).




 Testing a transformer at a substation at the   An overall view of the pot line at the Volta
Volta Aluminum Company Ltd. (VALCO) plant       Aluminum Company Ltd. (VALCO) at Tema,
            at Tema, Ghana, 1968.                             Ghana, 1968.

This project consisted of a dam and power plant at Akosombo, 50 miles above
the mouth of the Volta River, a transmission system to supply power to the cities




Construction work proceeds       Two Ghanaian surveyors        Pouring molten aluminum
  on the dam site, 1963         take a reading at the dam    into steel molds at the VOLCA
                                        site, 1963            plant at Tema, Ghana, 1968

of Accra and Tema, and a 700 mile transmission network to supply the principal
cities, towns, villages and mines of Southern Ghana. The project also included
construction of an aluminum smelter nearby to serve as the primary consumer of
electricity generated.
 The Volta River Dam at Akosombo, Ghana,       Construction site of the Volta River Dam at
                   1968                                Akosombo, Ghana, 1963

The main dam, of rockfill construction, was to rise 244 feet above river level and
370 above its foundations, with a crest length of over 2,000 feet. It created a
reservoir about 300 miles long with a surface area of 3,275 square miles. The
dam made available to Ghana the abundant supply of power which was
necessary for the economic development of the country.




Testing a transformer at a    Workmen inside the control     The intake structure from
  substation at the Volta    room of the Volta River Dam     upstream side at the Volta
 Aluminum Company Ltd.        in Akosombo, Ghana, 1968          River Project, 1965
 (VALCO) plant at Tema,
      Ghana, 1968.

A consortium of aluminum companies (VALCO) headed by Kaiser Aluminum and
Chemical Corporation built a large aluminum smelter to be supplied by power
from the Volta River Hydroelectric project under a long-term contract. Since
Ghana’s existing level of demand did not warrant such a massive undertaking,
the project would not have been feasible unless there was a major industrial
consumer to make use of the electrical output. The construction and operation of
the project was under the control of the Volta River Authority, an autonomous
agency established in 1961 for this specific purpose.




 Construction site of the Volta River Dam at    A group of Ghanaians plying their fishing
         Akosombo, Ghana, 1963                 business at Tema in Ghana with the VALCO
                                                alumina storage dome in the background,
                                                                 1968

In size and scope, the project ranked as one of the largest undertakings of its
kind to date. It has also been considered as one of controversial projects, used
by the Bank’s critics as evidence of the harmful effects of large dam construction.
