A Parody of the World Bank in Ancient
Rome

NUMBER 031
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: AUGUST 2003




                           January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
A Parody of the World Bank in ancient Rome
Despite the seriousness of its purposes, the Bank is not without its touches of
humor. This article, by David L. Gordon, delivers a Bank assessment on the
economic prospects of ancient Rome. It appeared originally in the January-
February 1969 issue of “International Bank Notes.?

Rome wasn’t built in a day. Everyone knows that. But of
course there was no World Bank in those times. If there
had been, just imagine how it might have contributed to
the growth and grandeur of Rome. If one could
reconstruct the files of some Latin counterpart of the
Bank, one might find, for example:

An excerpt from the report of an early economic mission
to this emerging country:

“The Kingdom of Rome has experienced a reasonably
satisfactory growth rate in recent years, but from a low
base as compared with the neighboring Etruscan and
Sabine states. The Government, under the Tarquin             David L. Gordon
dynasty, is stable and follows conservative financial
policies. The expansion of industries—mainly pottery,
iron smelting, and brick making—has averaged five percent annually over the
past decade, but agriculture has lagged and educational progress has been slow.
There appears to be some scope for Bank lending for productive projects,
particularly in these latter sectors

“The earliest settlers reportedly subsisted on wolf’s milk. These animals are
extremely inefficient and unreliable milk producers. However, the hillsides within
Roman territory offer good grazing and it seems probable that, with proper
technical guidance and the introduction of high-yielding varieties of goat, a dairy
industry could be established that would raise nutritional standards
considerably…

“The Sabine Kingdom has made representations to the Bank that certain
properties belonging to them were seized by Rome; that their claims remain
unsatisfied; and that no loan should be made to Rome until a proper settlement is
reached. The Mission was able to inspect a number of the properties in question.
They are well maintained and in good condition; they appear to be amply
satisfied and quite well settled. Thus there would seem to be no impediment to
Bank lending on this ground.?

From a putative Loan Supervision Mission report
some time later:

“Construction of the two sections of the Via Appia,
financed under Loan No. LXXXIV, is being carried
out approximately on schedule and in accordance
with specifications. However, local costs have
exceeded estimates, and local payments to
contractors complementing the Bank loan are over
three months in arrears as a consequence of
budgetary difficulties resulting from escalation of the
Punic War. The Mission reached agreement with the
Government on measures to be taken to correct this
deficiency.

“A more serious cause for concern is the occurrence         The cover of the January-
of pavement failures at numerous locations. These            February 1969 issue of
                                                            International Bank Notes
appear to be caused by the passage of elephants
recently introduced into Italy by Hannibal.
Considerable rehabilitation work may be required.

“Moreover, the use of elephants may be not merely a wartime expedient but a
lasting technological advance; after the reopening of trade with Africa they may
progressively replace the oxcart for movement of bulk cargo. If so, roads built to
the previously accepted standards would be liable to deteriorate rapidly.

“It is recommended that prior to approval of further road projects in Italy a study
should be carried out to determine:

   1. the cost advantages of shipping by elephant over conventional means,
      taking due account of the greater capital and foreign exchange
      requirements for the former and their higher fodder consumption;

   2. the likely rate of growth, and distribution by routes, of elephant traffic;

   3. the costs of reconstruction and/or increased maintenance of these routes
      to carry the increased elephant traffic; and

   4. an optimized expenditure program, taking account of the respective
       investment requirements for route construction and improvement and
       motive power, the expense of maintaining routes and equipment, and
       cargo haulage costs.

“Given the complexity of the several variables, this analysis will require use of the
latest abacus techniques, in which only a few Egyptian and Phoenician
consultants are experienced…. The study is estimated to require 97 man -
months, and to cost 220,000 sesterces, plus or minus 20 percent.?

From a still later Loan Supervision report:

“The mission inspected the bridge being built across the Rhine under the
direction of Julius Caesar, which was included in the project to be financed in
part by Loan No. CCCXLIV. The work is progressing rapidly. However, the
mission learned that contrary to the provisions of the relevant side letter, the
design of the bridge was not prepared by approved consultants, but apparently
by Caesar himself; and the construction is being carried out by his own forces
rather than by contract open to international tender. Consequently the costs
incurred for this portion of the project are not eligible for reimbursement, and
Caesar was so informed.

“He has requested the Bank’s agreement to apply the funds thereby released to
the construction of a bridge over the Rubicon, which is considered of the highest
priority and urgency. Engineering designs have been completed and the cost
estimates appear reasonable. The forecasts of growth of southbound traffic two
years hence, made by Caesar’s experts, seem exaggerated; but after adjusting
them to a more realistic prospect the mission considers the new bridge is still
justified. Approval of the proposed change in the project is therefore
recommended, provided that the Bank’s normal contracting requirements will be
observed.?
