Relieving Traffic Congestion - The Singapore
Area Licensing Scheme, 1975

NUMBER 053
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: AUGUST 2006




                           January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
Relieving Traffic Congestion - The Singapore Area Licensing
Scheme, 1975

The adverse effects of the increasing
use of motor vehicles in many
countries have resulted in
development of various programs to
decrease traffic congestion. In the
1970s Singapore was one of the cities
where environmental pollution,
deteriorating quality of life in the city
center, and congestion on limited
urban roads encouraged the
government to search for the means to             Traffic congestion in Singapore, 1975
improve the situation.

The experience of other cities demonstrated that attempts to encourage people
to ride public transport or organize car pools had limited success. In addition, the
economic, social and environmental costs of urban road construction programs
proved to be too high for cities with scarce resources. In this regard, greater
consideration was given to such methods of traffic limitation and control as
preferential treatment for high occupancy vehicles, streets reserved for
pedestrians and/or buses, and road pricing.

                                              The government of Singapore decided
                                              to implement the Area License
                                              Scheme - road pricing - to address the
                                              issue of traffic congestion in the city.
                                              The scheme was introduced in June,
                                              1975. At that time Singapore was the
                                              only city in the world to implement this
                                              plan.

                                                 The Area License Scheme required a
                                                 driver to purchase a special
 Buying a daily area license at the license sale
                                                 supplementary license,
                  booth, 1975
                                                 and display it on a car that was driven
in designated Restricted Zones during the rush hours. A year-long public
information campaign that was organized by the government contributed to the
successful implementation of the program.
Given a one-year notice by the
Government of Singapore about this
transport policy change, the World
Bank research staff had an opportunity
to conduct before-and-after studies to
identify and measure the effects of
Singapore's Area License Scheme on
the transport system in particular and
the urban system in general.

The specific areas dealt with were:         Bus posters were used to inform the public on
traffic performance, travel behavior,               how to improve traffic, 1975
the business community, conditions for
pedestrians, air pollution, and public opinion and attitudes. In addition, the
potential for developing similar license schemes for other cities was investigated
and available options and variations were suggested.

As a result of this research program, the “Relieving traffic congestion: the
Singapore area license scheme? report was published in June, 1978. The
purpose of this report was to provide the policy makers in other countries with
information on the effects of the license scheme and help them to draw
                                            conclusions on its usefulness and
                                            adaptation to local conditions. In 1998,
                                            Singapore switched to the current
                                            Electronic Road Pricing system in the
                                            central business districts and on outer
                                            ring roads. This is an electronic means
                                            of charging fees for driving in restricted
                                            zones in Singapore at certain times of
                                            the day.

                                           Singapore is currently well known for
  A Singapore street during the rush hour, its economic and infrastructure
                   1975                    successes. In September 2006
                                           Singapore will host the Annual
Meetings of the Boards of Governors of the International Monetary Fund (IMF)
and World Bank Group.

The Annual Meetings Program of Seminars theme is “Asia in the World, the
World in Asia? and focuses on the following topics: Infrastructure for the 21st
Century; Asia Rising: Myths & Realities; Capital Markets and the Financial Sector
in the Emerging Markets; and Corruption, Governance and Growth.
