The Fight against Riverblindness


NUMBER 014
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: MARCH 2014




                           January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
The Fight Against Riverblindness

On Wednesday, March 19, 2003, President Jim Wolfensohn will hosted a tribute
to former President Robert S. McNamara, celebrating his contribution to the
World Bank. As part of the tribute, a photo exhibit featuring key moments in
McNamara's presidency was unveiled on Thursday, March 20. Bank staff are
invited to visit the exhibit at the President's Gallery, MC13 Mezzanine, through
April 4.

The World Bank Group Archives and Bank’s World Today are pleased to present
the first of two articles that focus on McNamara’s
legacy.

One of the great success stories in the history of
the World Bank has been its role in the control of
onchocerciasis, commonly known as riverblindness.
The Onchocerciasis Control Programme (OCP) was
created in 1974 with two primary objectives: the
elimination of Onchocerciasis as a public health
problem and as an obstacle to socioeconomic
development; and enhancing both country and
regional capacities to control the disease and
counteract its impact on development.

The riverblindness campaign involved a complex
partnership, as it involved an eleven-country area:
Benin, Burkina Faso, Cote d'Ivoire, Ghana, Guinea,          Robert S. McNamara,
Guinea-Bissau, Mali, Niger, Senegal, Sierra Leone,       President of the World Bank
                                                                (1968 – 1981)
Togo. The program was sponsored by the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the
Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), the World Bank, and the World Health
Organization (WHO). It brought in a host of private sector companies and non-
governmental organizations.

The riverblindness program represented a bold and visionary new path for the
Bank, and has been pursued with determination under five presidents. But it was
the initiative and decisions of Bank President Robert McNamara that secured its
launch.

Five key points emerge from McNamara’s willingness to charter unexplored
territory. For the Bank, McNamara’s vision entailed much risk and uncertainty—
                              there were many who said the campaign was
                              simply impossible under the circumstances, that it
                              was too complex. The program’s undeniable
                              success underscored the value of thinking outside
                              the box and committing to a bold vision. Second,
                              the Bank was not engaged in health at the time,
                              and the decision to tackle riverblindness pushed the
                              Bank into a critical sector that continues today.
                              Third, the program has required institutional
                              persistence – a willingness to stick to a decision
                              over decades. Fourth, the program called for an
                              extraordinary partnership, and McNamara’s
                              conviction that this was possible reflects his
     Roger Chaufournier       confidence in the developing world and in the Bank
                              as a leader. Finally, the Riverblindness program
called for a combination of technical excellence (with adaptations along the way)
and people/management inputs that were new areas for the Bank during the
1970s.

In 1994 Mr. McNamara recalled the beginnings of the effort to control
Riverblindness:

"I remember vividly those days in what
was then called Upper Volta and is
now Burkina Faso, when we decided
that the World Bank should embark on
a bold new program to conquer
Onchocerciasis.

"Roger Chaufournier, [World Bank
Vice President for the Africa Region],
my wife Marg, and I visited
Ouagadougou together in 1972.
Ouagadougou seemed as far from
Washington as any place on earth,         An elderly man, blinded by onchocerciasis, is
                                           led through a village in Burkina Faso. The
and the challenge of poverty there
                                           Onchocerciasis Control Program has led to
seemed almost insurmountable.                  the near eradication of the disease.
Prospects looked grim for the people,
and each hurdle facing them was immense. To make things worse, the region
seemed gripped in an unrelenting cycle of devastating droughts that defied
solution.
"We had heard, before and during the visit, about the terrible disease called
riverblindness, and some had suggested that the World Bank should play a role
in doing something about it. We could hardly pronounce the name of the disease,
much less spell onchocerciasis, but we were horrified by what we heard about it.
Literally millions of people were at risk of a fate that could be worse than death in
that society and time. The catch, though, was that we had only shadowy ideas
about how to combat this disease. There was no good cure, and it covered a vast
area of land, so any solution would need to be on a vast scale, in areas without
real institutions and hardly any infrastructure.

"As we talked about the disease in Ouagadougou, Roger and I heard about two
French scientists who were said to have some ideas and some answers. So we
                                    chartered a plane, and Roger, Marg, and I
                                    went to Bobo Dioulasso, a town to the
                                    southwest of Ouagadougou. There we met
                                    the scientists, and they convinced us that
                                    they indeed knew what should be done, and
                                    had answers to the questions we had
                                    wrestled with.

                                           "The disease, caused by a parasitic worm,
                                           was spread by a fly that bred only in fast-
                                           flowing water. So by treating the flowing
                                           water courses, breeding could be stopped,
                                           and hence transmission of the disease
                                           leading to the elimination of the disease
                                           itself.

                                           "There were two ‘catches’, though. First,
                                           because the parasitic worm lived so long in
                                           its human hosts, the control program would
  The Onchocerciasis Control Program       have to be maintained for 20 years. And
   initiated an aggressive program of      second, because the fly could travel such
 insecticide application to prevent the
 proliferation of blackflies responsible
                                           long distances the program had to be
    for spreading the disease. Here a      launched and maintained over a vast area
helicopter sprays a breeding ground in     involving many countries, some of which
              Burkina Faso.                were hardly on speaking terms.

"So Roger and I, then and there, determined that we would do something about
the disease. We worked out a collaborative arrangement, letterhead and all, that
brought together key partners, and we launched a campaign on the spot from
Ouagadougou."

The Onchocerciasis Control Program has halted transmission and virtually
eliminated riverblindness throughout the eleven participating countries. Currently,
34 million people are protected from infection by the disease, with 600,000 cases
of blindness prevented by 2002. Since OCP’s inception, 15 million children born
within the programme area have been spared the risk of contracting
riverblindness. And 25 million hectares of arable land—previously shunned due
to their susceptibility to riverblindness—have become available for agricultural
use.
