“Village Water Supply: Economics and
Policy in the Developing World,? 1976

NUMBER 049
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: FEBRUARY 2006




                           January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
“Village Water Supply: Economics and Policy in the Developing
World,? 1976

About the Publication

The result of this study was the research paper
“Village Water Supply: Economics and Policy in the
Developing World,? written by Robert J. Sounders
and Jeremy J. Warford of the Bank’s Energy, Water
and Telecommunications Department.

The purpose of this paper was to describe and raise
awareness of the extent and nature of the problem
as well as provide some suggestions for dealing with
it. The authors explored the following topics in detail:
                                                           Use of an old well, Yako area,
                                                                Upper Volta, 1974
- the character and magnitude of the problems
connected with water supply and sanitation;

- the relation between water supply and water-borne disease, and also social and
economic activity;

- the effects of improved water supply and sanitation on productivity, incomes,
rural-to-urban migration, and overall development;

- problems of water supply program planning, administration, operation and
                          maintenance;

                              - and the importance of recovering program costs.

                              World Water Forum 2006

                              The Fourth World Water Forum “Local Actions for
                              Global Challenge? will take place in Mexico City on
                              March 16-22, 2006. The Forum is a six day event,
                              which will be followed by a Ministerial Conference.
                              Each day will be dedicated to one of the five topics:

                               - water for growth and development;
  Use of an artesian well,
 Koupela area, Upper Volta,
           1974
- implementing integrated water resources
management;

- water supply and sanitation for all; water for food
and the environment;

- and risk management.

The Bank is supporting thematic and regional
preparations for this Forum. Besides participating in
international events on water supply and sanitation,
the World Bank addresses the issues through the
                                                            Well in Tayenda, Upper Volta,
Water Supply and Sanitation Sector.                                     1982

                                This sector focuses on supporting client countries in
                                four areas:

                                 - extending water supply and sanitation services to
                                the urban poor;

                                - improving operator performance;

                                - increasing rural access to sustainable water supply
                                and sanitation;

                                - and better managing the water resource base.

                                The World Bank’s lending portfolio in water supply
                                and sanitation is over US$6 million, which makes it
                                the largest external financier in this sector.
Well in Tayende, Upper Volta,
            1982
