Second Annual Meetings of the Boards of Governors
of the WBG and the IMF, London, September 1947

NUMBER 059
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: OCTOBER 2007




                           January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
Second Annual Meetings of the Boards of Governors of the WBG
and the IMF, London, September 1947

Background

The first Annual Meetings of the Board
of Governors of the World Bank Group
and the International Monetary Fund
were held in Washington, DC in
1946. The Second Annual Meetings
took place in London from September
11 through September 20, 1947 and
were attended by Governors and their
Alternates from the 45 member             Participants of the Second Annual Meetings at
countries of the two institutions.           the reception, London, September 1947

Meeting Agenda

The London meeting agenda, drawn up by the Joint Procedures Committee of
Bank and Fund and approved by the Governors at the opening session, included:

      Second Annual Report of the Bank
      Financial statements and annual audit
      Administrative budget for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1948
      Application of the Republic of Finland for membership in the Bank
      Proposed increases in the subscriptions of Iran and Egypt to the capital
       stock of the Bank
      Selection of the Advisory Council of the Bank
      Proposed liaison agreement between the Bank and the United Nations
      Site of future annual meetings
      Loan regulations
      Proposed election of a fourteenth Executive Director
      The Indian Independence (International Arrangements) Order, 1947
       (International Bank Notes, Vol. 1, September 19, 1947, No. 11)

Second Annual Report of the World Bank Group

The Second Annual Meetings were opened by the Right Honorable Hugh Dalton,
Chancellor of the Exchequer of Great Britain, and Chairman of the Bank’s Board
of Governors.
 The Opening Session was followed by
a presentation of the second Annual
Report of the Bank to the Board of
Governors by World Bank President
John McCloy. As part of the effort to
include staff members providing
support from Headquarters during the
meetings, the report booklet was
distributed to them on the day it was
presented in London.
                                            Second Annual Meetings participants at the
In his remarks accompanying the                 reception, London, September 1947
presentation of the report, Mr. McCloy
stressed the importance of the
“productive? feature of the Bank’s loans not only from the point of view of the
Bank but also the relationship between nations. He indicated that great strain
upon international amity is created by loans “which leave behind merely an
obligation to repay, without corresponding benefits for those who must bear the
burden of repayment. The sum total is impairment rather than improvement of
relations within the international community?. (International Bank Notes, Vol. 1,
September 19, 1947, No. 11)

                                            Travel to London

                                              The Bank and Fund representatives
                                              traveled to London by sea on the
                                              Queen Elizabeth in two groups, one
                                              sailed on August 16, and the largest
                                              group of Executive Directors and staff
                                              members sailed from New York on
                                              September 3, 1947. One of the staff
                                              members from the Administration
Participants of the Second Annual Meetings at Department, Anthony Balasy, shared
   the reception, London, September 1947
                                              his impressions of the trip to London
                                              for the Second Annual Meetings in
an article published in the International Bank Notes (Vol. 1, October 3, 1947, No.
12):

“It has been said that the length of a trip must be measured not by the miles
covered nor by the days spent in traveling, but by the depth of the impressions
received. If this be true, the journey to London for the annual meeting of the
Governors was a lasting experience for all participants.

"The sea as we sailed east was calm and dull, not unlike those exasperating
people who don’t know how to wear the marks of anger. The passengers danced
and made merry to their hearts’ content. As we steamed up the Solent and
viewed the English coast, our thoughts went back to the years when those very
shores bore the brunt of a savage onslaught. And there was Southampton lying
in the sun with its many wounds just
healing to a scar.

 "We landed about five o’clock in the
afternoon and arrived in London by
nightfall. Through dimly lit streets we
reached our hotels and woke up next
morning to a week of meetings and
excitement, during which the
heartbeats of London aroused our
keenest curiosity.

"One has read so much about                   Other participants at the reception, London,
conditions in England – here was our                        September 1947
chance to see for ourselves. The
conditions of everyday life are difficult;
the economic crisis is still deepening, yet I never heard one word of complaint.
This reticence may be characteristic of the English, but I couldn’t help
remembering the lines of Galsworthy that only those strong enough to keep silent
about self are strong enough to be sure of self.

"Moreover, the inescapable feeling of political stability makes it difficult for the
casual observer to measure the extent of the inroads on England’s social and
economic structure. For those who knew London in the days of peace and
prosperity the picture of today is comparable to that of a wintry tree – alive
indeed, but stripped of its shining splendor?.
