Bretton Woods Monetary Conference,
July 1-22, 1944

NUMBER 061
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: JULY 2008




                          January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
Bretton Woods Monetary Conference, July 1-22, 1944

In July 1944, representatives from 44
nations met at the Mount Washington
Hotel in Bretton Woods, New Hampshire
for the United Nations Monetary and
Financial Conference. The United States
government selected the Mount
Washington Hotel as the site of the now
famous Bretton Woods Conference for
various reasons: its remoteness offered
seclusion from outside interference; the
White Mountains scenery was                    Historic plaque with the inscription
spectacular; and war-time security was        commemorating the Bretton Woods
more easily managed. The Mount                    Conference, July 1-22, 1944
Washington Hotel was closed for
business in 1930 and completely refurbished before the conference.

“…a prodigious amount of work was done during the three weeks of the
Conference. Many persons were assigned to both Bank and Fund committees,
which met around the clock, and in addition to committee meetings, there were
plenary sessions, where microphones were whisked from speaker to speaker by
Boy Scouts…? recalls Shirley Boskey (International Bank Notes, July 1956)




  The U.S. Secretary of the     Lord Keynes addressing the   U.S. Acting Secretary of State
Treasury, Henry Morgenthau,      Conference meeting, July      Dean Acheson addresses
 Jr., addresses the delegates             1944               representatives of 28 nations
  to the Conference, July 8,                                  gathered to sign the Bretton
             1944                                            Woods Monetary Agreement,
                                                                  December 27, 1945
More than a year later, representatives of 28 nations gathered at the State
Department in Washington, D.C. to sign the Bretton Woods Monetary
Agreements preliminary agreed upon at the Bretton Woods Conference.




          Articles of Agreement of the         "Bretton Woods Recalled" by
          International Monetary Fund          Shirley Boskey, International
                                                  Bank Notes, July 1957
              and IBRD, July 1944



Fred Vinson, the U.S. Secretary of the Treasury, said at the time of the formal
signing of the Bretton Woods Agreements: “History is being written today as we
execute these documents and breathe the breath of life into the International




      Delegates in front of the Mount      An informal gathering of the attendees
      Washington Hotel, July 2, 1944            of the Conference, July 1944



Monetary Fund and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
We can be thankful that the history we are now writing is not another chapter in
the almost endless chronicle of war and strife. Ours is a mission of peace – not
just lip service to the ideals of peace – but action, concrete action, designed to
establish the economic foundations of peace on the bed rock of genuine
international cooperation.

"If these two great international institutions are to achieve the mission which the
world has so hopefully entrusted to their care, it will require the wholehearted and
concerted cooperation of each of the member countries and their people"
(Treasury Department, Press Release, December 27, 1945)
