Nairobi Office Opens


NUMBER 029
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: NOVEMBER 2004




                         January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
Nairobi Office Opens


In this article, which first appeared in the May 1967 issue of "International Bank
Notes," David L. Gordon, the first Chief of Mission in Nairobi, gives a picture of
the Mission in its early
days.

The Bank first moved to
put down roots in Eastern
Africa in March 1965,
when T. V. Andersen
arrived in Nairobi. Over
the next several months
came a trickle of other
recruits. Harold Young
took over as Acting Chief
of Mission. Mary Sfeir
quickly organized the
clerical side of the Office
and personified the spirit
of Harambee (Swahili for        Nairobi Office staff, 1967. Sitting left to right: Timothy
"working together").            Mukangura, Shirley Jolley, Bhanu Shah, Rose D’Souza,
Douwe Groenveld arrived        Phoebe Odero and Celine George. Standing left to right:
from Rome. Sandy Storrar          Cyrus Samii, Dug Kirkwood, Douwe Groenveld, Kay
                              MacDonald, Sandy Storrar, Wynne Taylor, T. V. Andersen,
and Dick Henderson, old      Elizabeth Cook, David Gordon, Pepe Morra, Mary Sfeir, Tony
hands in East Africa,          Van Dijck, Ken Prashar, Gideon Wairioko, Samuel Maina,
came back to Nairobi to        Peter Kimani, and Joseph Macharia. Photo: Elite Studio’s
set up the Agricultural                                   Ltd.
Development Service
(ADS), a new departure in the Bank’s services to member countries. Pepe Morra
took on the growing administrative headaches just before the end of 1965.

[The Agricultural Development Service—attached to the Nairobi Office--
employed on long-term contract a limited number of men of proven agricultural
and managerial competence under African conditions, making them available to
governments or development agencies in Eastern Africa to assist in the
execution of agricultural projects and in the training of African managers to run
these projects later on.]
By the time I arrived in January 1966, the walls of our temporary seven room
office suite were bulging; half the Mission had to be kept traveling so that the
other half could sit down. Our expansion continued throughout the year, but now
we are more or less stabilized at a total of 38, including two ADS men appointed
but not yet on board. Fortunately, we managed, with some difficulty, to find
enough office space to house everyone and are now sufficiently settled to begin
to feel that it may really be a permanent mission.

In the variety of origins, backgrounds and
temperaments, the Mission fairly well reflects the
Bank as a whole. Ten nationalities are represented:
Britain, Canada, Denmark, India, Iran, Israel, Italy,
Kenya, the Netherlands, and the U.S. There are
nine members from the regular Bank staff, one
detailed from the FAO/IBRD Cooperative
Programme, twelve ADS members on long-term
contracts, and 16 local employees.

The ADS group are long-time residents of East or
Central Africa, agriculturists and practical farmers,
with a wide knowledge of conditions and
potentialities in this region. They spend most of               Thermod V. Andersen
their time in the bush, tramping or Land Roving over
embryonic ranching schemes, laying out tracks or
water and soil conservation works, inspecting crops and cattle, and chivvying
local administrators for equipment, supplies or boundary adjudication. The rest of
                               us feel somewhat desk-bound by comparison, but still
                               cover a good deal of ground—mostly on relatively
                               short trips, by the Bank’s usual standards, from one to
                               twenty days—within our region, which stretches from
                               the Egyptian border to that of South Africa.

                            It is a diverse and picturesque region—ranging from
                            the desert and the arid rangelands of Sudan and
                            Somalia; through the lush rolling country along the
                            upper Nile and around the great African lakes; the
                            high plateaux and deep valleys of Ethiopia, Kenya
                            and Tanzania; the steep slopes of Madagascar; and
                            down to the progressively drier country of South
                            Central Africa. There are lovely long beaches on the
     Douwe Groenveld
                            Indian Ocean, a dozen or so game parks in East
Africa and Zambia, charming country hotels and all kinds of sport facilities for the
occasions when we take a few days off from work. The Nairobi climate is
delightful most of the time—the same can’t be said for some other parts of the
region—and we find that in the months from November to March, especially,
there are quite a few people in the Bank who thoughtfully come out to assist us in
our tasks.

The main work of the Mission, apart from the ADS, is to help the countries of
Eastern Africa in the preparation of plans and projects, especially in the
agriculture and transport sectors, to the point where they could be financed by
the Bank or IDA. As we conceive our role in project preparation, it is not to work
out investment schemes on our own hook, and serve them up fully formed, ready
for financing and execution. Rather it might be said that we try to foster the
evolution of projects, responding to local initiative and relying on local authorities
to do most of the necessary collection of data, sifting of policies, devising of
administrative arrangements and assessment of advantages. But outside help is
often needed to get this project preparation work started, and keep it moving
along properly.




        Mary Sfeir              Alexander Stevenson            Giuseppe Morra



The Mission’s location in the center of the region, no more than two or three
hours by plane from any of its capitals, makes it easy to maintain this continuing
contract, going back to the project sponsors at successive stages of its evolution,
as often as is necessary. In the process we have a chance to gain a better
appreciation of development needs and problems, in other fields related to the
project, or become aware of other projects that deserve attention.
In this process also we may be too closely involved, too psychologically
committed to "our" projects, to be able to assess them with full objectivity. The
final appraisal and negotiation of loans is therefore rightly reserved to
Headquarters personnel. On the other hand, precisely because the regional
Mission is so closely and continuously involved in its countries, it may sometimes
be able to bring a different and valid perspective to the Bank’s assessment o f
development need problems, and an additional link of understanding with these
member countries.

In this process also we may be too closely involved, too psychologically
committed to "our" projects, to be able to assess them with full objectivity. The
final appraisal and negotiation of loans is therefore rightly reserved to
Headquarters personnel. On the other hand, precisely because the regional
Mission is so closely and continuously involved in its countries, it may sometimes
be able to bring a different and valid perspective to the Bank’s assessment of
development need problems, and an additional link of understanding with these
member countries.
