East African Mediation


NUMBER 035
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: SEPTEMBER 2003




                         January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
East African Mediation

The primary focus of the Bank today is poverty
alleviation. Yet the Bank also has performed
many other functions in the course of its work.
One of the lesser-known is that of mediation. In
this excerpt from a 1987 oral history interview,
Victor Umbricht tells the story of his role in the
mediation of the dissolution of the East African
Community.

Umbricht joined the staff of the Bank in 1953 as
Deputy Director of Operations for Europe, African
and Australia. He was on leave from the Swiss
government at that time. He returned to
Switzerland in 1957 to spend three years as
Director of the Swiss Treasury. He took leave
again in 1960-1961 to serve as Financial Advisor
and President of the Monetary Council of the               Victor Umbricht

United Nations Mission to assist newly-
independent and very turbulent Zaire (now Democratic Republic of Congo).
Thereafter, he spent four years as President of CIBA's New York subsidiary and
then became a member of the Board of the CIBA corporation in Switzerland, with
which he remained until 1985.

From 1966 onward Dr. Umbricht spent much time on the developing countries:
relief, war prisoner and refugee resettlement, peace negotiations and other
negotiations in Vietnam, Laos, Thailand, Israel, Bangladesh, Pakistan, India,
Iran, Nicaragua, Guatemala and elsewhere, either for the United Nations or for
the International Committee of the Red Cross, whose Vice Chairman he
ultimately became. In late 1977, upon the nomination of the Bank, he was
accepted by Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda as their Mediator in arriving at a
permanent and equitable division of the assets and liabilities of the East African
Community and to make recommendations for the future of the East African
Development Bank. His terms of reference assumed the job would be done in
about 15 months; in the event, it took more than nine years.

The following are excerpts from an interview with Dr. Umbricht in 1987.

This Mediation started in November 1977, as a consequence of the breakdown
of the East African Community, which was a very integrated organization of three
states, Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda. They originally decided in 1967 to work
together in a very close manner. [There had been considerable integration in pre-
independence days, under British administration.] They were much more
integrated than the European Community, for instance, which has only joint
discussions, joint subsidy policies, joint agricultural policies, but does not have
joint assets. Whereas in East Africa you had a joint parliament, joint judiciary,
courts, you had a joint secretariat, you had a ministerial council for Community
affairs, in addition to ministerial councils for national affairs. There was the East
African Railways Corporation-not the Tanzanian Railway or Ugandan Railway-
East African Airways, East African Harbours, East African research institutions,
East African taxes, customs, and so on. It was a very integrated community of
states, and what was left to the states was mainly foreign policy, agriculture
industry, security, police, education and so on. But plenty of their sovereign rights
were turned over to the Community.

                                       It was a wonderful idea, very forward-
                                       looking; there was a great vision behind it.
                                       But it did not work. It collapsed after 10
                                       years, with a number of difficulties in
                                       between. It collapsed because the three
                                       countries were not-how should I say-
                                       mature enough to have such an integrated
                                       system. Moreover, their policies diverged
                                       so much. For instance, Kenya had a
                                       market-oriented policy; Tanzania had a
                                        centralized economy, more socialist-
    Railway and Harbours Project, East  oriented; Uganda under Idi Amin had no
            African Community           policy at all-it was chaos. So the decision-
                                        making process in the three countries
differed so much that the progress which the Community should have brought did
not come about since they could not agree amongst themselves.

Now that collapse had, of course, very serious consequences. It was not only a
collapse in form, it was one of substance. The borders were closed. You could
not cross the border any more from Kenya to Tanzania. There were no inter-
country railways, no trade, no airways. We had no post and telecommunications
services any more, no joint navigation. We even had a war in 1978-79 between
Tanzania and Uganda when Idi Amin was thrown out, so everything was in a
shambles. It was chaotic.
And of course they did not pay their common debts. They not only had assets
like railway wagons, they also had common liabilities, say to the World Bank and
to many governments, which they had to re-pay as a Community. But the
Community having collapsed, nobody re-paid anything, so they were all in
default. There was no way to see to it that liabilities would be honored. The three
countries lived so much apart from each other that they were unable to talk to
each other anymore.

So in September 1977, three months after the breakdown, there was the Annual
Meeting of the Bank and Fund. Those governments came here, as they always
did because they were members of the Bank, and said to the Bank and Fund that
they are in trouble and the Bank should help them with funds, with money to
keep them afloat. The Bank said no, you have to make order first in your own
house and you have to re-pay existing liabilities before we can come in.
However, the governments informed the Bank that they were no longer on
speaking terms, and how can you settle a problem between us if you are unable
to meet and to talk. Therefore the Bank and the Fund suggested that if they could
not talk directly to each other, they should talk to somebody in between, a
Mediator.

That is how the Mediation system came up. The proposal was made and the
three countries accepted to have Mediation and asked the Bank to propose a
Mediator. And the Bank proposed four or five names. Amongst those names was
mine. So, I moved over to east Africa and I stayed there for nine years and three
months.

My team and I had not only divide the assets of the Community, we also had to
restore the economic sovereign rights of the countries, and we had to see that
liabilities were paid. We had to divide the liabilities. That meant we had to make
an apportionment agreement with each creditor, each one-in fact, three
apportionment agreements.

We also had to deal with plenty of additional questions, such as pensions. There
were 100,000 Community employees, and they all had made their contributions
to the pension fund, so they were entitled to a pension. Who were those entitled?
Were they still alive? Did they have one wife or four wives? In that part of the
world the rules are a bit different from our part. And did they have orphans? Who
was entitled to what, and what were their addresses? And that in Africa is not so
easy. And who or what was to pay those entitled? Also not easy to decide. So it
was a very arduous, complex exercise. But the main gist of it was to divide all
assets, say railway wagons or ships or buildings or airplanes-the joint assets-and
to divide the liabilities, and to prepare for future cooperation.

My job there was a battle every day, and
improvisation and creativity every day. That
was the basis for our work. We finished our
Mediation with 28 agreements. One is the
basic Mediation Agreement amongst the
three countries, and then we have three
agreements, where we had one before,
between every country in East Africa and
their creditor countries, or creditors in
general. The World Bank was the biggest
creditor against the Community.

A successful mediation requires a number of
pre-conditions. It only succeeds if the top
                                                     Signing of the Amendments to the
authority in the country has the will to support       Loan Guarantee Agreements to
it. And the Presidents did.                        finance the mediation services for the
                                                          East African Community.
The second one was the fact that the
governments, their cabinets, the ministers,
were on relatively good terms and speaking terms with each other, despite the
tremendous antagonism and friction and tension there was, because most of
them in three independent states had studied at the one and only East African
university, Makerere. And so they're colleagues, buddies from Makerere days. Or
they had worked together in the Community headquarters.

And the third point was that the administrative machinery, the high officials, were
more efficient than was expected. In that respect I think we Western people
underestimate the administration in developing countries. It is one of our major
mistakes.

And the fourth element, if I may mention the Mediator, he must have plenty of
perseverance, patience and fantasy. And I was never prepared to throw in my
contract, and the governments knew it. They knew that this man would not leave
them in peace until he succeeded.

Total discretion by the Mediator is a basic condition. You have to use the press,
but in a very general way, and only at the request of the government, never on
your own volition. So discretion is a top condition. You have to be firm and
friendly to them [i.e., the governments involved in the mediation], you have to
help them. They must feel that you are a friend, a firm, strict friend and a friend of
integrity, of total integrity.

A copy of Dr. Umbricht's book reflecting on his experiences as Mediator for the
East African Community can be found in both the Joint Bank-Fund Library and
the Law Library.
