Development in Iraq


NUMBER 032
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: AUGUST 2003




                         January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
Development in Iraq
In September 1957 Bank staff member Orville J. McDiarmid began a leave of
absence to serve as Economic Adviser to the Development Board of Iraq. His
description of Iraq in the excerpted piece that follows—which appeared originally
in the January-February 1959 issue of “International Bank Notes?—gives an
indication of the challenges faced by development efforts in that country almost
half a century ago—some of which remain today.

When the Beirut plane on which the McDiarmids
were vacation-bound last July rose above the
mile-high opaque blanket that shrouded Baghdad,
my son congratulated the family on finally
breaking the dust barrier. Dust was an important
fact of life in Iraq in the spring and early summer
months of a year of exceptional drought. About
one-third of a year’s normal 5 to 6 inches of rain
fell on a day in November. nt parched earth and
stunted barley in the normally rain-fed liwas of
northern Iraq. Crop Then, lack of the usual mid-
winter showers meafailure there was 30 to 50
percent. On the irrigated plains of the center and
south lack of water from the skies is of lesser
concern.                                                  Orville J. McDiarmid

There, the non-appearance of the usual rain-fed
desert shrubs meant hotter days and more dust in May, usually the last reprieve
before the 115-130 degree heat of the Iraq summer. But from October till April,
weather was no problem. Only the odd shower, of liquid mud, if the rain fell
through winds bearing the western desert to Baghdad, interrupted clear skies
and pleasant temperatures.

I would not like to give an impression that the McDiarmids were entirely immune
to the ruins of Nineveh, Babylon and other relics of ancient glory in the Tigris-
Euphrates valley. Indeed our children stocked a respectable museum in our
Baghdad house with priceless pieces picked up from atop many famous picnic
mounds, the spelling of which escapes me at the moment. These included a
genuine statue of Hammurabi’s wife or mother-in-law purchased at a nominal
figure from an energetic urchin in Babylon. It is as well that it, along with my
other household effects, remain in Iraq.
More seriously, there are few places on earth of greater historical interest than
Iraq. This is some compensation for the climate. A layman like myself may
confuse the Abassid Caliph Haruun al-Rashid, who built Baghdad in the eighth
century as the capital of Islam, with Rashid Ali of the abortive 1941 coup. He
must be impressed, however, that the ruins of the work of Sargon and
Hammurabi built in the second and third millennia B.C. provide lessons for
modern irrigation that the Iraqi Development Board has considered worthy of
study.

                                             No tourist should miss a visit to the Iraqi
                                             National Museum where the remarkable
                                             English woman, Gertrude Bell, saved
                                             for Iraq some of the best of the Ur and
                                             Babylonian finds. More would be there if
                                             archeology in the last century had not
                                             been closer to grave robbery than to the
                                             scientific business it is today. While the
                                             visitor may not approve of a religion that
                                             dictated the slaughter of so many
                                             courtesans in the royal death pits of Ur,
 The first two gates for the Wadi Tharthar   he must agree that the headdresses
 Flood Control Project being constructed.    they wore in 3000 B.C. would be difficult
     Photo: Ransomes & Rapier, Ltd.          to buy in Washington today.

Iraq is truly the land of the two rivers, whether one’s interest is in the past or the
future. Without Tigris and Euphrates water, the part of the ‘fertile crescent?
formed by the great valley would be barren desert, as are the vast reaches to
the west between the Euphrates and the Jordan. The civilizations of Sumer in
the south and Assyria in the north were of course fed from lands irrigated by the
rivers in ancient times. So also was the region around Baghdad in the more
recent Islamic period of Haroun as-Rashid and his successors up to the Mongol
invasions of the 11th and 12th centuries, when most of the irrigation works were
destroyed.

However, wit has only been in late years, when oil and a Bank loan were added
to ancient resources of land and water, that the control of the rivers, as distinct
from the use of their waters, has been accomplished. This was done first by the
Ramadi Barrage, which diverted excess Euphrates waters into Lake
Habbaniyah 100 kilometers west of Baghdad and only two years ago, when the
Bank-financed project at Samarra, 80 kilometers north of the capital, began to
pour Tigris flood waters, that devastated Baghdad in as late as 1954, into Wadi
Tharthar. This basin, larger than the Dead Sea, will store enough water for most
of southern Iraq if it does not leak. If even larger works now underway on the
Tigris tributaries Zab and Diyala are completed, fluctuation in flow will largely be
eliminated and the erstwhile,
erratic monster will be in reality a
canal.

Thus at this stage in its
development program, Iraq is well
on its way to controlling the two
rivers. However, the problem that
seemed to have been so
masterfully handled by antiquity is
again in the forefront of
discussions in Iraq. How can
irrigation water be used without
destroying the soil to which it          The barrage floor of the Wadi Tharthar Flood
gives life? Drainage, while less        Control Project under construction, January 5,
spectacular than Frank Lloyd                   1955. Photo: Goode & Partners
Wright’s plans for a Baghdad
opera, is of much greater concern to the Development Board. We have heard
that at one time or another the population of the Tigris-Euphrates valley was 20
to 30 million. This estimate was based largely on what the ancient irrigation
systems would support if all were in active use at the same time.

Experts question this conclusion, however, pointing out that the multitude of
abandoned systems indicate the long prevalence of the drainage and salination
problems and not that they supported a population 3 to 5 times that of modern
Iraq. People moved and cities fell as the adjacent lands salted up. In the past as
well as more recently, and perhaps in the future, irrigation without adequate
drainage destroys the productivity of the flat and heavy soils of central and
southern Iraq in which the natural lateral flow of water is slight.
Despite little rain and high
temperatures the water table is so
high that stagnant puddles remain
for long periods after every shower
or whenever even a shallow
excavation is made, but the
surrounding surface is so dry and
hot in summer that vegetation-
destroying sub-surface salts are
washed up and deposited. As
tourists will allow, it will take a lot of
leaching to make the soil around
Babylon produce again the grass that Nebuchadnezzer was supposed to have
eaten during a period of despondency.

As we bedded down on July 9 as the only guests of Beirut’s spacious Hotel
Capitol, and were lulled to sleep by the spatter of rifle fire from the rebel
stronghold above, punctuated by the occasional burst of a bomb or grenade, we
had nostalgic thoughts of Baghdad lying peacefully under its blanket of dust
beside the now smooth-flowing Tigris. Our short sojourn in Iraq was over.
Confirmation of the fact came a month later in a cryptic telegram from the new
Government.
                                      Construction of the barrage site of the Wadi
                                       Tharthar Flood Control Project, January 1,
                                           1955. Photo: Goode & Partners
