The World Bank’s Partnership with
Cameroon

NUMBER 006
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: JANUARY 2003




                           January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
The World Bank’s Partnership with Cameroon

Cameroon is a Central African nation on the Gulf of
Guinea, bordered by Nigeria, Chad, the Central
African Republic, the Republic of Congo, Equatorial
Guinea, and Gabon. Bantu speakers were among
the first groups to settle Cameroon, followed by the
Muslim Fulani in the 18th and 19th centuries. The
land escaped colonial rule until 1884, when treaties
with tribal chiefs brought the area under German
domination. After World War I, the League of
Nations gave the French a mandate over 80% of
the area, and the British 20% adjacent to Nigeria.       Water hand pump in Congola
                                                         near Maroua, supplied as part
After World War II, when the country came under a             of Credit 0723 Rural
UN trusteeship in 1946, self-government was               Development Fund Project
granted. At this time, the Cameroon People's Union
emerged as the dominant party by campaigning for reunification and
independence. In British Cameroon, unification was also promoted by the leading
                                     party, the Kamerun National Democratic
                                     Party. France set up Cameroon as an
                                     autonomous state in 1957, and the next
                                     year its legislative assembly voted for
                                     independence by 1960.

                                        Cameroon became an independent
                                        republic on Jan. 1, 1960. In 1961 the
                                        southern part of the British territory joined
                                        the new Federal Republic of Cameroon and
                                        the northern section voted for unification
                                        with Nigeria. The president of Cameroon
                                        since independence, Ahmadou Ahidjo, was
                                        replaced in 1982 by the prime minister,
                                        Paul Biya, who has remained in power ever
since. With the expansion of oil, timber, and coffee exports, the economy has
                                        continued to improve, although corruption
On April 10, 1964, the Federal Republic
 of Cameroon became a member of the     is prevalent, and environmental
 International Development Association  degradation remains a concern.
 (IDA). The Articles of Agreement were
 signed by His Excellency Jacques Kuoh
 Moukouri. Also present were IBRD and
IDA Secretary Morton Mendels (left) and
         Mr. Lyle Doucet (right)
In 2002, Cameroon's population numbered just over 16 million persons. The
largest cities are Doula (population 908,000) and Yaounde, the capital city
(population 730,000). Life expectancy is 50 years. Mount Cameroon (13,350 ft;
4,069 m), near the coast, is the highest elevation in the country. Total surface
area is 475.4 thousand square kilometers, with population per square kilometer
                                   of 32. The main rivers are the Benue, Nyong,
                                   and Sanaga. French and English are both
                                   official languages, and there are 24 major
                                   African language groups.

                                     Cameroon joined the World Bank on July 10,
                                     1963, becoming the 86th member of IBRD. The
                                     government subsequently joined IDA (April 10,
                                     1964, becoming the 92nd member) and signed
                                     as the 29th member of the ICSID Convention
                                     on February 7, 1967. On October 1, 1974
                                     Cameroon joined IFC, becoming the 100th
                                     member of the Corporation. On October 7,
                                     1988 Cameroon joined MIGA, becoming the
Spraying fungicide onto the leaves
   of coffee plants grown on the
                                     45th member.
    Arabica coffee plantation in
 Bafoussam (Credit 0784 Western      On August 18, 1975, IBRD opened a regional
  Highlands Rural Development        mission in Yaounde, headed by Mr. Michael
              Project)
                                     Palein. IFC opened a regional mission for
                                     Central Africa in Douala on May 1, 1990,
headed by Mr. Roger Blondel.

The first funding provided by the Bank to
Cameroon was Loan 0490, Credit 0100 --
Agriculture Project. The Agriculture Project was
based principally on oil palm, Cameroon's most
profitable crop, but it included planting or
replanting of rubber, tea and pepper, and also
included work on existing immature plantings
and provision for processing and other facilities.
It expanded the area devoted to plantations from
22,400 ha to 33,100 ha.

Over the years, the Bank's financial and                 Root stock for rubber trees is
                                                       treated at the HEVECAM Rubber
technical assistance spanned a wide range of                    Estate in Niete
sectors. The 1960s witnessed 3 loans and 3
credits, including ones for agriculture, education, oil palm, and water supply.
Projects in the 1970s included 18 loans, 17 credits, and 2 investments for rice
development projects, highway and feeder roads, Douala port projects, projects
on education, cocoa, oil palm, railways, water supply and livestock.

By the 1980s there were 20 loans, 4 credits, and 9 investments. Projects were
related to economic management, structural adjustment, rural development,
urban development, forestry, rubber, manpower development, post and
telecommunications, and small and medium scale enterprises. In the 1990s the
Bank Group made 3 loans, 10 credits, and 6 investments for national agricultural
extension and training, food security, higher education, privatization and private
sector technical assistance, transport sector technical assistance, economic
recovery, and Social Dimensions of Adjustment.




    Heavy equipment is           Railway track maintenance      Equipment repair at the palm
maintained and repaired in a   for the fourth Railway project     oil processing mill on the
 garage at the HEVECAM                  in Cameroon              Dibombari estate as part of
  Rubber Estate in Niete                                           the World Bank Group’s
                                                                 second SOCAPALM project



In 2000 the Bank agreed to support a $3.7 billion pipeline connecting the oil fields
in neighboring Chad with the Cameroon coast, providing $53.4 million to
Cameroon for its equity share in the project. Environmentalists feared the giant
project would harm rain forests and primarily benefit oil companies and political
elites in Cameroon and Chad. President Wolfensohn and the Board of Directors
determined that the project would be improved due to World Bank participation,
and that an independent body would monitor the project with attention to
environmental and social safeguards.
On October 16, 2000, the Bank approved a comprehensive debt reduction
package for Cameroon under the Enhanced Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
(HIPC) Initiative. Total debt relief from all of Cameroon's creditors was worth
around US$2 billion in nominal terms. The debt relief freed about $100 million per
year for the next three years for expenditures on health care, primary education
HIV/AIDS prevention, and other critical social services.

The Bank Group has produced 16 economic reports on Cameroon, the earliest
dating from 1964. Topics of these reports include general economic studies,
recent economic development, medium term public development program,
industrial sector, development planning, public investment review, social
dimensions of adjustment, and diversity, growth, and poverty reduction. (The full
text of these reports are available through
Imagebank).

The most recent (2002) Country Assistance
Strategy Progress Report for Cameroon had two
objectives: a) to complete the implementation of the
program set out in the 1996 CAS and the 1998
progress report; and b) to utilize the enhanced
Heavily Indebted Poorest Countries (HIPC) initiative
and Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP)
process to support second generation reforms to
address poverty reduction issues with particular
emphasis on governance, corruption, and the social      Spraying insecticide against
sectors.                                                the tsetse fly in Ngaoundere
                                                          as part of the Livestock
The report analyzed the Bank's experience in               Development Project.
implementing its assistance strategy since the
previous progress report in 1998 and discussed the Bank's interim program for
the next 12-18 months, given that Cameroon's PRSP and the next full CAS were
to be presented to the Board of Executive Directors. The interim lending program
comprised eight operations totaling $183 million. The report concluded that if the
government failed to address corruption and governance issues, the entire
program could be derailed. Risks could be mitigated by undertaking only limited
new lending until there had been satisfactory progress in these areas.

In total, the Bank Group has funded 45 loans, 39 credits, and 25 investments,
and 8 trust fund projects for Cameroon. The original principle has totaled
$2,618,641,993. Of this amount, $1,994,576,147 has been disbursed and
$331,475,468 has been cancelled. $927,463,422 has been repaid, and
$979,491,193 remains due.

World Bank Group Archives would like to acknowledge the various sources for
the historical and statistical data used in this document: World Bank Group
databases (including the Africa Region website, Archives' IRAMS database, CTR
Loan KIOSK Imagebank) , the Economist Intelligence Reports, and InfoPlease .
In cases of statistical discrepancy, the most recent statistics were chosen.
