Richard Demuth


NUMBER 005
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: JANUARY 2003




                          January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
Richard Demuth

Excerpt from an oral history interview with Richard
Demuth.

Demuth joined the Bank in 1946 as served as
Assistant to the President under presidents Eugene
Meyer, John J. McCloy and Eugene R. Black. He
was Director of the Department of Technical
Assistance and Liaison, which was responsible for
planning, coordinating and giving general direction
to the Bank's technical assistance activities, and for
coordinating the Bank's relationships with other
international agencies. From 1961 to his retirement
in 1973 he served as Director of the Development
Services Department and the International
Relations Department. He also served as chairman
of CGIAR.
                                                              Richard H. Demuth
In August, 1961, Demuth participated in the Bank's
oral history program. Following is an excerpt from his interview in which Demuth
talks about some of the earliest challenges facing the young institution:

"I have skipped over rather hastily Mr. Meyer's six months in office, because I
                                can't really remember very distinctly when particular
                                policies of the Bank were established. In any event,
                                during that period policy questions were being
                                explored rather than decisions being made, and a
                                great deal of the time was devoted to just setting up
                                the Bank's structure and getting some people to
                                staff it. If I had to mention the one major
                                contribution, the largest contribution I think Meyer
                                made to the Bank, it was the number of people that
    President John J. McCloy    were recruited during his time of office that rose to
  (center) on a trip to Central senior positions and are still with the Bank. It was
        America (1948)
                                really quite an amazing recruitment job in a short
                                period of time."

"Meyer's selection as president of course was in part dictated by his reputation
as a very successful investment banker, and as a successful head of the RFC
[Reconstruction Finance Corporation], and one of his major preoccupations was
sounding out the private capital market on raising money for the Bank. I
accompanied him on his first trip to New York, when
we had a meeting of investment bankers in the
Federal Reserve up there, and he was most
cordially received. The bankers were very ready to
hear his story. They were however thoroughly
unenthusiastic about giving any financial support for
the Bank. There was an amazing discrepancy
between the attitude of the bankers and the
expectations of Bretton Woods, where it was
believed that the Bank could easily borrow up to the
total amount of its subscribed capital resources and
surplus."

"There were reasons for the complete disinterest of
the bankers in buying our bonds. In part it was due         President Eugene Meyer
to legal limitations. I think the legal limitations were
quite severe, but even more, it was the attitude of the market towards an
institution that was completely unknown and that smacked of having to do with
foreign lending, which at that time was in very bad repute. The Bank had a lot of
members whose credit was undoubtedly non-existent. In general it was thought
of as a do-good institution, as a wild idea, without any respectable support. Some
                                 people understood the value of its securities, but
                                 they were few and far between."

                               "When we finally did come to make an issue, we
                               had to undertake a tremendous campaign of
                               education, changing laws, particularly getting
                               boards of directors and investment committees to
                               understand what the Bank was, because anything
                               called the "World Bank" or the "International Bank"
                               in those days smacked of something that
                               investment committees didn't want to have anything
                               to do with. So we organized a terrific sales group,
                               Black and McCloy did, when they set up the first
                               issue. Their presence and the support that they got
                               from their friends in the investment banking
       Robert L. Garner        community in New York, the underwriting group
                               they finally were able to put together, ensured the
success of the issue. If it had been done with any less careful preparation, I'm
afraid it might have been a very substantial flop."
"[McCloy, Garner and Black] worked as a remarkably good team, Black out
selling the Bank to the market, McCloy helping greatly in that effort but also
selling the Bank to the world, the public at large, Garner the able chief of staff
who really got the Bank into operation as an effective banking institution. I don't
think one could speak too highly of Garner's contribution in those days, not only
in terms of tremendous work but tremendous toughness, his insistence that we
operate not as a public institution -- accepting less than the best standards -- but
as a business institution. Our staff had to be the best staff that could be gotten
together, and we did not compromise because of the political nature of our
constitution and our structure."

"I know this created conflicts with governments at
times, governments that were pushing people. For
example, he [Garner] refused to pay any attention
to the political pressures that were put on to employ
certain individuals. While he was sometimes
impatient with the economists, with the "longhairs"
in the Bank, his approach was a very broad
approach, and he was willing to stick his neck out to
make decisions. All those policy issues that had            President McCloy chairs a
                                                            Meeting of the Executive
been discussed for a long time in committees were               Directors (1949)
brought up to the management of the Bank for
decision, and they were quickly decided, sometimes
rightly, mostly rightly, sometimes wrongly, but at least they were decided and
enacted."

"Mr. McCloy gave the Bank a broad vision and incisive approach that was
extremely salutary, and I think he probably made the most, the boldest moves
                              the Bank has ever made in terms of its European
                              reconstruction loans. He realized that the Bank's
                              reputation was at a low ebb and action had to be
                              taken, so he both organized the marketing
                              campaign I have mentioned and he decided to
                              proceed rapidly with a number of European loans.
                              Nobody at that time had any assurance that our
                              loans to Europe would be repaid, but there was a
                              desperate situation there, when Lend-Lease was
 Robert L. Garner and John J. cut off and the Marshall Plan had not yet been
    McCloy at the Bank’s      conceived, and the European economy was
 Twentieth Anniversary Dinner threatened with a stoppage of fuel and food
            (1966)
                              imports, raw material imports, and McCloy decided
that action had to be taken, and we made the 500 million dollars of European
reconstruction loans, on faith to a very large extent, without reasonable prospects
of repayment that could be documented, but in the knowledge that if Europe
wasn't held together, the rest of the Bank's job was not going to be very
effective."

"Then, you must remember, shortly after those
loans were made, the idea of the Marshall Plan was
first mentioned by Dean Acheson in his Louisiana
speech, I think it was, and Marshall made his
speech at Harvard which was taken up by the
Europeans. The Bank spent a great deal of time in
the summer of 1947 in helping work out the
Marshall Plan, helping the United States and                Robert L. Garner and
helping some of the Europeans work out the               President George Woods at
presentation of the Marshall Plan. McCloy testified         the Bank’s Twentieth
for the Marshall Plan, in full knowledge that this       Anniversary  Dinner (1966)
would put us out of business in the main area in
which we were attempting to do business, but with thorough recognition that the
job was so much beyond the Bank's resources that we shouldn't take a narrow
jurisdiction stand, and that the Marshall Plan was a necessity. And I think his
testimony assistance and the Bank's position was of considerable assistance in
getting the Marshall Plan through Congress. Then we turned to the problem of
                                development."

                              The Bank's first bonds were issued on July 15,
                              1947, for $250 million. In a 1961 article in
                              International Bank Notes, Demuth described the
                              event: "it is hard now to comprehend how difficult it
                              was initially to make investors, regulatory bodies
                              and legislatures understand how essentially sound
                              an institution we are. Indeed it was with
  Presidents Eugene Black,    considerable trepidation that we announced plans
   George Woods and John      for our first bond offering of $250 million in the
           McCloy             United States on July 15, 1947, through 1,700
                              securities dealers. This was the largest consortium
                              of its kind which, up to that time, had ever been
organized in this country. As the date of offering drew near, tension in the Bank
mounted to a high pitch, for as of then we had no experience of Mr. Black's
magic touch with the bond market. The Bank's bonds appeared on the New York
Stock Exchange ticker for the first time immediately after the 10 o'clock opening,
and by noon the issue was over-subscribed. The relief in the Bank was
considerable. I don't believe that any subsequent transaction matched the
excitement of the first."

The Bank's first four loans were reconstruction loans (to France, the Netherlands,
Denmark, and Luxembourg). Loan 0005 (1948) was to Chile, and was the first
Bank loan for development purposes.
