Education Project – Tunisia


NUMBER 039
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: DECEMBER 2004




                              January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
Education Project – Tunisia

The photo on the previous page shows a
group of students receiving instruction at
the Lycee Technique de Rades in Tunisia.
This school was designed to provide a six-
year secondary education with emphasis
on mathematics and technical subjects. It
was built using funds from the Education
Project for Tunisia (Credit 0029).
                                                   The Lycee Technique de Sfax expanded
This was the first World Bank Group             with the aid of funds from the World
financing for education. The purpose of the               Bank, May 1966
project was to provide assistance for the
most crucial requirements of the Tunisian school system by financing the
construction of a number of middle and secondary schools.

These schools were urgently needed to reduce overcrowding and to enable
teachers who were already on the job to be used more effectively. The Lycee de
Jeunes Filles Elomrane and the Lycee Technique de Sfax were also financed as
part of the Tunisia Education Project.

The World Bank Group continues to assist in the development of education in
Tunisia. In March 2004 the World Bank approved a $130 million loan to support
efforts to improve the quality and equity of public in the country.




 Two students at the IDA-financed Lycee de    A young student works at the blackboard in
Jeunes Filles Elomrane near Tunis, November    the classroom at the Lycee Technique de
                    1969                                    Rades, 1966
