The Bank and Postage Stamps


NUMBER 021
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: MAY 2003




                          January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
The Bank and Postage Stamps

The World Bank has frequently made an appearance in the world of postage
stamps. In this article we will take a brief look at the form that some of these have
taken.

United Nations World Bank Commemorative Stamps

On December 9, 1960, the United Nations Postal Administration issued a
commemorative stamp honoring the Bank. The stamp was printed in sheets of 50
in both 4 cent and 8 cent denominations by the Government Printing Bureau,
Tokyo, Japan, in quantities of 3,000,000 and 2,750,000 respectively. The design
is by Angel Medina of Uruguay.

The stamp is multicolored and printed by the
photogravure process. The 4 cent denomination
is predominantly pale blue with dark green, tan
and brown, while the 8 cent stamp is
predominantly orange with light olive green,
blue and dark brown.

On January 27, 1989, the United Nations Postal
Administration issued another set of
commemorative stamps honoring the World
Bank. The stamps, in U.S., Swiss and Austrian
denominations were sold in New York, Geneva
and Vienna, as well as at the World Bank
Bookstore (now the InfoShop), which became,
for that day, an official U.N. Post Office station
where letters bearing the stamps could be
                                                      Doctor B. Rinchin (1905 - 1977,
mailed to any address in the world.                   Mongolia). Scientist, great writer
                                                                and teacher
The design of the 1989 commemorative stamps
was decided by competition. The U.N. Stamp
and Medal Committee received 221 entries from 46 artists and designers in 24
countries. The winning designs were by Saturnino Lumboy, a Filipino artist, who
was awarded $12,000 by the U.N. for his six designs. The stamps had a limited
edition of 900,000 to 1.5 million per denomination and were on sale for a year.
Those seeking to purchase these stamps today should consult stamp dealers.
Annual Meeting Commemoratives

Annual Meetings held away from Washington
are also sometimes the subject of
commemorative stamps. Turkey issued a set
of four scenic stamps commemorating the
Tenth Annual Meeting in 1955 in Istanbul,
each stamp having a border reference to the
meeting. The 15 krs. stamp, in yellow orange,
shows a view of the College of Literature,
Istanbul; the 20 krs. stamp, in crimson rose, a
                                                   First Day Cover from Saint Vincent
view of the University of Istanbul where the
                                                           and the Grenadines
meeting was held; the 60 krs. stamp, in
purple, a view of the Hilton Hotel; and the 1
lira stamp, in deep blue, a view of the Tower of Leander. The border inscription
(clockwise from lower left) reads "IBRD and IMF Governors Assembly—Tenth
Annual Meeting Istanbul 1955." A special postal cancellation, having the same
inscription, was also authorized.

Austria marked the occasion of the Sixteenth Annual Meeting in Vienna in 1961
with a 3 S stamp in dark gray picturing the mythological Hermes (Mercury). He
carries his magic wand, the caduceus, and a globe with grid lines can be seen in
the background. This is the first stamp bearing the names of the International
Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the International Finance Corporation
and the International Development Association. It also bears the name of the
International Monetary Fund. These border the frame with the words "World
Bank-Monetary Fund Congress Vienna 1961" in the upper right corner of the
stamp. Again, a special postal cancellation was authorized.

Some Other World Bank-Related Commemoratives

The World Bank made loans to the Tata Iron and Steel Company, Ltd, and the
Tata Group of Power Companies. The Tata family gave India many distinguished
merchants, industrialists and philanthropists who contributed greatly to India’ s
development. The family’s industrial enterprises were founded by Jamsetji
Nasarwanji Tata (1839-1904). In addition to many other accomplishments, he
established the Tata Iron and Steel Company and planned the use of electrical
energy, which resulted in the formation, after his death, of the Tata Power
Companies.
In 1958 India issued a 15np, red orange stamp, commemorating the 50th
anniversary of its steel industry, which pictures J. N. Tata and, in the background,
the steel works at Jamshedpur. Bank loans aided in the modernization and
                          expansion of this plant.

                        In January 1965 India issued another 15np stamp to
                        honor the memory of J. N. Tata for his massive
                        contribution to India’s industrialization. This stamp bears
                        a likeness of J. N. Tata and also contains symbols of the
                        steel industry and of power transmission facilities, the
                        construction of which was aided by World Bank loans.

                          The Volta River power project in Ghana was formally
                          inaugurated in January 1966, at which time a
                          commemorative set of four postage stamps was issued.
                          When completed, the earth and rockfill dam itself,
 Commemorative stamp
                          located at Akosombo about 50 miles above the mouth of
       from Mali          the river and only one part of the project, rose 370 feet
                          above the foundations, and had a crest length of about
                          2,100 feet, and a reservoir, wholly within Ghana, about
300 miles in length. At the time the commemorative stamps were issued, other
parts of the project included a power station, designed to accommodate six
generating units; a second dam about one-third as high and one-half as long at
the crest to close off a small valley adjacent to the spillway; a transmission
system about 500 miles in overall length, to service an aluminum smelter at
Tema on the coast; and a transmission "beltway" supplying power to Accra,
Takoradi, Kumasi, and other towns, villages and mines in southern Ghana. The
construction and operation of the project is under the control of the Volta River
Authority, an autonomous agency established in 1961 for this specific purpose.
The 6p stamp shows a section of the dam with the powerhouse, and is printed in
brown and orange; the 15p gives a view of the dam and Lake Volta, in orange,
blue and green; the 24p is a symbolic representation of the Dam in grey, blue
and green; and the 30p, in light blue and dark blue, symbolizes the fertility
created by the project.

Another project with Bank involvement that was commemorated by stamps is the
Indus Basin Project. The Indus and its five tributary rivers comprise one of the
great river systems if the world. Use of the rivers’ waters, descending from the
high Himalayas to the plains of West Pakistan and northwestern India, had been
a source of dispute for many years and especially so after the partitioning of the
sub-continent in 1947.
Early in 1952 a proposal by the Bank to lend its good offices in seeking a solution
for the use of the Indus waters was accepted by India and Pakistan. There
followed two years of study by a technical group representing the three parties
and some six years of discussions and negotiations, most of which were carried
on at the Bank’s offices in Washington. It all culminated in the Indus Waters
Treaty of 1960 signed by India, Pakistan and the Bank on September 19 of that
year.

Some time prior to that, however, after it
had become apparent that the cost of the
project was far beyond the capacity of
India and Pakistan, the Bank had entered
an independent series of negotiations
soliciting the financial aid of a number of
friendly governments. These discussions
ended with the Indus Basin Development
Fund Agreement under which, and
including a Bank loan of $80 million, India,
Pakistan, Australia, Canada, Germany,           Stamp commemorating the Indus Basin
                                               Project, showing the Mangla Dam, 1967
New Zealand, the United Kingdom and the
United States agreed to contribute the
equivalent of $894 million to the Development Fund. This was supplemented
early in 1964 to provide an additional $315 million of which $58.54 million was an
                                             IDA credit.

                                                The Treaty entitled India to the use
                                                of the waters of the three eastern
                                                rivers; Pakistan to that of the three
                                                western rivers; and provided for a
                                                transition period during which
                                                Pakistan would construct a system
                                                of link canals to obtain water from
                                                the western rivers replacing water
                                                previously supplied by rivers in the
   Indus Basin Project, first day cover, 1967
                                                east. The program was one of the
                                                largest of its kind undertaken
                                                anywhere.

One of the two huge dams in the project is the Mangla Dam on the Jhelum River.
To commemorate the inauguration of the Mangla Dam on November 23, 1967,
Pakistan issued a fifteen paisa stamp in yellow, blue, red and black. The design
shows the spillway with water gushing through the sluice gates and, in the
background, the vast lake merging into the horizon. The insignia of WAPDA (the
Water and Power Development Authority of West Pakistan, formed in 1958 to
plan and execute the project) appears in the upper left corner.

More recently, to increase awareness of and respect for what they view to be
"the world’s most important job," Education International, with support from
UNESCO and the World Bank, invited nations of the world to issue postage
stamps on the occasion of World Teacher’s Day, celebrated on October 5 every
year. The first such stamps were issued in 1999.

The World Bank Stamp Club

The World Bank Stamp Club was organized on
February 25, 1951. By 1956 it had over 100
members (out of a total staff of some 511; a
membership of almost 20% of staff!). There
was an arrangement by which the Bank’s Mail
Room handed over stamps from incoming mail
to the Stamp Club, which in turn periodically
distributed them among its members. The
Stamp Club also conducted stamp auctions,
and built a philatelic reference library. By 1960    World Bank Stamp Club, 1956
the Stamp Club was charging annual dues of
25 cents. In 1991 the Stamp Club held a celebration to mark its 40th anniversary.
However, the World Bank Stamp Club seems to have faded away. The last
mention of it in the World Bank Group Directory was in the November 1995
edition.
