Sir Alec Cairncross – First Director of the
Economic Development Institute, 1954-1957

NUMBER 003
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: JULY 2002




                           January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
Sir Alec Cairncross – First Director of the Economic Development
Institute, 1954-1957

Alexander Kirkland Cairncross was born in
Lanarkshire on February 11, 1911 and educated at
Hamilton Academy, winning a scholarship to
Glasgow University, where he specialized in
economics. He then went to Trinity College,
Cambridge. Alec Cairncross took a first in the
Economic Tripos, and became a lecturer in
economics, under the considerable influence of
John Maynard Keynes (author of "The General
Theory of Employment, Interest and Money" and
one of the leading lights of the 1944 Bretton
Woods Conference, which saw the founding of the
World Bank and the International Monetary Fund).
During World War II most of his work was in the
Ministry of Aircraft Production, where he rose to         Sir Alec Cairncross, first
become Director of Programmes. In 1946 he                Director of the Economic
served briefly on the staff of The Economist, and          Development Institute
subsequently became adviser to the Board of
Trade. He was seconded to be the economic adviser to the Organisation for
European Economic Co-operation in Paris in 1949. and he left to become
Professor of Applied Economics at his old university, Glasgow, in 1951.

In the summer of 1954 Sir Alec was engaged by the Bank to study the feasibility
of the establishment of what eventually became the Economic Development
Institute (EEDI). With regard to the objective of the EDI, he noted that the Bank
had already undertaken "a training program designed mainly for young men with
only a limited experience of administration and for specialists visiting the United
States for training in their own fields." He went on to write:
But the training of more senior men, not in economic theory or in specific
techniques, so much as in the formulation of economic policy, is a far more
difficult proposition. But it is a task that is clearly worth attempting; the Bank is in
a good strategic position to make the attempt; and no issue of principle would be
involved if the attempt were made in view of the schemes of training in which the
Bank is already engaged.

Sir Alec was subsequently invited to become the first Director of EDI, an
invitation that he accepted. On January 10, 1956, the first EDI classes were held
at its headquarters, an old mansion at 1620 Belmont Street, N.W. that belonged
to the wife of the World Bank's first President. Eugene Meyer, and had been
used for a time as the Embassy of the Netherlands. Sir Alec saw the new EDI
well launched, and returned home in 1957. The subsequent career of Sir Alec
Cairncross was replete with achievement. He was Economic Adviser to the
British Government, 1961-64, Head of Government Economic Service, 1964-69,
and Master of St. Peter's College, Oxford, 1969-78. In 1961 he was elected a
Fellow of the British Academy and was President of the Royal Economic Society
1968-70. He was also a prolific author, writing more as he grew older (there are
46 citations in the JOLIS catalog under his name). His "Introduction to
Economics" (1944, 66 ed. 1982) was long a standard text for students, and he
produced numerous other academic texts. His works on economic history
included "The Price War" (1986), an analysis of reparations policy at the end of
the Second World War; "Managing the British Economy" in the 1960s (1996);
and, with Kathleen Burk, "Goodbye Great Britain" ( 1992), an account of the
economic crisis of the mid-1970s. He edited two volumes of the diaries of Sir
Robert Hall, his predecessor as government adviser, and wrote a life of the
Cambridge economist Austin Robinson (1993). He also published a book of
poetry, "Snatches" (1981). He edited the Scottish journal of Political Economy
from 1954 to 1961.




 Participants and faculty in   Sir Alec with an EDI course   An EDI seminar in action
   the EDI's first course       professor and participant



His obituary in The Economist stated: "An impression that Sir Alec Cairncross
took some pleasure in creating was that really he was a fairly ordinary chap.
Don't take too much notice of all those honours, all that learning. Still he would do
his best. What was the problem?" In 1954, the problem was to evaluate the
embryonic concept of the Economic Development Institute; in 1956 the problem
became its establishment and successful launch. In both cases, he succeeded
admirably, and the EDI of today is indebted to Sir Alec Cairncross for the
soundness of its conception and establishment.
Sir Alec Cairncross on Planning the Economic Development Institute

"In the late spring of 1954 I was approached by Dick Demuth, whom I had first
met in Berlin in 1945-6, to act as a consultant to the World Bank in Washington.
He asked me to review a proposal that the Bank should provide some form of
training for senior administrators from the less-developed countries. This
proposal had been put forward originally by Paul Rosenstein-Rodan [an early
World Bank economist] and had strong support from some of the Bank staff who
were keenly aware that many of these countries lacked administrators with the
skill and understanding to evaluate large capital projects. It was hoped to make
the task of Bank loan officers easier (and perhaps increase the flow of capital to
creditworthy countries) by a form of management education aimed at key
members of staff in these countries. The question was not so much whether
there was something that needed doing as whether it might be better done by
existing educational institutions. There was a further question, how such a
proposal would be viewed in the countries concerned: would there be enough
applications from men of the necessary seniority? And might they not prove too
heterogeneous in command of English, familiarity with economics, age, seniority,
and so on, to form a coherent group for simultaneous instruction?




  Sir Alec makes a point         Visiting a dam        American Museum of Atomic
                                                                Energy

"I discussed the proposal with as many members of the staff of the Bank as
possible and went in search of academic opinion to Harvard and elsewhere.
What I suggested in the end was a staff college to consider case studies drawn
from the wealth of material which must exist in the Bank; a maximum of 25
participants, and a course lasting six months. These recommendations were
found acceptable.

"There were other recommendations in my report that created more difficulty. It
was simply not possible to find accommodation of the kind I had suggested and
the Bank in the end settled for a mansion house in Belmont Street that had
belonged to its first President, Eugene Meyer. On the grounds of cost I had made
no allowance for the transport and housing of wives and families. But as the
French Executive Director, Mr. Roger Hoppenot, was
quick to point out, this Anglo-Saxon view of life was
somewhat unrealistic and less than human.

"However, the scheme was approved and the Ford and
Rockefeller Foundations offered to meet a substantial
part of the cost, which worked out at $10,000 per
participant, exclusive of the cost to his government of
releasing him. The new institution was christened the
Economic Development Institute and was scheduled to             At the Tennessee Valley
begin operations in January 1956."                                      Authority


Launching the Economic Development Institute

[On January 6, 1966 Sir Alec Cairncross returned to deliver the Anniversary
Lecture, in the course of that lecture he described the beginning of EDI]

On January 10, 1956 the Economic Development Institute was launched, quite
literally, with a splash. The previous evening, one of the participants in the first
course at the Institute arrived late, rather tired, and decided to have a bath and
                           go to bed. Unfortunately he forgot to turn off the bath
                           water, which in due course found its way through the
                           ceiling on to the beautiful new carpet that had been laid
                           for the opening ceremony.

                          Dampening though it was, it did not delay the
                          proceedings. But it was not only the bath water that
                          dripped through. A large invited audience arrived in
                          installments throughout the delivery of the inaugural
    Baltimore & Ohio      address by the Director because it happened to be one
    Railroad Museum
                          of those winter days in Washington when a little ice here
                          and there throws traffic into utter confusion. Thus,
although it was heartening to see the audience grow rather than melt away, it
was impossible not to reflect, as newcomers dropped in all the way to the final
paragraph, on the obstacles to development -- in this case the development of a
theme -- that persist even in advanced societies and on how much, momentarily
at least, the Institute had in common with a cinema.
"Apart from the need for a continuous performance when there is a message to
be got across, the events of the morning pointed a number of salutary morals.
One was that interest in economic development tends to increase rather than to
decline. Then there was the obvious fact that plans are apt to go awry and that
one must exercise constant vigilance to adapt them to new circumstances. But
above all, the cold water poured on the Institute by one of its own participants
prompted the reflection that it might not be a bad way of studying economic
growth to look at it in the light of the Institute's own experience, the impulses that
made it grow and the obstacles that it had to overcome."




 Oak Ridge Atomic Energy        Checking for radiation    Sir Alec, John Adler and EDI
  Commission installation                                          participants



Sir Alec Cairncross on the Economic Development Institute

The founding of EDI had not only a deep personal interest for me -- it might have
been the beginning of an entirely different career -- but it provided a case study in
the creation of new educational institutions. At the final session of the first course
I pointed out that much could be learned about economic development from
reflection on that case study. The establishment of the Institute had been itself an
effort of development in which one could observe as through a microscope the
elements that made for success and failure The theories that economists had
devised in order to explain development could be brought to the test of their own
recent experience. If they imagined that it would be easier to develop their
countries than to develop the Institute they would find themselves mistaken. To
make a success of the Institute meant that everybody had to be emotionally
involved in making it work; and in the same way successful development of a
country called for a general feeling of participation in the process. That process,
moreover, was essentially educational; at the root of the problem of development
was the need to organize the transfer of knowledge and experience. This could
be done in many different ways; and the best way to do it preoccupied many
different institutions from the World Bank to the various national planning
agencies. It was the essential concern of the EDI. The experience of the EDI
might have lessons, therefore, of much wider significance than its own immediate
future."




EDI course participants at the B&O Railroad     EDI Faculty and participants
                  Museum



Building on the solid conceptual foundation established by Sir Alec Cairncross
and his colleagues, the Economic Development Institute has become the Bank's
key instrument for delivering learning programs on the full range of development
issues to Bank clients. Its mission continues to be to help build the capacity of
clients in their development efforts through learning programs. However, instead
of just 14 participants in a single course in Washington, EDI learning programs
are now active in 149 countries and reach 20,000 direct participants in member
counties through some 430 activities annually.
