Excerpts from International Bank Notes


NUMBER 004
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: JANUARY 2003




                           January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
Excerpts from International Bank Notes

Excerpts from International Bank Notes, volume 2,
no. 1, January 15, 1948:

It is fitting that at the threshold of the new year we
should ponder the path of our feet. Few will
question that we live in a process of metamorphosis
and witness a period of great structural change. But
there are many whose thoughts are oppressed by a
sense of futility when they see the survival of so
many deadweights on our upward march.

Nationalism and other chains of traditionalist
thinking are still with us instead of being relegated
to the limbo of forgotten things to which they
belong. For there can be little doubt that the future
spells intern-nationalism: the question is only
whether it will be implemented by democratic principles or imposed by tyrannical
sway.

Such thoughts come to us at the turn of the year and they must be a source of
gratification to persons whose work is in the service of international cooperation.
These people march in the front of an army, which is called mankind, and do the
spade work, an occupation often ungrateful because the rest of the people are
slow in catching up. In act, they are more than just slow; they are the victims of
prejudice, once defined as the emotional reaction of ignorance to truth and a
tremendous obstacle on the road to progress.

"In culture," said a Professor of Stanford University the other day,
"internationalism is the basic fact. Isolation, autarchy, is delusion or self-
mutilation." The same goes for politics and economics, provincial hangers-on
notwithstanding.

Our path therefore seems clearly marked. The coming year will be as charged
with fate as any we have known. And although the great decisions may be
beyond our reach, we should never commit the greatest of all mistakes, which is
to do nothing because we can do only a little. Let us do our share and lend
assistance to the thought that nations must be international-minded in proportion
to the insight they have into their own good.
And to the skeptics, who have neither vision nor courage to stake the future on
an act of faith, let us apply the words of Jefferson: "I like the dreams of the future
better than the history of the past."

The Year Ahead was written by staff member
Anthony Balasy.

In the same issue, International Bank Notes
reported on other Bank-related items.

World Bank Group staff members were invited to a
"Quiz Kids" program at the United Nations Club in
Washington, DC. Participants included Executive
Director (E.D.) Kyriakos Varvaressos, Alternate            "Quiz Kid" Executive Director
E.D. Guy de Carmoy, and E.D. Leon Baranski.               Kyriakos Varvaressos (center).
                                                           Photo taken from the Bretton
Their opponents included staff from the British             Woods Conference, 1944.
Embassy, the Indian Embassy, the Turkish
Embassy and the Netherlands Embassy. (The
results of the competition could not be determined.)

Bank Staff were also invited to a scavenger hunt, "Step ‘n’ Fetchit," sponsored by
local television station WTTG. The winner of the scavenger hunt was Miss Asta
Borup, who reported on her adventures: "My morale was high on finding that one
of my items was a book – so like a homing pigeon, I doubled back to the Bank,
and borrowed it from the Joint Library (thank you, Mr. Loftusi!). From then on,
with the able support of two American friends, I careened around Washington,
collecting everything from unshelled peanuts to a dinner gong, commandeering a
football player on the way (the husky center from G.W.)."

Continued Ms. Borup, "my reaction from start to finish of a
hectic two hours was one of unreality, which was in no way
lessened on finding myself making my debut in front of the
television cameras and being presented with a gold Dunhill
lighter." Ms. Borup joined the Bank in October 1947, and
resigned in November 1949. She was described as
intelligent, energetic, thorough and dependable.

The Personals Section identified members of staff who
were visiting with their families over the Christmas
vacation. Sixteen members of the Loan Department, seven            "Quiz Kid" Executive
                                                                      Director Leon
members of the Legal Department, and seven members of                   Baranski.
the Public Relations Department traveled home to visit their families. Drew
Dudley (Director, Public Relations) and Doris Garvey (Legal Department) had
their parents visit them for the holidays (Mr. Dudley joined the Bank in November
1946, served as the Bank’s Public Relations Officer in Paris until 1954. Ms.
Garvey joined the Bank in December 1947, and served in the Legal Department
                                      until January 1985.)

                                         French lessons were offered in Room 1122
                                         and Spanish lessons were offered in Room
                                         412 on Monday and Thursday evenings from
                                         6:30 to 8:30 p.m. Dancing lessons through
                                         the Arthur Murray Studio were offered from
                                         8:00 to 9:00 p.m. (The Bank was in a single
                                         building at 1818 H Street.) Bank Group
                                         bowling teams met at the Kalorama Center
                                         on Tuesday nights, and staff members could
                                         play bridge on Thursday and Friday nights at
Some Bank staff who had joined the
                                         the United Nations Club or 2410 Wyoming
 Bank by January 1948: Front row:        Avenue (on the first Friday of every month).
 Albert Waterston, Virginia Morsey,
Robert Skillings, Lillian Berger. Back   Mrs. Fred Rieth, Chairman of the Red Cross
 row: Henry Duvall, Hazel Dishner,
 Victor Chang, Lota Fairall, Virginia    Community Service to Camps and Hospitals
  Hunter, Arnold Casson, Dorothy         sent a thank-you letter to IBRD staff for the
              Alexander.                 100 Christmas stockings which were "so
                                         generously filled with all sorts of gifts that
                                         were really outstanding."

Bank staff donated $130 to CARE during the month of December.

The International Cooking Corner had a recipe for Chicken Curry from Mr. N.
Sundaresan, Alternate E.D. for India. Mr. Sundaresan had his own kitchen at his
residence in the Shoreham Hotel, and often served guests dishes that he
prepared himself.

The Who’s Who in the Bank section profiled
President John J. McCloy, appointed in March
1947. The profile went as follows:

In addition to being President of the International
Bank, a lawyer, and the former Assistant Secretary
of War, Mr. John J. McCloy is also a tennis player


                                                               President John J. McCloy,
                                                              profiled in the January 15,
                                                              1948 issue of International
                                                                      Bank Notes.
of some note. After playing at college, he lived in Forest Hills, Long Island, the
American Capital of tennis, and while there he had an opportunity to play with
some of the distinguished players who were constantly coming through. Being
able to play with good players, at one time he, in his own wo rds "didn’t have to
apologize to anybody before playing a few sets with him."

When we asked if he ever played with any of the big name players, he admitted
that he had played with Big Bill Tilden, Little Bill Johnson, among others of that
vintage. He also used to play with Helen Wills and Suzanne Lenglen. He said he
used to help "tune Helen up for tournaments." During the first World War, when
Mr. McCloy was a Captain, he played an exhibition game in Paris with Mlle.
Lenglen before she became internationally famous. After the war he was too
busy practicing law to enter tournaments, but he says he "wouldn’t have been
                               any great terror anyway."

                                   Mr. McCloy is also a fisherman. He enjoys fishing,
                                   especially for trout, bass, or salmon, and was at
                                   one time President of the Anglers Club of New
                                   York.

                                   Banker, lawyer, soldier, sportsman, John J. McCloy
                                   was born in Philadelphia, March 31, 1895. He
                                   attended the Peddie School at Hightstown, New
                                   Jersey, and Amherst College, from which he
                                   graduated with honors in 1916. He entered Harvard
                                   University as a law student but his studies were
                                   interrupted by the war and he served in France with
                                   the Allied Expeditionary Force (A.E.F.) as a Captain
President McCloy takes part in     of Field Artillery. He returned to Harvard Law
an event celebrating Panama's     School, graduating in 1921, and commenced the
    culture. The woman is
wearing a pollera, the national
                                  practice of law in 1922.
       dress of Panama.
                              In April 1930 he was married to Ellen Zinsser, the
sister of Patty Zinsser, wife of Lewis W. Douglas, who is Ambassador to England,
and also Mr. McCloy’s classmate at Amherst. On his wedding date, Mr. McCloy
and his bride sailed fro France, where Mr. McCloy took charge of the Paris office
of Cravath, de Gersdorff, Swaine and Wood.

In 1940, Mr. Henry L. Stimson requested Mr. McCloy to come to the War
Department. Between wars, Mr. McCloy had traveled frequently in Europe and
worked on litigation which enabled him to know something of German espionage
and sabotage activities.

Once there, Mr. McCloy said everything developed fairly quickly and he became
Assistant to the Secretary of War; shortly thereafter he was made Assistant
Secretary of War, a position which he held until November 1945. He attended
several of the Big Three Conferences. He was appointed Chairman of Combined
Civil Affairs Committee of the Combined Chiefs of Staff which dealt with many of
the politico-military problems of the war. In the
course of his duties, he traveled widely to the
various fronts, visiting South America, Asia, Africa,
the Middle East, all the European Theatres, Alaska,
the Aleutians, Japan, and China.

Mr. McCloy was awarded the Distinguished Service
Medal by President Truman for his war work and         Sydney Raymond Cope, new
was honored by France with the rank of Grand            staff member of the Loan
Officer of the Legion of Honor.                                Department.


Resuming his law practice in 1945, Mr. McCloy
joined the firm of Milbank, Tweed, Hope, Hadley
and Mc Cloy. He was with the firm at the time the
Executive Directors elected him President of the
Bank on February 28, 1947. Mr. And Mrs. McCloy
have two children in school here, a son, 10, at St.
Albans and a daughter, 6, at Potomac.
