The Woods Presidency


NUMBER 023
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: MAY 2003




                          January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
The Woods Presidency

George D. Woods was President of the World Bank
from January 1, 1963, to March 31, 1968. Under
Woods, Bank activities went in significant new
directions. This article is excerpted from "The
Coming of Age" by Roger Chaufournier in the June
1984 issue of Finance and Development.
Chaufournier joined the Bank in 1952 and retired in
1984 as Vice President of the Europe, Middle East
and North Africa Regions (EMENA). He had
previously worked in the Western Hemisphere
Department (including a term as Resident
Representative in Peru), and in the West Africa
Region.
                                                        George D. Woods President of
                                                              the World Bank
By the early 1960s, Bank procedures and policies
were viewed by some on the outside as old
fashioned – "antediluvian" in the words of a major borrower – and the Bank was
increasingly criticized as being too conservative. When George Woods arrived at
the Bank, he found the institution ready to catch its second wind. The outside
                               environment provided the opportunity. As soon as
                               President John F. Kennedy took office, he
                               launched the Alliance for Progress. There was a
                               new spirit in Washington and renewed enthusiasm
                               for development aid. At no time since the Marshall
                               Plan were there such a community of interests and
                               favorable environment for international
                               cooperation. The idea of a compact with borrowers
                               undertaking to reorder their economies and donors
                               pledging increased support became a new
                               challenge. I was privileged to be a witness at the
                               launching of the Alliance in Punta del Este in 1961.
                               Che Guevara was there, representing Cuba. The
                               forces of change were already on the move. The
                               idea of the Alliance was visionary, and it was as
Roger Chaufournier, the author generous as it was ahead of its time. Few countries
  and former Vice President of then were ready to make the necessary
  the Europe, Middle East and  adjustments to their economies and one has to wait
 North Africa Regions (EMENA)
                               until the oil shocks and the world inflation of the
                               1970s for a larger number of countries to initiate
such a process. By then, unfortunately, the support they needed to facilitate this
adjustment was on the decline.

The Alliance had an important effect
on the Bank. Increased aid in
response to economic performance,
donor cooperation, and coordination
were features of the early 1960s. The
Bank’s economic work was
considerably strengthened and
became increasingly policy-oriented.
Lawyers had exercised the dominant
influence in the Bank in the early
years, contributing ideas and
concepts; the 1960s became the
economists’ golden age. An                   US President John F. Kennedy addresses the
Economic Committee was established            1963 Annual Meetings in Washington, DC.
                                              George Woods sits on President Kennedy's
on a par with the Loan Committee.                           immediate left
Economists were appointed as

                                      managers in the Projects Departments, to
                                      improve the economic methodology and the
                                      policy links.

                                      This was also a period of close cooperation
                                      with the International Monetary Fund. The
                                      lines were sometimes temporarily blurred,
                                      with the recognition that stabilization of any
                                      economy, in order to endure, had to be based
                                      on medium-term adjustment and a resumption
                                      of longer-term growth. In Argentina, the Bank
                                      negotiated exchange rate adjustments while
                                      the Fund concerned itself with the
                                      rehabilitation of the railways as a condition for
                                      its financial assistance.
 Irving S. Friedman. The Economic
Advisor to the President Friedman’s   Cooperation between the Bank, the Fund, and
 appointment reflected the growing    bilateral aid agencies was particularly close
influence of economists in the Bank   when Colombia’s borrowing needs were
            under Woods
                                      approached in a comprehensive manner
                                      based on a medium-term investment plan.
The economic dialogue that followed provided the context in which subsequent
Bank operations developed. It covered several of the features which are found
today [1984] in the more comprehensive
approach of current structural adjustment loans.
In January 1963 the first Consultative Group
meeting organized by the Bank was held for
Colombia. Burke Knapp, then the Bank’s Vice
President, chaired the opening meeting. The
Fund was represented by Per Jacobsson, its
Managing Director.

The Colombian case and the aid program for
Chile represented successful approaches to
consultation between donors and recipient
countries. At the same time, there were hushed
references in the corridors of the Bank about
other instances where the use of lending to              Sierra Leone joins the World
influence policy had cooled relations between the      Bank September 10, 1962. One
Bank and some of its major members.                     of the many African countries
                                                         joining the Bank in the early
                                                                     1960s
Under George Woods, the Bank evolved from a
development institution toward a full-service
development institution. One of his major contributions was to push the Bank into
new lending for agriculture and education. Until then, lending for agriculture had
been confined to brick and mortar, to infrastructure projects like dams, and to
financial institutions as a channel for financial credits. Still, despite George
Woods’ efforts and until the arrival of Robert McNamara, lending for agriculture
remained of the traditional type, predominantly plantation or commercial
agriculture, largely influenced by the experience of former colonial agricultural
officers who constituted a large proportion of the Bank’s agricultural staff. By the
time I came to the Bank’s West Africa Regional Office in 1968, the Bank had
                                      financed only one agricultural project in the
                                      24 countries of the region.

                                     Cooperation with other UN agencies
                                     developed rapidly under George Woods.
                                     Consultative Groups for coordinating aid
                                     efforts were established for a number of
                                     countries. Many African countries that had
                                     recently become independent joined the
                                     Bank in the early 1960s, and aid began to be
reoriented toward the poorest. Market rates of interest at a premium over Bank
lending rates were introduced for a short while, to push higher-income countries
to the capital market. This led to the voluntary graduation of some countries like
Norway. The Young Professional Program was established in 1963 to recruit
staff straight from universities or early in their careers to broaden international
recruitment and strengthen the institution through greater cultural diversity.

To those who knew him well, George Woods was an inspiring force. He had
                                        vision and his instincts were sure; he knew
Signing of the first loan agreement for
  the first loan to Senegal. President  the complexity and the many dimensions of
  Woods (left) and Mr. Knapp (right)    development. I remember him asking about
  are joined by His Excellency Habib    the progress of the El Chocon Project in
    Thiam, Minister of Planning and
   Development of Senegal, and Mr.
                                        Argentina. When I told him that the rate of
Mohamed Nassim Kochman, Executive       return was still hovering around 6 percent, he
   Director of IDA for Senegal, 1966    replied that only small people thought
                                        exclusively in terms of rate of return. He
knew that the rate of return was only discipline and that there were other
dimensions that affected development. He was a precursor of important things to
come, and he opened the door for the expansion of our activities in the social
sector.




                                       The first group of Young Professionals, standing,
                                     standing, Left to right: Andre Gue, Wilfried Thalwitz,
                                     Richard Van Wagenen, Special Assistant for Training,
                                      Geoffrey M. Wilson, Vice President, George Woods,
                                      President, Christopher Willoughby, Antonio Faccini,
                                     Murugappa Madhavan, Christian Monsod. Seated, left
                                     to right: Eugenio Lari, Bilsel Alisbah, Garbiele Sciolli,
                                                   John Malone, Michel Cujot
Although George Woods never struck a good rapport with our African members,
by pushing lending for agriculture and education, by pressing hard for a larger
replenishment of IDA, by establishing the first regional resident mission if Africa,
and by commissioning two important studies on that region, he did more for the
                                                             poorest countries, and
                                                             particularly for Africa, than
                                                             anyone in the Bank had
                                                             done before. George
                                                             Woods, through the force
                                                             of his personality had
                                                             reinforced the presidential
                                                             character of the
                                                             institution. Like his
                                                             predecessor, E ugene
                                                             Black, he was aided by a
                                                             group of Executive
                                                             Directors of considerable
   First meeting of the Pearson Commission. Left to right:
                                                             stature, many of them
 Roberto de Oliveira Campos (Brazil), Douglas Dillon (United
    States), Saburo Okita (Japan), Sir W. Arthur Lewis (St.  having occupied the most
   Lucia), Rt. Hon. Lester B. Pearson (Canada), Rt. Hon. Sir senior financial posts in
  Edward Boyle (U.K.), Robert Ernest Marjolin (France), and  their own countries, and
                    Wilfried Guth (Germany)
                                                             by a group of very able
                                                             senior administrators.
Perhaps as remarkable during these early years was the ability of the institution
to attract staff with a high degree of expertise, experience, and commitment who
established very early the reputation of high professionalism which the Bank has
enjoyed ever since. Burke Knapp, as Vice President and Chairman of the Loan
Committee under three Presidents, provided firmness, continuity, and
predictability to the direction of our operations as well as motivation and trust,
sometimes under trying circumstances; he invited me to join the Bank in 1952
and as my mentor for so many years I cannot fail to express the debt of gratitude
we have toward him.

By the mid-1960s, the U.S. role as a leader of development aid was rapidly
fading. George Woods sensed the need for mobilizing greater support for our
institutions. He commissioned a review of the criteria for IDA lending and, more
important, launched the idea of a "grand assize," an international commission of
influential opinion-makers under the chairmanship of Lester Pearson, former
Prime Minister of Canada. The IDA review and the establishment of the Pearson
Commission were not completed under George Woods. However, the stage was
set for a further deepening of our understanding of the process of development,
for our preoccupation with absolute poverty and social justice, for the strong and
enlightened leadership, and for the frenetic activity that characterized the
presidency of Robert McNamara.
