Mr. Black’s Bank – The 1950s


NUMBER 008
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: FEBRUARY 2013




                          January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
Mr. Black’s Bank – The 1950s

Eugene R. Black was President of the World Bank
from July 1949 to December 1962. Black's
presidency encompassed the whole of the 1950s --
a remarkable period of growth and diversification for
the Bank. The story of that period is told by Roger
Chaufournier, a witness to the Bank in the 1950s
and its evolution over the years. Mr. Chaufournier
joined the Bank in 1952 and retired in 1984 as Vice
President of the Europe, Middle East and North
Africa Regions. He had previously worked in the
Western Hemisphere Department (including a term
as Resident Representative in Peru), and in the
West Africa Region.
                                                              Eugene R. Black

"By 1950, economic recovery in Europe was well on
its way. In the developing world, the notion of progress was spreading rapidly
and each member country wanted its share. The Bank, which had contributed
only marginally to financing reconstruction in Western Europe, was now focusing
its attention resolutely to the needs of the developing world.

"The year 1952 marked a turning point in the history of the institution. It was the
year during which the first major reorganization of the Bank took place. The two
existing departments, the Loan Department and the Research Department, were
split into three Area Departments and a Technical Operations Department. It was
an early recognition of the need to focus attention on individual countries, while
ensuring at the same time that the technical aspect of projects would receive full
attention. The so-called creative tensions that ensued were designed, in the
words of a former colleague, to protect the Bank against "the excesses of both
the diplomats and the technocrats."

"The Federal Republic of Germany and Japan became members in 1952. But the
Bank was not only broadening its membership, it was broadening its activities. I
remember the 1950s as a decade of major accomplishments for the Bank, as a
project lender, as an institution builder, and as an advocate of development. It
was also a time when the ethos of the institution developed into that of a
technically competent development institution, conservative but flexible, self
assured, and a trifle arrogant but with a strong esprit de corps and pride in its
accomplishments. This, at the beginning of the decade, was in strong contrast to
the Fund, which was still trying to find its footing.
                              "The culture of the institution was decidedly Anglo-
                              Saxon; close to 80 percent of the staff were from
                              the United States, the United Kingdom, or Canada.
                              A Bank jargon was pervasive; drafting and
                              redrafting occupied the major part of staff and
                              management time. There was the usual complaints
                              from national minority groups; the "old boy" network
                              was functioning effectively in deciding managerial
                              appointments. I remember an interview with a panel
                              established by Eugene Black to investigate
                              allegations of discrimination against Frenchmen.
                              Personally, I was struck by the absence of
                              divisiveness, but for those who did not have English
                              as a native language, insistence on linguistic
     Roger Chaufournier
                              perfection was a source of constant irritation. The
                              sense of hierarchy was strong, but contact between
senior management and staff was close and frequent. The Bank was then
refreshingly unbureaucratic, small enough to rely on people more than on
procedures.

"Eugene Black had a patrician aloofness -- we always called him Mr. Black -- but
we knew his consideration for younger people and his ability to motivate them. I
recall his impatience with the nitty gritty and his indifference to internal
management. "I make deals," he used to say -- and what a superb dealmaker
and bond salesman he was! There was an
aura of statesmanship and flair about him that
affected the institution. The Bank was known
as Mr. Black's Bank.

"Important events took place under his
leadership, and the diplomacy of development
flourished. The Indus Basin Agreement was
reached in 1960 between Pakistan and India
when President Ayub Khan and Prime Minister
Nehru signed a treaty. It was the culmination
of nine years of complex and difficult            Japanese representative signing the
negotiations, during which the Bank's             World Bank’s Articles of Agreement.
President and some of his senior associates                August 13, 1952
played a key role in shaping the outcome.
"There was also the unsuccessful mediation in the Iranian oil dispute and the
Aswan Dam episode, which drew the Bank into the Cold War. The refusal of the
U.S. Government to finance its share of the project, despite Mr. Black's strong
                                   plea, forced the Bank to withdraw. All those
                                   events projected the Bank to the forefront of
                                   world attention.

                                      "This was a period of other solid
                                      accomplishments. The Economic
                                      Development Institute [now the World Bank
                                      Institute] was founded in 1956, and the
                                      International Finance Corporation (1956),
                                      and the International Development
                                      Association (1960) were created as Bank
                                      affiliates. Ten years earlier Eugene Black
    A representative of the German
  Federal Republic signing the Bank’s
                                      would have been shocked at the suggestion
   Articles of Agreement. August 14,  he might some day propose lending on soft
                  1952                terms. By the late 1950s he was able to see
                                      that the least developed member countries
could not mount a satisfactory development effort without the support of
substantial amounts of concessional lending. This realization was clearly
reinforced by the acceleration of the process of decolonization, which brought so
many of the newly independent states into the membership of our institution in
the early 1960s. IDA was an act of vision and an essential step toward a full-
service development institution.

"There were innovations and flexibility in lending, and technical
assistance was expanded. The Bank was responding to change
by adapting itself and, when it could not, by creating suitable new
institutions. Economic work become more sophisticated and
expanded steadily as an underpinning for our lending activities. A
sectoral approach was introduced in economic analysis and
planning of development projects. There was also a new
emphasis on institution building as well as on conditionality in
lending policy. As a result, for example, the
Bank stopped lending for several years to some            Sir Alexander Cairncross First
major countries like Brazil until economic               Director of EDI (now the World
performance improved. Adequate infrastructure,                    Bank Institute)
particularly energy and transportation, was
viewed as a precondition to development. It is therefore not surprising to find
that, in its first 15 years of operations, the Bank financed and installed capacity in
energy in Latin America equivalent to the total capacity in existence in the region
15 years earlier; the impact on organization and policy in the sector was
                                  considerable.

                                     "Country creditworthiness was measured
                                     through the 10 percent rule of thumb. The
                                     danger signal flashed when debt service
                                     exceeded 10 percent of export earnings.
                                     Respect of external obligations was strictly
                                     monitored; lending to several countries was
                                     delayed several years pending progress on
                                     settlement of external obligations. By the end of
                                     Eugene Black's term, lending activities were
                                     gathering momentum. During 1962, his last year
Robert L. Garner, President of IFC
                                     in office, the Bank made 29 loans and 18 IDA
 (left) and John C. Beevor, Vice     credits for a total exceeding one billion dollars
      President of IFC (right)       for the first time.

"Between 1950 and 1962, the membership of the institution and its staff had
more than doubled; the number of operations and the volume of lending had
increased fourfold. The Bank's reputation as a development institution was well
established and the last years of Eugene Black's presidency had seen some
important initiatives. In addition to the creation of IDA and IFC, there was the
launching of consultative groups, and innovative cofinancing such as in Mexico."

This article is excerpted from The Coming of Age by Roger Chaufournier in the
June 1984 issue of "Finance and Development."
