Spoof on WB Technical Jargon


NUMBER 013
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: MARCH 2003




                         January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
Spoof on WB Technical Jargon

In 1971, a formal memo appeared in the February
1971 edition of International Bank
Notes. Addressed to a fictitious department head,
Paul Szasz, a lawyer in the IBRD Legal
Department, pens a satire spoofing the use of
"Bank-ese" and the highly technical language used
by staff members. The subject refers to the
explosive growth in the numbers of Bank staff, a
fact born out of the doubling of staff that occurred
between the years 1968-1971. Szasz examines the
consequences for the world at large if the World
Bank grew at such high rates of growth:

                Office Memorandum

To: Director for Advanced Planning

From: Paul C. Szasz

Date: February 1, 1971

Subject: The Ultimate Expansion of the World Bank

1. You have asked for an outline of the principal implications of a long-term
projection of the present growth of the Bank’s professional staff. The summary in
Parts B-D below is therefore merely designed to identify certain matters requiring
further exploration and detailed analysis by special study teams.

                                  A. Time Scales

2. On June 30, 1968 the professional staff of the Bank stood at 741; the
projected figure for the end of fiscal year 1971 is 1,417, an increase of 91%,
equivalent to a compounded annual rate of about 24%. Increasing at such rate,
the staff will equal the current population of the world, some 3.6 billion, in only 69
years—that is by about July 2039 (the Saturation or S Date). Even if the
population, in spite of the efforts of the Population Projects Department,
continues to increase at the current rate of some 2% per year, the terminal date
for expanding the Bank can only be advanced by about another seven years —to
August 2046.
3. Applying sensitivity analysis in respect of the two growth rates in question, and
assuming variations of up to 20% in these rates (approximately one standard
deviation—see Annex 1), it still appears that S Date can with
over 80% assurance be bracketed for the period 2032-2066.

4. Though these dates may appear remote, it should be
considered that the median estimated period is only half again
as long as that of an IDA credit—and falls within the life span
of those recently born, and perhaps even of some of our


                                                                      Paul C. Szasz

Youngest Professionals.

                             B. Recruitment Policies

5. The closer S Date approaches, the more it will be necessary to relax certain
recruitment restrictions lest the healthy growth of our professional staff be
prematurely curtailed:

a. Most serious is the anti-nepotism rule, estimated to reduce the potential adult
employment pool by a factor of 4.4 (assuming for the average staff member .70
spouse, 1.40 siblings, 1.05 parents, and 1.25 children of employable age —see
Annex 2); this factor would increase to about 5.8 if the restriction referred to in
para. (c) were to be removed.

b. Continuing the arbitrary age limits on employment would bar some 42% of the
world’s population below age 18 and some 6.5% above age 65 (the normal
retirement age).

Even without taking into account the empirically observed reluctance to engage
women for professional positions, it is evident that the cumulative effect of the
indicated restrictions reduces the employment pool to about 9% of its potential —
thus necessitating an advance of S Date by over 12 years.

6. On the other hand, no change will be required in the employment of general
service personnel, if present trends continue. Since the current rate in the growth
of that component of the staff is somewhat under 15%, by S Date the ratio of
professional to other staff will be about 388:1 (entitling each officer to the
assistance of a secretary on the average of one day about every second year),
and the entire abolition of this force and its absorption into the higher category
would not delay S Date by more than 4-5 days.

                     C. Transmutation of Internal Services

7. The absorption by the Bank staff of the entire population of the planet cannot
but affect the scope and significance of certain of its internal transactions and
services:

a. The Bank’s budget projections, involving as they will an increasing share of the
world’s GNP, will gradually become the sole instrument of macroeconomic
manipulation; all forms of taxation will be replaced by salary deductions and the
rate of inflation will be determined by rather than influence the Bank’s salary
policy.

b. The Credit Union will presumably absorb and replace the existing network of
banks. Aside from the Retirement Plan (see below), it will therefore constitute the
sole significant market for World Bank bonds.

c. Similarly, the Staff Retirement Plan will take the place of all existing social
security and insurance arrangements—but only until the reforms referred to in
paras. 5(a) and (c) are implemented and S Date has been reached, for thereafter
the Bank will guarantee, and indeed must insist on, cradle to grave employment
for all.

d. The Messenger Service will absorb the national postal system and replace the
Universal Postal Union. Extrapolating from the current speed of transmission of
papers between adjoining offices, it can still be promised that transatlantic
communications will continue to move considerably faster than continental drift.

e. The Bank’s Press Releases, consolidated on a daily basis, will easily replace
newspapers; similarly Bank Notes, Finance and Development, and the
Newsletter will conveniently supplant the current excessive variety of periodical
literature.

f. EDI (now WBI) and the Young Professionals Program already constitute a
suitable base for the creation of a universal higher education system for the
optimum training of staff members.

g. In ICSID the Bank Group already has a promising kernel of a universal judicial
system; the building guards will develop into the sole police and military force,
but some concern may be expressed in the slow growth of the Legal Department,
which at its current puny 10% rate of expansion will by S Date only be able to
staff the bar of a medium size country.

                               D. External Impact

8. Corresponding to or paralleling certain of these basically internal changes,
consideration must be given to the interaction of the special needs of the Bank
and the "outside economy":

a. The Bank’s reluctance to take responsibility for commodity price stabilization
may wane, when this can be accomplished merely by adjusting the menus of its
Cafeteria.

b. Ecological considerations may necessitate a reduction in the output of paper
per project (Annex 3), should the Agriculture Projects Department determine that
reforestation cannot be implemented at a sufficient rate.

c. Finally, well before S Date the Population and Education Projects Departments
should consider the optimum genetic makeup and environmental background of
staff members; how to breed international employees and to train bureaucrats
from the nursery.

Should developments continue as here projected, a special commemoration may
well become appropriate for the centennial of the Bretton Woods Conference. On
that auspicious date we may cease to talk of the World Bank—and welcome
instead the Bank World.
