The Bank’s 57th Birthday Retrospective


NUMBER 026
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: JUNE 2003




                           January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
The Bank’s 57th Birthday Retrospective


                               On June 25 the World Bank will mark its 57th
                               birthday, for it was on June 25, 1946, that the Bank
                               formally opened for business. This auspicious event
                               was preceded by a great deal of preparatory work.
                               The Articles of Agreement had been hammered out
                               at the Bretton Woods Conference nearly two years
                               before, in July 1944. They became effective on
                               December 27, 1945, upon signature, in Washington,
                               by 28 governments. The Inaugural Meeting of the
                               Boards of Governors of the World Bank and the
                               International Monetary Fund had taken place in
                               Savannah, Georgia, in March 1946. On May 7 the
    1818 H Street, N.W.
                               Bank’s Board of Executive Directors held its first
Washington, D. C. The World   meeting. On June 18 the Bank’s first President,
Bank opened for business on   Eugene Meyer, took office.
   the tenth floor of this
 building on June 25, 1946.
                              On June 25, when the Bank opened for business, it
                              had a staff of 26. One of them, Marie Louise ("Lise")
Cathala, recalled the early days of the Bank:

I may as well tell you that, even in retrospect, there were
never "good old days" spent in sunny climes of unhurried,
harmonious work. These were exciting days, challenging
days, disheartening days, difficult days in 1946; in fact there
was never a dull moment. All of us who were present at that
time had very much the same feeling as attending the
launching of a ship: it is a big enterprise, everything possible
has been done, but now hold your breath and look at the
way she takes to the water. And the waters around the Bank
                                                                 Marie Louis Cathala,
were sometimes choppy; the press was not altogether                  Office of the
favorable; it took quite a long time for the US Government to     President, 1946 -
propose our first President and we felt paralyzed without a              1971
head; every decision, every appointment was provisional.
Until Mr. Meyer’s nomination every newspaper was playing a wild guessing
game and I remember that Lewis Douglas and James Forrestal were great
favorites.
My personal recollections of the first days of the Bank are hopelessly mingled
with my first impressions of the United States. When I came to Washington, the
                                      Office of Price Administration was still in
                                      existence; there were "restrictions" of
                                      sugar—although sugar bowls were on every
                                      restaurant table—and there was even a
                                      "meat famine" going on, which meant that
                                      sometimes you had to settle for a chicken
                                      instead of a T-bone. For me, coming from
                                      war-torn France and four years of
                                      starvation, I firmly believed that I had
                                      reached the country of Cocaigne, and my
                                      impressions of New York were very much
 The World Bank began operations on
                                      akin to those of the poorest starry-eyed
June 25, 1946 with 26 staff members, immigrants. Was it possible that such plenty
   12 of whom are pictured above     could exist? The first time I walked through a
                                     Safeway store I was unable to gather the
nerve to buy any of these extravagant luxuries: milk, eggs, oranges… But this is
taking us far from the Bank.

The first Board meeting of the IMF was held on May 6 at the Washington Hotel.
The Bank was more fortunate as concerns lodgings and held theirs the following
day at 1818 H. Members of the Board had temporary offices either at the
Washington Hotel of at their various
embassies. The Director for France had
an office on Massachusetts Avenue
with the French Financial Attaché, and I
worked there for several weeks. Later
on, the State Department put a few
rooms at the Bank’s disposal at 1818 H
which later became the A building of the
old main complex. I still remember the
wide, spacious rooms on the 10th floor.
The rooms were large and beautiful, but
they were bare; so back I went to
Massachusetts Avenue.
                                              Some Bank staff members: (left to right)
The next time I came to 1818 H great         Front row: Pauline Newton, Martin Rosen,
progress had been made: there was a           Therese Seguin, Badri Rao. Second row:
desk and there was a chair in each room       Jean Galiffa, Arthur Wubnig, Ann Rozeck,
                                             Bernice Westrom. Third row: Lydia Miller,
                                                James Lynch, Toni Georgion, Samuel
                                                               Lipkowitz
but there was no typewriter; so back I went to Massachusetts Avenue.

The third time—well, the third time I stayed, and my troubles began. I needed
stationery, envelopes, scissors. I went to see Eddie Donovan [Assistant to the
Chief of Office Services] and assumed imprudently that the French and English
languages had a lot in common. I innocently asked for some "furniture" (after all,
supplied are called "fournitures" in French). Eddie was dismayed. "But you have
received it already. Don’t you have a desk, or a chair?" I shrugged in a very
French way and protested, "I told you I needed furniture—furniture like paper,
envelopes, etc." Eddie certainly thought that he had a difficult customer—these
foreigners!—but he obliged. I had an armful of supplies when I realized that I
had nothing to put the documents in. I needed files. The only trouble was that I
did not know the English word for it. Unfortunately, the French word "chemise,"
meaning light Manila folder, does not lend itself to misuse and my previous
experience should have warned me of the dangers of literal translation, but I
made a new try. "Please," I said with my most engaging smile, "and may I also
                                               have some shirts?" Poor me! I am
                                               still blushing.

                                                    Soon, however, things were
                                                    rolling. Every day a new telephone
                                                    list (one mimeographed sheet for
                                                    the whole staff) contained new
                                                    names. Every month the State
                                                    Department occupancy receded in
                                                    from our advancing tide and
                                                    relinquished more floors of the
                                                    building. [1818 H Street was
                                                    occupied primarily by U.S. State
                                                    Department offices at the time.]
                                                    Poor Borda, [Joseph F. Borda,
Some original Bank staff members: (left to right)
                                            Assistant to the Personnel Officer]
 Front row: Leonard Rist, Anne Starcevic, Henry
                                            our first Chief of Personnel, was
Riley, Marion Abbott. Second Row: Aron Broches,
                                            collapsing under the avalanche of
  Audrey Smith, William Howell, Gladys Willard,
                                            applications: more than 700 a day.
 Joseph Fajams. Third row: Morton M. Mendels,
    Lyell Doucet, Marvel Pollock, Ivan Holness,
                                            Committees were formed:
                  Richard Demuth            Procedure, Interpretation, Loan,
etc. Meetings were called every hour every day of the week. Press releases
were issued and the press ceased to call us "The Bretton Woods Institutions"
and created the term "World Bank." Rules and regulations began to rain, order
reigned, the fun was over!
Another staff member, Richard H. Demuth recalled his experience of the early
days of the Bank:

When I joined the Bank in mid-July 1946 no one had a clear idea of what role
the Bank could or should play, except that we all assumed that our job was
primarily one of European reconstruction and that our "development" function
was secondary, both in time and importance. We were equally fuzzy in our
ideas as to the methods by which the Bank should operate—whether through
lending the Bank’s own funds or, as was more generally believed at Bretton
Woods, through guaranteeing loans made by others. "Technical Assistance"
was then a phrase unknown. Even the project approach…was an embryonic
idea.




       Eugene Meyer                  Harold D. Smith           Morton M. Mendels,
First President of the World   First Vice President of the   Secretary, 1946 – 1973.
            Bank                       World Bank



The following from Eugene Meyer in the Tenth Anniversary Issue of
"International Bank Notes", June 1956:

Finding the proper path for this new experiment in international cooperation was
not easy. We had only the Articles of Agreement to guide us and they provided
only the sketchiest of outlines. The first annual report, covering only a few
months of operations, noted that the Executive Directors and the staff had been
engaged in "continuous study" of loan policies, a statement literally true. We
were all doing the first slow and painful thinking so essential to the development
of sound practices and procedure.
