Bank Pays Tribute to Robert McNamara


NUMBER 011
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: MARCH 2003




                         January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
Bank Pays Tribute to Robert McNamara

At a dinner on Wednesday night, hosts Jim and
Elaine Wolfensohn gathered over 200 people to pay
tribute to Robert S. McNamara, President of the
Bank from 1968-81. In attendance were
distinguished guests including former President
Tom Clausen (1981-86), Ted Sorensen (one of
President Kennedy's closest aides), family and
friends, myriad Bank staff from the past, the current
senior management team, and several Executive
Directors including the Dean of the Board, Franco
Passacantando. It was an evening of speeches,
memories, and fun focused on Robert McNamara's
legacy of transforming the Bank into the world's
premier development institution.                             Former President Bob
                                                           McNamara addresses the
As part of the tribute, President Wolfensohn wrote       guests assembled in his honor
the remarks published below. Following these               during Wednesday night's
                                                                    dinner.
remarks is a summary chronology of the McNamara
years, prepared by the World Bank Group Archives.
Also unveiled Wednesday was a photo exhibit celebrating McNamara's
presidency. Created by the Banks Art Program, all staff are invited to attend the
                               photo exhibit on the 13th floor.

                               "Bob McNamara is my friend. He is also someone
                               whom I have long respected and admired: for his
                               extraordinary abilities, his passion, for his
                               achievement in bringing to the world's attention the
                               urgent issues of development and above all, for
                               bringing real action to the fight against poverty.
                               President John F. Kennedy called him "the smartest
                               man" he ever met. President Leopold Senghor
  Bob McNamara and Elaine      called him "a poet of action." He is one of those rare
 Wolfensohn sharing a laugh.   human beings whom, whatever they do, make a
                               pivotal contribution.

"All of us associated with the World Bank honor Bob and recognize that it was he
who transformed the institution from being a "bank" into being the world's premier
development agency. When he assumed the presidency of the Bank, there had
been no recent loans to such critical countries as Indonesia or Egypt, nor to the
great majority of the poorest nations of Africa. He
changed that.

"In 1968, when Bob came to the Bank, it was
lending about $1 billion per year. When he left in
1981, Bank lending stood at about $12 billion a
year. More importantly, he also changed the focus
of the Banks work beyond infrastructure and
projects to basic human needs, poverty reduction,
and creating an economic environment that can
deliver for poor people. In the process, he not only
changed the Bank, he changed the way the world
looks at development.

"It was Bob who, in his famous Nairobi speech in
1973, proposed the term "absolute poverty." He                   President Wolfensohn
defined this as a condition of deprivation that "falls       delivering his remarks during
below any rational definition of human decency."                   the tribute dinner.
For all of us in the development community, his call
to action in the fight against poverty still rings in our
ears. It is still the greatest challenge facing the world todayand Bob showed us
                                        something can be done.

                                       "Like all great men, Bob is effective because
                                       he dares to dream -- and to pursue his
                                       dreams with action: on the nexus of
                                       agriculture stagnation, population growth and
                                       environmental degradation. On the conflict
                                       between military expenditures and
                                       development. On river blindness. Above all,
                                       on poverty. His dream remains our dream.

   A view of the tribute held in the    "Bob acted on the premise that giving a hand
    gallery on the 13th floor, MC.      to people to lift themselves out of poverty is
                                        the foundation on which development must
                                        be built. During his presidency at the Bank,
he shaped an institution that helps many of the worlds poorest countries to do
just that. His shaping of that institution was not only his finest achievement, but
one of the world's finest achievements in the 20th century. And one that will
endure well into the 21st century."
       Robert S. McNamara at the World Bank Group: a Brief Chronology

1968

McNamara becomes President of the Bank, IDA, and IFC on April 1.

At McNamara's invitation, Lester Pearson accepts chairmanship of international
commission to examine world development (the Pearson Commission Report,
Partners in Development, issued in September 1969).

McNamara's first Annual Meetings speech outlines bold five-year program and
proposes a doubling of Bank lending; announces that the Bank has raised more
funds by borrowing in the last 90 days than in the whole of any single calendar
year in its history; signals upcoming transformation of the organization.

1969

McNamara delivers a landmark address at Notre Dame University on the
problem of excessive population growth, "the most delicate and difficult issue of
our era perhaps of any era in history."

IDA-2 comes into effect, with a commitment authority of $1.4 billion for 1969-
1971.

The Annual Meetings speech promises a new emphasis on population issues,
educational advance, and agricultural expansion. McNamara says that
"development" is more than "economic growth" and urges action on the Pearson
Report.

1970

McNamara proposes formation of the Consultative Group for International
Agricultural Research (CGIAR) which goes on to make a major contribution to
increasing global food production and reducing hunger.

The Bank approves its first population project totaling $2 million to Jamaica in
support of family planning programs.

A key message from the Annual Meetings speech in Copenhagen: "We cannot
allow the fundamental task of developing the undeveloped nations of this planet
to fail for lack of resources."
1971

The Banks first-ever sector study paper is published, as requested by
McNamara, on Water Supply and Sewerage.

The Banks first-ever loan for pollution control in Sao Paulo, Brazil.

McNamara says in his Annual Meetings speech, "malnutrition is widespread and
it limits the physical, and often the mental growth of hundreds of millions and it is
a major barrier to human development"

1972

The Bank announces it has achieved the goal, set
by McNamara, to provide twice as much assistance
in fiscal 1969-73 as it did in the previous five years.
For the first time, lending for agriculture exceeds
that of any other sector. Major reorganization of the
Bank announced to enhance its focus as a
development institution.

In a major speech in Stockholm, McNamara speaks
of the dilemma between economic growth and
environmental concerns arguing that they are not
irreconcilable, and that the rich world has an
obligation to assist the poor. In a major speech in
Santiago, he focuses on the "skewing of income"
and on the plight of the "bottom 40 percent" of poor      Hanna Voicke, President of the
people.                                                   Margaret McNamara Memorial
                                                            Fund speaking during the
                                                                     dinner.
In his Annual Meetings speech, McNamara calls for
nations "to give greater priority to establishing
growth targets in terms of essential human needs: in terms of nutrition, housing,
health, literacy and employment.

1973

McNamara begins second term as President of the World Bank Group.
McNamara proposes that the Bank take the lead in mobilizing international funds
for an onchocerciasis (riverblindness) control program and convenes first
meeting of the Onchocerciasis Control Program.

In Nairobi, McNamara focuses his Annual Meetings speech on the rural poor and
"absolute poverty: a condition of life so degraded by disease, illiteracy,
malnutrition and squalor as to deny its victims basic human necessities and a
condition of life so common as to be the lot of some 40% of the peoples of the
developing countries." Rural development is identified as a development goal.

The Annual Meetings of the Board of Governors of the World Bank Group and
the IMF held in Nairobi, Kenya in 1973 was the first large international
                             conference to take place in Africa.

                                1974

                                The Development Committee is established to give
                                greater voice to development issues on the
                                international scene.

                                Redistribution with Growth is published, with author
                                Hollis Chenery focusing on income distribution and
                                economic growth. The report was a product of the
                                new Development Policy Staff, created by
                                McNamara to strengthen the Banks policy advice.

                                   At the Annual Meetings, McNamara's
 Bob McNamara, enjoying the        keynote speech takes place against a backdrop of
 festivities at the tribute in his oil crisis and inflationary pressures: "Aid is not a
              honor.               luxury something affordable when times are easy,
                                   and superfluous when times become temporarily
troublesome. It is precisely the opposite. Aid is a continuing social and moral
responsibility, and its need now is greater than ever."

1975

IDA-4 becomes effective at a level of $4.5 billion.

Intermediate Financing Facility ("Third Window") is established, using OPEC
contributions to provide development assistance.
McNamara's speech during the Annual Meetings focuses on the life of the urban
poor, described as "unspeakably grim." He states that the "central task of
development is the reduction and ultimately the elimination of absolute poverty."

1976

IFC's capital stock is increased from $110 to $650 million.

World Bank approves first loan for nutrition to Brazil for $19 million.

The Annual Meetings speech in Manila describes the plight of the poorest
nations and the growing burden of debt, with McNamara calling for cooperation
and coordination among the various international development agencies.

1977

McNamara proposes creation of a new
commission to break the impasse in
discussions between the rich and poor
nations related to economic development,
suggesting Willy Brandt as chairman (The
"Brandt Commission" released its
landmark report in 1980: North-South: A
Program for Survival).
                                                 McNamara (center) and Jim Huttlinger
McNamara makes major speech at MIT on              (right) of the Bank Group Archives,
"World Change and World Security" that           discuss a photo from the exhibit with a
links issues of development to issues of                    fellow dinner guest.
global peace and stability with a focus on
population growth.

The Annual Meetings speech calls for continued research into the problems of
development. McNamara promises that the Bank will produce an annual "report
on world development."

1978

The first World Development Report is published. The theme is the prospects for
accelerating growth and alleviating poverty.
The Executive Directors endorse a new Bank policy to control the environmental
impact of Bank-supported projects.

McNamara uses the Annual Meetings speech to call for measures that will
increase the productivity of the poor and increase the access of the poor to
essential public services: clean water, basic education, medical care, electricity,
and public transportation.

1979

World Bank Group commitments exceed $10 billion for the first time, with first
loan for the health sector.

In a major speech at the University of Chicago, McNamara focuses on
development and the arms race, saying that the concept of security has become
erroneously and dangerously oversimplified into a problem which nations thought
could be addressed through an increase in military hardware. He says
alternatives to an arms race include the acceleration of economic and social
progress in developing countries.

During the Annual Meetings in Belgrade, McNamara reviews development
progress in the decade of the 1970s and sounds the alarm: "Income grew the
least where it was needed most: in the poorest countries, containing over half the
population of the world."

1980

Banks Board of Governors approves a general capital increase of approximately
$44 billion (to $85 billion).

The Peoples Republic of China joins the World Bank Group.

In his final Annual Meetings speech, McNamara reflects on 13 years as Bank
President. Focusing on poverty reduction, McNamara states that "What these
countless millions of the poor need and want is what each of us needs and
wants: the well-being of those that they love; a better future for their children; an
end to injustice; and a beginning of hope."

1981
June 30: Robert S. McNamara ends his tenure as the fifth President of the World
Bank Group.
