The Bank’s Fitness Center


NUMBER 027
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: JUNE 2003




                            January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
The Bank’s Fitness Center

The World Bank Group’s well-equipped Fitness Centers have been a part of
Bank life for numerous staff for many years—so long, in fact, that few people
today recall its humble and precarious origins. In August 1974 the exercise
group consisted of three staff—all Bank teachers of English. But friends came,
and they, in turn, invited friends, and so in early 1975, the number of twice-
weekly exercisers sometimes exceeded a dozen, men included.

The March 1975 issue of Bank Notes reported that a class of as many as a
dozen people or more had been meeting twice a week to do physical exercises
during the lunch hour. They were led by English instructor Mary Evans, a former
modern dancer (in college), and, more recently, a "slimnastics" instructor at the
"Y." Her class found an exercise room wherever it could. In less than six
months, it had met in vacant rooms on the tenth, ninth and third floors of the old
N Building at 801 19th Street, NW. The IMF had turned down Miss Evans’ plea
for time in its exercise room, and as the Bank filled in the N Building, it was hard
to know where to turn to next.

"We’ve got a good group, and they are really loyal. They want to continue," Miss
Evans said.




              The I Building exercise facility shortly after it opened in 1980



A few years later, the situation had improved considerably. On July 1, 1980 the
Bank’s first genuine exercise facility opened in the basement of the I Building.
Mary Evans was designated by the Staff Association, which managed the
facility, as one of the Exercise Room Coordinators, along with Joanne Spina.

There were approximately 25 people in each class, and as many staff as
possible were accommodated in the exercise program. The classes included
instruction in the martial arts, yoga, and general calisthenics. Although not
available immediately, it was planned to equip the Exercise Room with two
pulley systems, small weights, bicycles, jump ropes, mirrors, a ballet barre, and
a few other items shortly after it opened. A punching bag was contributed by a
staff member. The Exercise Room was also equipped with showers, saunas
and lockers. Classes were open to both sexes, but initially few men were
                                             involved.

                                             Over the years the Bank’s fitness
                                             program continued to evolve. When
                                             the H Building was completed in 1983
                                             it included an exercise facility on the
                                             B1 level. One staff member recalls
                                             that in 1985 the current entrance area
                                             to the Fitness Center in H Building
                                             had one large open area for aerobics,
                                             blocked off from the machines,
                                             weights, rowing machines and
   A fitness class in the N Building in 1975 exercise bikes by what appeared to
                                             be a rather dirty fishnet. The carpeted
floor was lumpy, the showers were sparse and cramped, and the lockers were
continually fought over.

But the fitness program continued to grow in popularity. The J Building was
completed in 1986 with a small additional exercise facility on JB1. These two
facilities ran in tandem with that in the I Building for several years.

Then, on August 31, 1992, the new three-floor Fitness Center opened on the B1
level of the H Building. By that time management of the Bank’s fitness program
had moved from the Staff Association to the Health Services Department
(HSD). "One of the most important decisions we had to make as we looked at
growing," said Dr. Bernhard H. Liese, then Director of HSD, "was to put an
integrated program into place and, as part of that, to improve on the limited
space and substandard conditions which we had with the three scattered
facilities." This led to management’s decision to expand the program, and after
careful research, it became obvious that the logical approach was an integrated
facility, with most growth potential, in the H Building, where the primary center
already existed. "No other Bank building," said Dr. Liese, "including the New
Main Complex, could accommodate the size of an integrated facility which
would service HSD’s projected membership."
Today the Fitness Center facilities consist of the "H" Facility in H B1-030 on the
B1 level of the H Building, and the "IFC" Satellite Facility in F-K-108 in the IFC F
Building. The "H" Studio is equipped with locker rooms, showers, sauna rooms,
exercise studios, equipment rooms, and a testing room. The "H" Facility is also
equipped with a shower, locker, and toilet area to accommodate handicapped
persons located on the main level. The "IFC" Satellite Facility is equipped with
weight training equipment, a large exercise studio, locker rooms, showers, and
sauna rooms. There are now approximately 4,000 registered members. In 2002
between 450 and 600 members used the facilities daily. The number of exercise
classes offered was 70.

All in all a vast change from the precarious wanderings of a few determined staff
looking for a vacant room in which to exercise in the mid-1970s!
