Computers Come to the Bank


NUMBER 015
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: APRIL 2003




                          January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
Computers Come to the Bank

Today computers are ubiquitous in the Bank. Just
about everyone has their own personal computer,
and other computers perform many different
functions in the institution. Of course, this was not
always so. In this article, reprinted from the April
1961 issue of International Bank Notes, Victor
Chang of the Treasurer’s Department recounts
one of the very first introductions of computers into
the work of the World Bank.

Automation Takes Over!

The Bank has had a Data Processing Section with
IBM equipment in operation since last November
[1960]. As the activities of the Bank and its             Al Schaech (seated) gives
associated organizations continue to increase,          President Eugene Black (right)
                                                          an explanation of the inner
record keeping becomes more voluminous, and             workings of the new computer.
the need for prompt information regarding previous
activities becomes more frequent and imperative.
In order to meet these needs, the Bank has obtained the latest equipment
suitable for its purposes and is now in the lengthy process of transferring to IBM
punch cards the records relating to the past and present activities of the Bank.




 Schaech demonstrates how        Al Schaech and Robert       And the audience eagerly
   the computer works…         Stewart examine the "hard         views the results
                              copy" as it comes out of the
                                407 accounting machine

Mr. J. Albert Schaech in the Treasurer’s Department is in charge of this section
and is beginning to see the results of many long weeks of preparation and
planning. His first job was to transfer the entries on the Bank’s financial books to
a punch card system of accounting. The general accounting records of the Bank,
                                including statements to borrowers, are now being
                                produced on IBM equipment.

                                  The Bank’s statements to borrowers have always
                                  presented a problem for conventional bookkeeping
                                  equipment because of the diversity of currencies
                                  and the magnitude of the sums involved. The word
                                  "billion" is often heard in the Treasurer’s
                                  Department. Until the past year or so there was no
                                  conventional equipment that would present the
                                  information in a form suitable for Bank needs. The
                                  new IBM equipment permits showing borrowers
                                  their statements of account in a much more concise
 Grethe Hasal, at the verifier,   and presentable form. Eighteen currencies is the
checks on the accuracy of the     maximum number charged so far to any one loan.
     key punch operation
                                  Previously the statement of such an account would
                                  involve twenty or more separate pages, whereas
                                  the new statement can now be shown on a little
over three pages.

As soon as Al Schaech has completed his work on the Bank’s general and loan
accounts he will then be ready to help other hard-pressed people elsewhere in
the Bank with their record keeping problems. The arduous work of programming
and recording previous statistical history is a job that ordinary mortals would
prefer to avoid. The Data Processing Section thrives on it!
