The Bank and Japan’s Bullet Trains


NUMBER 009
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: FEBRUARY 2003




                           January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
The Bank and Japan’s Bullet Trains

In 1961 a loan from the World Bank to the Japanese National Railways helped
finance one of the most technically advanced railway projects in the world —the
New Tokaido Line (the Shinkansen Project) between Tokyo and Osaka that
carried the famous Bullet
Trains.

But this landmark event cannot
be fully appreciated without
knowing more about Japan’s
experience with trains to that
date. The first railway in Japan
was constructed by the
government in 1872 from
Tokyo to Yokohama, a distance
of 29 kilometers. By 1881,
government lines totaled 135
kilometers. Thereafter, for
financial reasons, private
enterprise was called upon to
assist in railway construction.    Signing of the loan to the Japanese National Railways.
                                      From left to right, His Excellency Koichiro Asakai,
Nine years later, there were       Ambassador of Japan in the United States; Sir William
885 kilometers of government       Iliff, Vice President of the World Bank; and Mr. Shinji
and 2,124 kilometers of private      Sogo, President of the Japanese National Railways.
railways.                           Standing, left to right: Mr. Gengo Suzuki, Executive
                                   Director of the World Bank for Japan; and Mr. Manabu
                                       Kanematsu, Managing Director of the Japanese
Expansion by public and                                National Railways
private means continued to
1906, when the multiplicity of short-line disconnected private carriers led to
government action. In order to promote long distance through transportation, the
Railway Nationalization Law was enacted whereby the government purchased all
privately-operated railways, except those serving local areas.

At the end of 1907, the government owned and operated 6,407 kilometers of
lines, compared with 717 kilometers of privately-owned short lines. Construction
of new railway lines continued to 1937 at an average annual rate of 470
kilometers, for a total at that time of about 20,000 kilometers. From 1938,
emphasis was on improvement to existing lines rather than on new construction.
Loan 0281 for $80 million was approved on May 1, 1961. The purpose of the
loan was to assist the financing of the new $548 million New Tokaido Line, a
311-mile express railway serving the cities of Tokyo, Yokohama, Nagoya, Kyoto
and Osaka, providing what was at the time the fastest train service in the world.
The project was in addition to a much larger continuing railway development
                                     program.

                                          The Tokaido area is the industrial heart of
                                          Japan. For some time the development in the
                                          Tokaido area of adequate transport facilities
                                          was becoming an obstacle to the general
                                          economic development of the region.
                                          Highways in the area were continually
                                          congested and the existing narrow gauge
                                          railway was operating at maximum capacity
                                          with as many as 186 passenger trains and
The new bullet train in Torikai station   124 freight trains using it each day.
  on the new Tokaido Line in Japan
                                    Japanese National railways set up a team to
                                    begin the feasibility study for the project on
May 10, 1956. The project was authorized on December 19, 1958, with the first
portion of the construction beginning on April 20, 1959. By October 1961 the
route between Tokyo and Osaka was finalized. Service on the line began
October 1, 1961.

The New Tokaido Line was designed as an electrified system with standard
gauge double track throughout. The track was composed of long welded rails,
each measuring about a mile in length and linked together by expansion joints
with double elastic fastenings on pre-stressed
concrete ties. The curves of the track were
designed to be gentle, permitting the
maintenance of higher speeds.

The project envisaged the construction of 80
tunnels for a total length of 62 kms, and of
these tunnels 18 would be more than 1 km
long, of which the Tanna Tunnel, 7.9 kms,
would be the longest. The total length of
bridges is 18.1 kms. A subway 2.2 kms long
                                                         The new train depot and fitting out
was to be built in the Tokyo area. These and               station at Torikai rail station,
other structures including elevated tracks are               between Osaka and Kyoto
required by the undulating and hilly terrain, and represent a total length of 226
kms or 45 percent of the length of the Project, which was approximately 500 kms
                                        overall.

                                          As originally designed the new line carried
                                          passenger trains during the day and freight
                                          at night. Even the freight trains traveled at
                                          speeds approaching 100 miles per hour.
                                          The trains were designed to be controlled
                                          at the Centralized Traffic Control in Tokyo,
                                          which also maintained communication with
                                          the train engineers by train radio telephone
                                          communication. The rolling stock on the
                                          new line consisted of multiple unit electric
 Here, President Ishida is seen cutting a rail cars of lightweight construction and
tape at the grand ceremony marking the    equipped with a motor on each axle. To
opening of the New Tokaido line in Tokyo  ensure safety and riding comfort, the cars
                                          were provided with devices to eliminate
vibration, noise and heat transfer. The cars were air tight to protect the
passengers from unpleasant effects when entering tunnels at high speeds or
passing another train going in the opposite direction.

The passenger trains could be made up to a maximum of sixteen units with a
seating capacity of 1,250. For the initial service, the trains traveled between
Tokyo and Osaka every thirty minutes beginning at 6:00AM. Half of the trains
were Super Expresses named Hikari with
stops at Nagoya and Kyoto. The other
trains stop at all the larger stations between
Osaka and Tokyo.

To ensure maximum safety, a considerable
amount of testing and research was
employed before the New Tokaido Line
began operation. Several different
prototypes of rail cars were designed and
tested and considerable time was spent in
researching the best possible design of              A view of an embankment on the
track.                                                         Tokaido Line


Mieko Nishimizu, SAR Vice President, reflects on the significance of this loan in
an August 1994 interview with Bank’s World:
"I decided to give this old World Bank a try for a few years, without knowing much
about the Bank really. That proposal caused my father great distress. After my
being a professor, this was certainly something he couldn’t stomach. He called a
                                      family conference to discuss what to do.

                                          "Unknown to me, I had an ally in the family,
                                          one of my uncles on my mother’s side. He
                                          was with the Japan National Railways
                                          Company, and when he was a young,
                                          dashing engineer, a few decades back, he
                                          was assigned to the Shinkansen project
                                          engineering team—the Bullet Train, which
                                          was a World Bank-supported project. So my
                                          uncle had known something about the
                                          Bank, and when he came to this family
 The new double track wide-gauge line     conference, he said to my relatives: ‘You
runs parallel with the old narrow-gauge   are very crazy if you think that the World
line from Tokyo to Osaka. The new line    Bank is a money lender. Don’t you know
will be used only for express passenger
                                          that the World Bank was a great teacher to
   and express freight trains, reaching
       speeds of 125 miles an hour        our country?’

                                         "Of course, engineering we knew everything
about and we didn’t have to learn from the World Bank engineers. But they
taught us how to think about the project,
they taught us about rational project
analysis, they taught us cost-benefit
analysis, they taught us how to think about
pricing train tickets in the context of the
Shinkansen Project, and they taught us how
to think, most of all, about a railway line
project, not just in the context of the railway
system of our country, but in the context of
the entire transport system of Japan.

"And so these are the things I would learn         The photo shows regular service
from the great teacher called the World          railcars for the New Line standing in
                                                   readiness for operation, in Tokyo
Bank and, in fact, we have been applying
what we learned to every single project that we executed and to every single
marginal extension of the Bullet Train system."
Bank lending to Japan ended in 1966. There was a total of 31 loans from 1953
through 1966 for $862 million.
