Bank President John McCloy’s Congratulations on
the British Royal Birth in 1948

NUMBER 082
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: JULY 2013




                          January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
Bank President John McCloy’s Congratulations on the British
Royal Birth in 1948

On 22 July 2013, much of the world’s attention
turned toward England and the news of the birth of a
son to the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge. For
staff in the World Bank Group Archives, the occasion
brought to mind a piece of correspondence between
then British Ambassador to the United States Oliver
Franks and the second World Bank President, John
“Jack” McCloy. While the first heir to the British
throne, Charles, Prince of Wales, is today welcoming
his first grandson, almost 65 years ago he was the
subject of a short note, reproduced below, from
Ambassador Franks to President McCloy. In the
November 16th, 1948 letter below, Franks
acknowledges McCloy's kind words in an earlier               World Bank President John
correspondence and then uses the arrival of Charles,                Jay McCloy
“the little Prince,” to bless not only the infant heir but
the future of his country and the world, as well.

This piece of correspondence is found in the records of the Records of President
John J. McCloy sub-fonds, which have recently been declassified and digitized
for online availability. To view the folder of McCloy’s correspondence in which
this letter is found (Archives folder 1506591, pg.83), visit the sub-fonds
description, or click here. This letter from Ambassador Franks is only one item
within an entire folder of John McCloy’s correspondence dating from 1 May 1947
to 31 December 1948.

You never know what you might find within the archival holdings of the World
Bank Group, and this letter is only one example! Explore our Archival Holdings
website to learn more about the history of the Bank and its work.
