Report to the President of the IBRD and IDA on
India’s Economic Development Effort, October 1, 1965

NUMBER 069
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: NOVEMBER 2010




                            January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
Report to the President of the IBRD and IDA on India’s Economic
Development Effort, October 1, 1965

The Report to the President of the International Bank
for Reconstruction and Development [IBRD] and the
International Development Association [IDA] on
India's Economic Development Effort, also known as
Bell Mission Report, was declassified in August,
2010, shortly after the World Bank’s new Policy on
Access to Information went into effect on July 1,
2010. Public disclosure of this document by the
World Bank, in partnership with the government of
India, reinforced the Bank's role as a leader
in transparency among multilateral institutions.

"This new policy constitutes a major shift in the            Bernard Bell, 1912-1994
Bank's approach to information disclosure,
transparency, sharing of knowledge, and
accountability,? said President Robert B. Zoellick in the foreword to the Policy.

The Bell Mission Report, consists of fourteen volumes, and was issued on
October 1, 1965. This report was an outcome of the Bank’s mission to India
                                             headed by Bernard Bell. Mr. Bell had
                                             served as chief economist of the
                                             Export- Import Bank in the U.S., and
                                             then was employed by various
                                             consulting firms from 1953 - 1965,
                                             during which time he was engaged in
                                             a study of the coal transport industry of
                                             India. The mission's purpose was to
                                             conduct a comprehensive study of the
                                             Indian economy and advise the Bank
 Mr. Subramanian, Minister of Agriculture of and the partnering aid consortium on
        India, and Mr. Woods, 1965           the Indian economy and its
                                             challenges.

Bell’s 1964-1965 mission to India significantly influenced Bank policies toward
Indian development. During this period India was the IBRD's largest debtor and
was also heavily indebted to other development agencies and governments
throughout the world.
Bell's report recommended many policy changes, including the introduction of
intensified agricultural production, and the devaluation of the Indian currency. In
return, the mission report supported India's request for additional assistance,
especially for quicker project disbursments.

In December 1965, Bell joined the Bank as assistant director of the Projects
Department under Vice President Siem Alderwereld. During the George Woods
presidency the Bank began placing more emphasis on the impact of a project on
the total economy. The Bank also became much more concerned with and
involved in the overall economic policy program and performance of borrowing
countries.

The Bank accepted India’s five-year planning as a framework of its development
program. One of the recommendations was a change in the allocation of
investment resources, i.e. a shift from industry to agriculture. Bell continued to be
involved with India and was responsible for the Bank’s analysis of the Indian
government’s Fourth FiveYear Plan. His study was published in the subsequent
1967 Bank report entitled “Indian Economic Policy and the Fourth Five Year
Plan.?
