Barber Conable’s Trip to India in November 1987


NUMBER 070
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: MARCH 2011




                           January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
Barber Conable’s Trip to India in November 1987

On April 3rd, 1986, Barber Conable was selected as the
7th president of the World Bank Group, a position which
he formally took over on July 1st of that year. In honor of
the 25th anniversary of that event, the Archives has
selected a sketch of Conable, drawn by the Indian
cartoonist Ranga during Conable's trip to India in
November 1987.

At the time of his selection, Conable was largely
unknown by members of the World Bank group. He was
a veteran of WWII and the Korean war and had spent his
life as a career politician. During his time in the US            The cartoonist Ranga
                                                                 drew this line sketch of
House of Representatives, Conable had a keen interest            Barber Conable during
                          in budgetary, tax and trade            Conable's 1987 trip to
                          issues. He understood the                       India
                          complicated systems that
                          controlled these issues, and the
                          importance of these financial matters to the world at
                          large. As a result, he was fully committed to the World
                          Bank's central mission of reducing poverty, and made it
                          his priority throughout his term as President.

                            The sketch was drawn on November 7th of 1986, likely
                            during a press conference, by freelance cartoonist N. K.
  Barber Conable and       Ranganathan, known as Ranga. Known for his
  U.P. Minister Ammar
 Rizvi in front of the Taj recognizable line drawings,
  Mahal in Agra, India     Ranga's work was featured
                           in numerous publications
throughout India, including The Statesman, Midday
and Amrita Bazar Patrika, as well as the New York
newspaper India Abroad. Ranga was well-known
for drawing caricatures of celebrities and other
notable persons, until his death in 2002.
                                                          Barber Conable and U.P.
Conable's mission to India occurred from                 Minister Ammar Rizvi at the
November 4th, 1987 to November 9th, and                    Mughal Sheraton Hotel
throughout the five days he had meetings with a
variety of figures such as: Prime Minister Rajiv Ghandi; S. S. Nadkarni; the
Chairman and Managing Director of the Industrial Development Bank of India;
various ministers and governors; and Mother
Theresa. Discussions ranged over a variety of
topics related to development of India including
growth and poverty alleviation, industry,
environmental improvement, trade and tax policy,
and education.

Despite meetings, press conferences, and
business lunches and dinners, President Conable
and his wife Charlotte enjoyed the culture, food,
dancing, and sights of India, including the Taj            Though a simple drawing,
Mahal. In thanking Ammar Rizvi, the Minister of          Ranga's caricature of Conable is
Parliamentary Affairs and Revenue to the state of            almost eerily accurate
Uttar Pradesh, for his hospitality, Conable wrote
that "the beauty of the Taj by full moon is a sight that [my wife and I] shall never
forget" (Letter from Barber Conable to Ammar Rizvi, 11/23/2011, Archives folder
1122945; view below).
