1962 Presidential Transition – Eugene Black
to George Woods

NUMBER 080
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: DECEMBER 2012




                           January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
1962 Presidential Transition – Eugene Black to George Woods

In this photograph, Eugene Black (left) speaks
with George Woods (right) who succeeded him
as fourth President of the World Bank,
International Development Association, and
Chairman of the International Finance
Corporation. The two portraits in the
background are Eugene Meyer on the left (first
President of the World Bank from June 1946 -
December 1946), and John McCloy on the right
(second World Bank President from March
1947 - July 1949).

Soon, the World Bank Group will welcome its
12th President on 1 July 2012. A concise
history of all World Bank Group Presidents can        The first four World Bank
be found on this website. As well, descriptions   presidents in one image: Eugene
of the archival records from the Office of the    Meyer, John McCloy, Eugene Black
                                                         and George Woods
President during the Woods, Black, and
McCloy presidencies can be found on the
Archives’ website here. These and many other stories about past World Bank
Group Presidents can be found in the World Bank Group Archives - find out more
about our holdings!
