World Bank President Eugene Black Attends
Washington Baseball Games with Staff

NUMBER 072
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: APRIL 2011




                          January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
World Bank President Eugene Black Attends Washington Baseball
Games with Staff

With summer here and baseball season in full swing, the Archives highlights an
annual tradition that took place under Eugene Black, the 3rd President of the
World Bank Group. In 1949, when Black became President, the Bank was a
small organization: its mission only vaguely understood and its future path
uncertain. This gave Black the opportunity to make an impact on its
development, as well as become more involved in the Bank’s social events. In
addition to knowing nearly all staff members by name, Black rarely missed an
annual picnic, Christmas party or bowling tournament. He also created an annual
event of his own: The Father and Son Baseball Party.




 These and images below are taken from International Bank Notes, July-August 1962. View
                                the entire article below.

Though relatively small in 1949, the Bank staff, and its Board of Executive
Directors, was very diverse. The Board was composed of thirteen Executive
Directors, each of a different nationality, and together represented more than 50
countries. In order to provide this group with a team building, and quintessentially
American, experience Black invited the Board of Directors and their sons to
celebrate summer at a Washington Senators' baseball game.
This event occurred first in 1950, and once a summer the World Bank Fathers
and Sons would be bused to RFK Stadium for an evening of basball, food
and fun. Eventually the group expanded to include not only the
Executive Directors but senior staff as well. By the end of the tradition in 1962, it
had grown to include a pre-game buffet in the stadium and an attendance of
more than 100 people of a dozen nationalities.
                  WELCOME TO NEW STAFF-JUNE
(Seated L to R): Peggy Cury, Department of Operations-Far East, from
Beirut; Ingrid Luttut, Department of Operations-Far East, from Bielefeld,
Germany; Phyllis Brown, Administration Department, from Eastbourne, Sussex;
Erla Gunnarsdotti1', Administration Department, from Skagafirdi, Iceland; and
Anthea de Winton, Office of Information, from Aberdeenshire, Scotland. (Stand­
ing L to R): Barbara Huddleston, Office of Information, from Canton, New
York; Bharat B. Krishna, Economic Staff, from Meerut City, India; and Edith
Selse, Treasurer's Department, from Hanover, Germany.

                    INTERNATIONAL BANK NOTES

              Vol. 16 Nos. 7-8              July-August 1962


                                 CONTENTS
                                                            Page
              World Bank Fathers & Sons
               Support the Senators. . • • . . . • .          3
              Loans to Mexico . . . . • . . , . . . .         6
              Some Light-hearted Reflections on the
               General Training Program. . . . .. •..         9




                                       2

Approaching the staJillm from the bllses
which took the grOll/) from the Btl" to
the game.

                                                             WORL'D
                                                               K
                                                            BAN,
                                                             FATHERS
                                                             AND
                                                             SONS
                                                             SUPPORT
                                                             THE
                                                             SEN'ATO'RS 

         ON JUNE 13 the Washington Senators and the Cleveland Indians were
         cheered by 15,000 spectators. In the crowd that evening were the World Bank
         "Fathers & Sons"-an unusually polyglot group even for such an international
         city as the Nation's Capital.
            When Eugene R. Black of Atlanta, Georgia, became President of the Wodd
         Bank in 1949, he found himself chairman of a Board of Executive Directors
         unlike any he had experienced in his thirty years of experience as an American
         inv~stment banker. There were thirteen men at the Board table, each of a
         different nationality. Between them these men represented more than fifty
         countries, all stockholders in the Bank.
            Gene Black is as good an internationalist as any-and better than most. But
         he thought it only right that he should introduce his foreign colleagues to the
         great national game of baseball. To make the idea even more palatable, he
         invited the Executive Directors to bring their sons along.
            That was in the summer of 1950. What was then a new idea has now become
         an annual event. In addition to Executive Directors, Mr. Black now invites



                                               3

senior World Bank staff members to the game-and this year, to a buffet supper
in the Stadium as a curtain raiser.
   It is evident from the pictures that it was a pleasant evening. There were
close to 100 guests, including children. In all, there were more than a dozen
nationalities in the party, running all the way through the alphabet from
Australia and China to the United Kingdom and Yugoslavia. Maybe many of
them didn't understand all that was happening on the floodlit diamond before
them-but what they lacked in knowledge, both young and old made up in
enthusiasm. Pete Quesada, President of the Senators, who sat with Mr. Black
through the game, seemed well pleased with his new group of World Bank
rooters.




                                               The boys ate first. (L to R in f01'e~round):
                                               Stevie-Robert Sadove's son; Greg-Gerald
                                               Alter's son; and Tony-Y.L. Chang's grandson.
Some spectator reactions.




Harold Graves' youngest son, Mike, kept    Y.L. Chang's· grandson, Tony, divided his
careful record of the score.               attention between popcorn and baseball.




                A man hopes that his lean years are behind him;
  ~             a woman, that hers are ahead




                                          5

