Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized




                                  Competitiveness of the Kyrgyz
                               economy in the wake of accession
                                 to the Eurasian Customs Union:
                               Selected issues and opportunities
Public Disclosure Authorized




                                         March 2016
Acknowledgement

Prepared by a team led by Jieun Choi (Economist & Task Team Leader, World Bank Group) and
comprised of Sebastian Saez (Senior Trade Economist, GTCDR), Alberto Portugal (Senior Trade
Economist, World Bank Group), Andrew Myburgh (Consultant, World Bank Group), Erik van der
Marel (Consultant, GTCDR), Martin Molinuevo (Consultant, GTCDR), Lorenzo Costantino
(Consultant, World Bank Group), Nurlanbek Tynaev (Consultant, World Bank Group), Serhiy
Osavolyuk (IFC) and Vanya Pasheva (Consultant, World Bank Group). Chapter II represents a
compilation of a report titles “Comparative Analysis of Certain Requirements of Food Legislation in
the European Union and the Custom Union of Russia, Belarus, and Kazakhstan,” having as the main
author Kateryna Onul (Adviser on Food Legislation, GTCDR), and produced under the Ukraine IC for
Agribusiness Project.

The World Bank’s team acknowledges extensive feedback from peer reviews Kateryna Onul
(Operations Officer, GTCDR), Irina Shemlenya (Operations Officer, GTCDR), Seok Hyun Yoon (Senior
Economist, IMF), Marina Bakanova (Operations Officer, GTCDR). Last, but not least, the authors of
the report appreciate the unwavering support and essential guidance provided by the management
team, including Paloma Anos Casero (Practice Manager, GTCDR), Saroj Kumar Jha (Country Director
for Central Asia Region), and Jean-Michel Happi (Country Manager for the Kyrgyz Republic).

The views presented in this document belong solely to the team. The document results from a
broad consultation exercise implemented by the World Bank Group in the Kyrgyz Republic.

Disclaimer

This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. Note that The
World Bank does not necessarily own each component of the content included in the work. The
World Bank therefore does not warrant that the use of the content contained in the work will not
infringe on the rights of third parties. The risk of claims resulting from such infringement rests
solely with you.

The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the
views of The World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the governments they represent. The
World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries,
colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any
judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

Nothing herein shall constitute or be considered to be a limitation upon or waiver of the privileges
and immunities of The World Bank, all of which are specifically reserved.




                                                  1
                                                                                 Contents
Abbreviations And Acronyms Used In The Report.................................................................................................... 3
Executive Summary ................................................................................................................................................................ 5
Chapter I : The Eurasian Customs Union and the Kyrgyz National Quality Infrastructure .................... 16
  The Building Blocks of a National Quality Infrastructure ................................................................................ 18
  Role of Public Policy for NQI ........................................................................................................................................ 22
  The Kyrgyz NQI .................................................................................................................................................................. 24
  Challenges for the Kyrgyz NQI upon Customs Union Accession ................................................................... 28
  Opportunities for the Kyrgyz Republic .................................................................................................................... 32
  Recommendations ............................................................................................................................................................ 36
Chapter II - Certain Requirements of Food Legislation in the Customs Union of Russia, Belarus, and
Kazakhstan ............................................................................................................................................................................... 39
  The Kyrgyz Context .......................................................................................................................................................... 39
  The Russian embargo on food imports.................................................................................................................... 40
  Certain Requirements of Food Legislation in the CU of Russia, Belarus, and Kazakhstan ................. 42
  Important Notes for Governments, Policy Makers and Businesses ........................................................ 52
  Requirements to Food Quality in the Customs Union ....................................................................................... 53
  Food and Food-related Articles and Materials that Require Special Authorization ............................. 55
  Laboratory Control and Food Safety Criteria in the Customs Union ........................................................... 56
Chapter III - Services Trade in the Kyrgyz Rebpulic ............................................................................................... 57
  Services in the Kyrgyz Republic’s Domestic Economy ...................................................................................... 60
  The Kyrgyz Republic’s Services Exports Performance...................................................................................... 63
  Valuing Services in Trade .............................................................................................................................................. 76
  Services Diagnostics ........................................................................................................................................................ 90
  Conclusions ......................................................................................................................................................................... 98
Chapter IV: The Garment Sector: Impact of Joining the Customs Union and Options to Increase
Competitiveness.................................................................................................................................................................. 100
  Introduction ..................................................................................................................................................................... 101
  Economic context........................................................................................................................................................... 101
  The garment sector ....................................................................................................................................................... 104
  The potential impact of joining the Eurasian Customs Union (ECU) on Kyrgyz exports ................. 109
  Strengthening the garment’s sector’s competitiveness ................................................................................. 113
  Recommendations ......................................................................................................................................................... 127
  Conclusion ........................................................................................................................................................................ 129
Bibliography ......................................................................................................................................................................... 130
Appendix: ............................................................................................................................................................................... 133
Letter from the Ministry of the Economy of the Kyrgyz Republic.................................................................. 133




                                                                                             2
           Abbreviations And Acronyms Used In The Report

BAS    Biologically Active Supplements
CAC    Central Asian Cooperation on Metrology, Accreditation, Standardization and Quality
CAC -MAS-Q    Codex Alimentarus Commission
CET    Common External Tariff
CIPM International Committee for Weights and Measures
CIS    Commonwealth of Independent States
CSM    Center for Standardization and Metrology
CU     Customs Union
EAEU Eurasian Economic Union
ECU    Eurasian Customs Union
EFSA   European Food Safety Authority
FDI    Foreign Direct Investment
FVO    Food and Veterinary Office
GATP Global Trade Analysis Project
GIZ    Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit
GoK    Government of the Kyrgyz Republic
HACCP Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points
IAF    International Accreditation Forum
ICT    Information and Communications Technology
IEC    International Electrotechnical Commission
ILAC   The International Laboratory Accreditation Cooperation
ILCT   Laboratory Comparison Tests
IMF    International Monetary Fund
IOML International Organization of Legal Metrology
ISO    The International Organization for Standardization
ITC    International Trade Centre
ITU    International Telecommunication Union
JICA   Japan International Cooperation Agency

                                                3
KCA    Kyrgyz Center for Accreditation
MRA    Mutual Recognition Agreement
MSTQ Metrology, Standards, Testing and Quality
NAB    National Accreditation Body
NMI    National Metrology Institute
NQI    The Kyrgyz National Quality Infrastructure
NSB    National Standards Body
OCS    Other Commercial Services
OECD Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development
PPP    Purchasing power parity
PTB    The Physikalisch Technische Bundesanstalt, the German Metrology Institute
RASFF Rapid Alert System on Food and Feed
RTBET The Reducing Technical Barriers for Entrepreneurship and Trade Project
SAM    Social Accounting Matrix
SECO State Secretariat for Economic Affairs
SMEs Small & Medium Enterprises
SPS    Sanitary and Phytosanitary measures
STRI   Service Trade Restrictions Index
TBT    Technical Barriers to Trade
UNDP United Nations Development Programme
USAID United States Agency for International Development
WBG    World Bank Group
WTO    World Trade Organization




                                               4
                                          Executive Summary
In May 2015, the Kyrgyz Republic became a member of the Eurasian Customs Union (CU),
comprising Russia, Kazakhstan, Belarus, and Armenia; it also joined the Common Economic
Space (CES), which introduced “free movement of goods, services, capital, and labor” between
members in 2012. The CU gives the Kyrgyz Republic access to a potentially large consumer market
with 170 million people, an estimated GDP of US$2.3 trillion, and a goods turnover of about US$900
billion (Gill et al. 2014). The two agreements form the basis of the Eurasian Economic Union
(EEU)—an area of free flow of labor and goods between the five member countries, which is
expected to come into full effect in January 2016.

The government of the Kyrgyz Republic (GoK) has been making substantial progress along
the accession road map in terms of harmonizing technical and sanitary regulations, transport and
infrastructure, financial policies, tariff and nontariff regulations, and customs administration,
among other areas. Since 2012, 34 relevant laws have been enacted (IMF 2015). Accession to the
EEU could trigger gradual formalization of the economy. Kyrgyz companies wanting to export to the
EEU market will be required to meet EEU standards and comply with stricter technical regulations.
This should force some companies currently operating informally to regularize their activities,
which would increase tax collections and improve labor market outcomes (Dubashov 2015). At the
same time, delays in reaching compliance with a number of standards, including harmonizing
veterinary and phytosanitary control with standards of the EEU, has postponed the opening of
borders with Kazakhstan. The Kyrgyz Republic still must upgrade equipment and implement EEU
standards at customs check points, as well as comply with requirements about laboratory testing
for veterinary, sanitary, and phytosanitary safety.1

In September 2014, the Ministry of Economy (MoE) of the Kyrgyz Republic sent a letter
requesting the support of development partners, including the World Bank Group (WBG), on
a wide range of CU and CES accession activities (see appendix for a copy of the letter). After
consultations with MoE and other development partners, the World Bank team prioritized deep-
dive analyses on the four chapters of this report that we believe will help the Kyrgyz Republic
capture the medium- and long-term benefits of the CU while mitigating the short-term adaptation
challenges. Separately, over the course of supporting the GoK on activities related to CU accession,
the World Bank Group has provided comments on the results generated by the Computable General
Equilibrium (CGE) model developed by a local think tank and shared lessons from Kazakhstan’s
membership in the Eurasian Customs Union. This information is not included in this report

This report aims to respond to selected areas of MoE’s request: it supports topics III
(“Development Programmes”) and IV (“Development of Foreign Trade Infrastructure”). Within
topic III, the team identified high-impact industries that are likely to see a decline in
competitiveness as a result of CU accession—namely food, services, and garments. These industries
represent nearly 60 percent of exports and over 80 percent of employment, and have been growing
significantly in recent years. The first chapter—on the national quality infrastructure (NQI)—
relates to topic IV and analyzes the level of preparedness of the Kyrgyz Republic to proactively

1 Tatyana Kudryavtseva, “Border.kg: Wait until Fall?” July 8, 2015.

                                                             5
support the competitiveness of key sectors and benefit from renewed terms of trade with CU
members.

Economic context of the CU accession

The economy has been resilient in spite of the economic slowdown in Russia and the region,
although the risks to the outlook remain on the down side. According to the National Statistics
Committee preliminary June data, non-gold growth reached 4.4 percent and 12-month inflation
slowed to 4.5 percent, notwithstanding the exchange rate depreciation of 5.8 percent since the
beginning of the year. However, worker remittances fell by 25 percent in the first 5 months of the
year; trade continues to slow down, and nonperforming loans (NPLs) and deposit dollarization
increased further (IMF 2015).
In the first quarter of 2015, exports have increased by about 10 percent and imports have
contracted by about 20 percent, improving the trade balance. According to MoE and State
Customs data, exports to regional partners have decreased by about 30 percent due to a collapse in
exports to Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan. Trade with Russia has decreased about 10 percent both in
terms of exports and imports. Imports from China dropped by 25 percent in the first quarter as
external tariffs came into effect. At the same time, exports to Europe have increased three-fold in
the first quarter of 2015, creating a large export surplus. Switzerland accounts for over 90 percent
of European exports with a trade surplus of $178 million.
Despite the benefits from access to larger markets, short-term effects accession to the
Customs Union on growth and trade of are expected to be mixed. Both export and import
growth is expected to decelerate as the transit trade declines due to higher external tariffs. At the
same time, the country may not benefit much from trade creation with current CU members since it
already enjoys a free trade regime with them (IMF 2015).

The experience of other CU member states is consistent with the anticipated negative short-
term impact. A World Bank analysis on anticipated trade creation and trade diversion for Armenia
in the wake of EEU accession estimated that adopting the common external tariffs would imply a
welfare loss of 0.14 percent of GDP, and an expected decrease in imports of US$215.4 million (2.3
percent of GDP) at current EEU tariffs (effect was expected to be abated by 2020 when external
tariffs decrease). At the same time, the report estimates that little trade creation will take place in
the case of Armenia as a result of joining the union as it already enjoys free trade agreements with
EEU member states (World Bank 2015). In the case of Kazakhstan, the CU had important effects on
nontariff measures as procedures and technical requirements were altered to mirror the Russian
approach. The World Bank estimates that lower trade-facilitation costs would help Kazakhstan
counterbalance some of the negative effects and increase the value of consumption by 1.4 percent
(World Bank 2012).

In addition, spillovers from Russia’s slowdown will decelerate growth and exports, slowing
down growth by as much as 2 percent in 2015 and 2016, according to the IMF. The Kyrgyz
currency, the som, has depreciated by 20 percent since the onset of the Ukraine crisis, leading to
inflation and an increase in the exchange rate. Remittances, largely from Russia, have proved

                                                  6
resilient so far, with increased flows largely compensating for the drop in the value of the ruble. The
IMF expects these flows to decrease by 15 percent in 2015. At an estimated 30 percent of GDP,
remittances are a key driver of private consumption, and a 1 percent decrease in flows can slow
growth by 0.15 percent (IMF 2015).

Trade also slowed down, contributing only 1.4 percent to GDP in 2014, down from an
average of 2.2 percent over the last three years. Exports of services dropped by 20 percent in
2014 and are expected to drop further in 2015 before they begin recovering again starting in 2016.
Re-exports are expected to remain at around 50 percent of their 2013 levels until 2018 due to
higher and more complex external tariffs resulting from CU accession (IMF 2015). This slowdown
can have wide-reaching repercussions for the economy as import-, processing-, and re-export–
related activities employ 22 percent of the working population. Tighter customs control at the
Kazakh-Kyrgyz border (in line with EEU requirements) contributed to the slowdown, adversely
affecting trade and reducing the incomes of small and medium businesses (Dubashov 2015).

Kyrgyz authorities have been identifying measures to mitigate short-term risks. The creation
of a US$1 billion Russia-Kyrgyz development fund and a US$200 million Russian grant to
implement the road map to join the Customs Union could mitigate short-term effects. The priorities
of the fund include accelerating the implementation of technical regulations (TRs) in the
agribusiness, garments and textile, and services sectors, as well as the development of
entrepreneurship and infrastructure (IMF 2015).

This report and its recommendations

This report explores the sectors that will be instrumental for positive CU impact and
competitiveness in the medium term. The initial chapter analyzes the gaps and opportunities the
Kyrgyz NQI presents for capturing benefits of access to the enlarged common market across
sectors. The next three chapters take an in-depth look at three high-growth sectors and identify
adaptation priorities and opportunities. Agriculture, services, and garments are a large and growing
share of exports and are the sectors most likely to be transformed by accession to the CU and the
increased tariffs to countries outside the EEU. Services added 56 percent to GDP in 2013, while
agriculture contributed 18 percent, and manufacturing 16 percent. Exports in the garment sector
were close to US$200 million in 2013, employing over 150,000 workers. The main findings of each
chapter are summarized below followed by a summary of recommendations.

The first chapter, titled “The Eurasian Customs Union and the Kyrgyz National Quality
Infrastructure,” analyzes the challenges related to adapting to CU quality standards and TRs.
It takes a cross-sectoral approach to identifying gaps and opportunities in the Kyrgyz NQI, and
makes recommendations for prioritizing NQI investments and capturing longer-term opportunities
in light of the potential CU enlargement.

Kazakhstan’s CU accession experience demonstrates that a strong and harmonized NQI is a
prerequisite to reaping the benefits from CU accession. When Kazakhstan joined the Customs
Union in 2009, it anticipated an increase in exports toward the large new market. In reality, it

                                                  7
observed a shift of imports toward CU members due to an increase in external tariffs, largely
substituting for imports from the European Union. Exports to CU members, however, remained flat
(Gill et al. 2014). Part of the reason was the burden of nontariff measures2 (NTMs) that came with
CU membership. Kazakhstan had previously lowered tariffs and taken measures to harmonize
NTMs with the European Union. In some cases,3 the CU’s NTMs are more complex and impose costly
procedures that reduce Kazakhstan’s ability to access the Russian market (Malouche 2013).

Learning from this experience, the Kyrgyz Republic has identified a strong NQI as a priority.
The Kyrgyz Republic was eager to avoid the experience of Kazakhstan and to tackle NTM challenges
up front by evaluating and investing in its national quality infrastructure. A robust and
internationally accepted system for quality is essential to enable the country to take advantage of
CU membership and to capture trade opportunities across sectors.

Today, the Kyrgyz Republic is well positioned to build upon its existing NQI, which has the
essentials of (1) a metrology system, (2) a proven capacity to develop technical regulations, and (3)
a solid accreditation capability. In 2013 the Kyrgyz Republic was granted International Laboratory
Accreditation Cooperation (ILAC) recognition, which reinforces the credibility of the national
accreditation system.

However, the main challenge lies in implementing the new TRs—both in terms of
infrastructure and in terms of quality systems—within the accelerated timeframe of the
accession road map. At an infrastructure level, the gap is most notable in the field of border
control and testing laboratories where significant investments in equipment and training need to
be made to comply with CU regulations. A US$200 million grant from Russia will finance the
modernization of border control infrastructure, such as equipping customs posts, testing
laboratories, and certifying bodies, and will be essential for modernizing the NQI. Nevertheless,
implementing the roadmap nationally and training staff will remain a longer-term priority (the CU
Accession Road Map allows the Kyrgyz Republic until 2018 or 2020 to upgrade laboratories and
implement TRs in the phytosanitary space).

While generally decreasing in contribution to GDP and employment, agriculture and food
products remain significant drivers of the Kyrgyz economy. Agriculture accounted for
approximately 18 percent of GDP in 2014 (down from 33 percent in 2006), 20 percent of exports
(in 2013), and 34 percent of employment (in 2010). Food product exports were US$120 million in
2013; approximately 20 percent were sold to CU member countries. While the Kyrgyz Republic is
relatively better prepared to meet CU requirements with its internationally accredited laboratories,
several institutional and legislative challenges remain to achieve compliance with new
requirements for CU and EEU and to increase export-readiness, particularly in food industries.


2. NTMs are typically trade-related regulations, such as product standards or labeling requirements imposed for
legitimate purposes, such as protecting public health or the environment, but they may also be used to restrict trade
intentionally.
3. For example, Russia’s Ministry of Health in 2012 prepared to issue a CU-wide regulation on emissions from volatile
organic compounds used as solvents in glues in many furniture items. The regulation aimed to set the limit at half of what
the EU’s regulations tolerate, a level incompatible with local production capabilities in the three other member states,
which could potentially leave firms in permanent violation of the rules (Malouche 2013).

                                                            8
In terms of quality management systems, the Kyrgyz Republic must harmonize its domestic
regulatory system with CU requirements, particularly in agriculture and food exports. This
implies implementing a HACCP (Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points) system, which is not
currently in place in the Kyrgyz Republic. The challenge is that such a system has the potential to
impose the burden of compliance also on small agribusiness firms and as such will take longer to be
adopted throughout the private sector.

Like Kazakhstan, the Kyrgyz Republic has been developing internationally compliant
technical regulations, in some cases modeled after the European Union. In 2004, the Kyrgyz
Republic began implementing an internationally and WTO-compliant system of voluntary
standards and technical regulations. This process led to the adoption of 47 technical regulations
that have been developed according to international practice and referencing international
standards. CU accession requires a realignment of the technical regulatory environment with the
Russian system, which is based on GOST and GOST-R standards. This realignment can present a
challenge: currently 47 percent of Kyrgyz standards are harmonized internationally, while only 30
percent of GOST standards are consistent with ISO/IEC requirements. As a result, exports to
markets outside the CU may suffer as well.

The second chapter takes an in-depth look into agriculture exports and food safety—one of
the sectors where the difference in approach between Russian/CIS standards and international
standards is particularly notable. The chapter summarizes certain requirements of food legislation
relevant to accession into the CU.

This report is relevant to the Kyrgyz experience as it highlights important differences both
in terms of regulations and technical requirements. The report highlights differences between
the EU and CU regulatory systems in approaches to food safety and legislation, but it also analyzes
the differences in infrastructure aspects of the NQI, such as testing laboratories and certification
mechanisms between the EU and CU. The Customs Union approach is based on end-product
compliance to a speciﬁc technical regulation or standard, whereas the European Union relies on
preventive measures and minimizing risks associated with each process throughout the complete
food chain. In the CU food control system, food control bodies verify that the end-product meets the
required technical specifications established by the government; in the EU system, end-product
attributes such as size, color, shape, smell, and taste are generally left to the marketplace to judge if
they are acceptable. Importantly, the report pinpoints specific technical requirements for EU food
safety that differ from the CU requirements (Microbiological Criteria for Foodstuff, Contaminants in
Food; Maximum Residue Limits for Residues of Pesticides, and Pharmacologically Active
Substances).

The Russian embargo on food imports from the European Union amplifies the opportunity
for the Kyrgyz agriculture sector. The embargo on fruits and vegetables, dairy, and meats in
particular presents an opportunity to increase exports of unprocessed products. The cultural and
geographic proximity give the Kyrgyz Republic a competitive advantage in the Russian market over
imports like onions from Peru or eggplants from Morocco. In addition, despite the focus on CU



                                                   9
accession, the Kyrgyz Republic should remain open to trade opportunities with other markets, like
China, Turkey, or the European Union.

The third chapter, titled “Services Trade in the Kyrgyz Republic: a Competitive Analysis,”
provides a detailed benchmarking of the role and potential of services in the Kyrgyz
economy. The report benchmarks the Kyrgyz Republic against a number of countries in the region
and in Latin America of similar size and level of development. The authors conduct an extensive
analysis of the forward and backward linkages4 among various services and other parts of the
economy, and highlight sectors that have the potential to spur growth in the economy due to high
degree of linkages. As data on the services sector are scarce and information on service-related
regulation requirements imposed by CU accession is limited,5 this chapter does not provide an
analysis of the direct effect of CU accession. Instead, it provides an overall analysis of the
competitiveness of the service sector, and identifies opportunities for improving it.

Services are an important sector for the Kyrgyz economy, where employment is growing at
the expense of agriculture. Services drive the competitiveness of an economy by diversifying its
export base, and by pushing the country toward higher value-added activities. In the Kyrgyz
Republic they have been an engine of growth: the value of services exports increased by 70 percent
since 2010, and in 2013 accounted for about a third of exports. The increase in services exports is
partially due to a growing tourism sector. The majority of services exports are within the CU
member countries, which already enjoy a high level of market integration with respect to services
with low restrictions. Services are a growing policy priority as well—the high-tech park
established in 2013 to promote export-oriented software development by offering preferential
legal and tax treatment is a case in point.

Even though currently CU regulations do not directly pertain to services (outside the realm
of customs), the sector will be affected by the increased external tariff. In particular, re-
exports, which accounted for about 20 percent of exports to CIS countries in 2013, are likely to be
affected. The IMF estimates that re-exports already dropped by half in 2014 due to import
restrictions and that they will remain at a low level (under 15 percent of exports) until 2020. As the
re-export sector employs over 20 percent of the working population, the drop in re-exports is likely
to have far-reaching repercussions throughout the economy (IMF 2015). Another possible impact
of the CU on the services sector is through certain technical requirements related to customs. The
CU code (article 13) mandates that customs representatives obtain insurance for the products they
bring across borders (formerly a function performed by customs brokers). Unless they buy
insurance costing US$10,000 to US$15,000 per year, or provide a €1 million guarantee, they risk
losing their license.

Another way in which accession to the EEU is likely to affect the services sector is by
facilitating free labor mobility within the region. Free labor mobility is likely to be hard to

4. Linkages are an indicator of the interdependence of sectors in the economy and can inform the development strategy of
a country. A sector with strong backward linkages have a positive impact on its suppliers as demand for its output
increases. A sector with strong forward linkages benefit from increased demand for the products for which it provides
inputs.
5. Negotiations between CU and the Kyrgyz government were ongoing at the time this report was written.

                                                          10
achieve in the short run, given substantial physical infrastructure and income gaps among member
states. The evidence so far suggests that Russia has been pulling more workers from the former
Soviet space into its own labor market rather creating a common labor market. For instance, since
the CU was established, the number of Belarusian workers moving to Russia has risen, reflecting
income gaps between the two countries: Russia’s per capita income is almost double that of
Belarus. Given this situation, a common labor market as envisaged in the EEU has further
accelerated Belarus’s brain drain. This may also become a challenge in the case of the Kyrgyz
Republic, which already relies heavily on remittances from workers in Russia.

This report identifies subsectors and opportunities that may help the Kyrgyz Republic
improve the competitiveness of its services sector. While the level of services exports is
generally consistent with the level of development of the Kyrgyz Republic, the authors find that the
composition of exports is disproportionately skewed toward “traditional services” such as travel
and transportation, and the country may be missing an opportunity to develop higher value-added
services. Services could strengthen their link to key economic activities in manufacturing or
agriculture to boost exports of goods and contribute to diversification. One opportunity, for
example, is to serve and support the growing industry sector by outsourcing service activities such
as logistics and transportation, which are often performed in-house. In terms of the regulatory
environment, the Kyrgyz Republic compares favorably to benchmark countries, but restrictions can
still be reduced, particularly in transportation and professional services (for example, audits). More
broadly, the report highlights the need to incorporate services trade development in policy
priorities, to build expertise and knowledge in services policy reform (general and sector-specific),
and to improve regulators’ understanding of the implications of international commitments.

The final chapter analyzes the garments sector—another high-growth sector that has
powered the economy in the past two decades and stands to lose competitiveness within the
CU. The garments sector increased output seven times between 2004 and 2012 and is thought to
employ 150,000 people. Joining the CU is expected to increase external tariffs between 3.6 percent
and 7.7 percent or perhaps even more, and to formalize procedures at the border. Due to the
reliance on imported cloth and materials, the authors of the report argue that this will place
pressure on the sector. In particular, importers of finer textiles are more likely to be hurt by the
increase in tariffs. Under the current simplified regime, all textile imports are taxed on a per-
kilogram basis. Replacing the simplified tariff regime with the CU’s common external tariff will tend
to increase production costs disproportionately for firms that use more expensive textiles to
produce garments.

The authors further identify a number of constraints that must be overcome to ensure that
firms remain competitive. In a sector where success has so far depended on focused strategies
and superior market knowledge, firms need fresh skills and expertise to continually find and serve
niche markets underserved by foreign competitors. To remain competitive, firms must invest in
market intelligence and in employees with design and marketing skills. A lack of administrative and
operational management skills, as well as technical skills, are inhibiting firms from increasing their
size to take advantage of economies of scale. Limited access to finance and expertise on new
equipment or processes, as well as corruption and poor access to electricity also reduce the ability

                                                 11
of Kyrgyz garment firms to compete in the industry. The authors recommend specific interventions
designed to address these constraints.

A few themes emerge from the analyses of the four topics presented in this document—trade
and competitiveness in the services and garments sectors, implications for food safety and
agricultural exports, as well as the more general discussion of the national quality infrastructure.
Joining the CU presents both challenges that will require adjustments in the short-term, as well as
challenges that will call for ongoing commitment for building capacity and systems. Membership in
the CU also presents opportunities to improve the competitiveness of the Kyrgyz Republic in the
region and beyond. Table 1 summarizes the recommendations by topic.

In the short term, challenges stem mainly from the higher external tariffs that will come into
effect for many products as a result of CU accession. For instance, production costs will increase
in import-dependent sectors such as garments. Similarly, the cost of doing business will increase in
other sectors affected by CU TRs such as for customs representatives who need insurance. Other
sectors and jobs that depend on imports from China and Turkey may all but disappear with the
collapse of the re-export market, threatening the employment prospects of tens of thousands of
people. At the same time, the Russian ban on food imports from the European Union presents a
unique opportunity for the Kyrgyz Republic to position itself as a supplier of key food items to the
145 million–strong Russian market.

Longer-term adaptations will be needed, particularly in bringing private sector firms up to
CU requirements and building new systems and institutions. The HACCP system is a case in
point. The system has to be built in terms of both regulatory and enforcement institutions, and
capacity has to be developed within the private sector for compliance with HACCP system
requirements. In other sectors, training and capacity building will be needed for firms to
understand the new requirements and position themselves to succeed in the CU market (for
example, educating firms about the NQI). Given that these changes require both broader
adjustments to the structure of the economy and affect the economy deeply all the way to small and
medium enterprises, these adjustments will be longer-term investments.

In the medium to long term, CU membership is also expected to create opportunities for the
Kyrgyz economy. The cultural proximity to the Russian market and the lack of language barrier
put Kyrgyz producers and exporters in a unique position of being able to identify and serve niche
markets that are not served by more cost-competitive imports (for example, from China). This
opportunity exists across sectors as discussed in the chapters on garments and services. The Kyrgyz
Republic can capitalize on its strong traditions of trading with regional partners outside the CU (for
example, China and Turkey), or leverage its strong human capital and lower cost base to export
services within the region, including offering quality infrastructure services to Kazakhstan or to
future CU accession members.

The chapters also discuss implementation of CU requirements and adaptations. Policy makers
would need to work with the private sector to build capacity and facilitate identifying and
developing niche markets where Kyrgyz firms have a competitive advantage. They would also have


                                                 12
to adopt a long-term approach to building permanent institutions to support the export-oriented
sectors and the national quality infrastructure. The World Bank Group stands ready to continue to
support the GoK in further developing and implementing the recommendations of this report as
well as in other areas related to CU accession and harmonization. As part of this effort, the WBG will
also hold a training/workshop on issues of food regulation with the Ministry of Economy later this
year.




                                                 13
Table 1.1 Summary of Recommendations
               Short-term challenges           Longer-term adaptation                 Longer-term opportunities                Implementation implications
NQI            Upgrade border                  Equip and strengthen                   Identify and promote niche export        Continue support to the domestic NQI,
               infrastructure and other        laboratories                           opportunities                            at both infrastructural and institutional
               priority equipment                                                                                              levels
                                               Mandate HACCP system and               Provide NQI services to other CIS
               Reinforce capacity (invest in   develop inspection capabilities;       countries, including future CU           Deploy concrete awareness campaigns
               calibration, metrology, and     support implementation of              accession countries                      on opportunities and implications of CU
               accreditation to retain ILAC    HACCP by private sector                                                         for local SMEs
               recognition)
                                               Facilitate SME integration into
                                               the CU (e.g., training programs
                                               and guides, online information
                                               portal, help desk)
Food safety,   Capture the opportunity for     Implement HACCP system,                Transition toward higher value-          Assess competitiveness and prioritize
agri-exports   export of unprocessed           including establishing the             added food products, especially niche    TR harmonization for export categories
               products to Russia following    institutional environment and          products for the Russian market          likely to benefit from CU accession in
               EU import ban                   building capacity in the private                                                the short term
                                               sector                                 Capitalize on position within CU as
               Harmonize TRs for largest                                              well as relative alignment with          Establish public-private partnerships
               export categories                                                      international standards to participate   overseeing the HACCP system to ensure
                                                                                      not only in CU market but also in EU     support from a regulatory perspective,
                                                                                      and other international markets          as well continued capacity building and
                                                                                                                               enforcement in the private sector
Services       Adapt to the decrease in        Reduce restrictions that affect        Nurture a services environment that      Incorporate services trade development
               employment in the transport     connectivity to the world,             supports manufacturing: activities       among policy priorities
               sector, and other services      especially in air transport and        that serve manufacturing firms can
               sectors affected by the         rail freight transport                 be outsourced and professionalized       Seek technical assistance to improve
               collapse in re-exports                                                 (e.g., transportation, logistics)        internationalization of services through
                                                                                                                               negotiations, expertise in services
               CU requirements for customs                                            Move to higher value-added services      policy reform, regulatory matters, and
               representatives                                                        (e.g., business services with linkages   enforcement.
                                                                                      to other sectors) to capitalize on
                                                                                      existing favorable factors (human        Build expertise and knowledge in
                                                                                      capital, geographic advantage,           services policy reform (general and
                                                                                      internet penetration)                    sector specific)




                                                                                 14
Garments          Adapt to increase in           Expand trade promotion              Proximity to market, knowledge of      Establish public-private partnerships to
                  production costs due to 3.6    programs                            niche market demand                    ensure continuity, retain institutional
                  to 7.7% increase in external                                                                              knowledge, and make it easier to scale
                  tariffs                        Strengthen skills through           Sector has the potential to be a       up programs that improve the sector’s
                                                 education and training              stepping stone to higher value-added   competitiveness
                                                                                     activities (easy to diversify from
                                                 Increase new equipment              garments—e.g., “apparel phase” of      Leverage industry associations and
                                                 adoption (requires education        industrialization in the UK, US, and   cooperation between firms—include
                                                 about new equipment but also        Japan)                                 industry representatives in governance
                                                 financing)
                                                                                                                            Improve coordination of funding
                                                                                                                            between public, private, and donor
                                                                                                                            funders at the sector level
Source: authors




                                                                                15
      Chapter I : The Eurasian Customs Union and the Kyrgyz
                   National Quality Infrastructure6

The Kyrgyz National Quality Infrastructure (NQI) is prepared to accompany the country into the
Customs Union (CU): the basic quality infrastructure of metrology and calibration are
appropriate to ensure accuracy in measurement and traceability; the national accreditation
system is internationally recognized by the International Laboratory Accreditation Cooperation
(ILAC) and the regulatory aspects of NQI are supported by public institutions that have sufficient
capacity to develop internationally compliant Technical Regulations. The basic NQI agencies and
institutions are empowered to carry out the necessary technical tasks stemming from accession
to the CU.

Yet, major equipment gaps undermine the ability of the Kyrgyz Republic to properly enforce CU
regulations and requirements.        The accession to the CU highlights the considerable
infrastructure investment needed to bring the overall implementation and enforcement
structure in compliance with CU provisions. The Kyrgyz testing and certification infrastructure
needs to be upgraded across the board: enforcement agencies and inspectorates lack the
equipment necessary to enforce CU requirements; this is especially challenging in the case of
customs and border control checkpoints. In addition, the testing market should be liberalized to
allow the entry of private laboratories and reduce restrictions imposed by agencies (e.g., specific
regulators accept results only from narrowly defined set of laboratories).

The infrastructure gap is being filled by in-kind support pledged by Kazakhstan and Russia,
which committed a cumulative 300 million USD for the Kyrgyz equipment needs. With 100
million USD and 200 million USD respectively, Kazakhstan and Russia have supported the
definition of equipment lists and their technical specifications. Equipment is expected to be
procured in the near future. Nevertheless, the procurement, delivery and installation of testing
equipment is a time-consuming endeavor, especially when training on the use of the new
equipment is considered. As a result, in spite of CU countries’ pledges, the significant
infrastructure gap will undermine Kyrgyz Republic’s ability to reap the benefits of CU accession
in the immediate term.

In addition, the Kyrgyz private sector may not be ready to proactively participate in the CU
market due to lower sophistication of production, business and quality management practices,
especially in the high value added food and agricultural products segment. The Kyrgyz business
sector has not fully internalized the benefits and implications of the CU in their daily operations.
Moreover, apart from a handful of exceptions, the majority of Kyrgyz enterprises do not have a
fully-fledged internal quality management system: in addition to exposing Kyrgyz companies to
increased competitive pressures from more advanced CU companies, the lack of domestic
system for the adoption of quality management at enterprise level may expose the Kyrgyz
Republic to a more serious risk of not being able to comply with some CU Technical Regulations
that refer to implementation of elements of the quality management system. At present, there is


6This chapter was prepared by a team led by Jieun Choi (Economist, World Bank Group) and comprised of Lorenzo
Costantino (Consultant, World Bank Group) and Nurlanbek Tynaev (Consultant, World Bank Group). The views
presented in this document belong solely to the team. The document results from a broad consultation exercise
implemented by the World Bank Group in the Kyrgyz Republic

                                                      16
no system in place in the Kyrgyz Republic for the adoption and enforcement of the quality
management system for food safety, HACCP.

From a regulatory perspective, the Kyrgyz Technical Regulation (TR) system is relatively
advanced, with adequate capacity to develop TRs: in the last few years 47 TRs were developed in
the Kyrgyz Republic. Nonetheless, confusion at implementation and enforcement levels may
stem from the simultaneous application during the transition period - up to four years
depending on the sector - of both the Kyrgyz and CU TRs that may differ in some technical
aspects.

Notwithstanding the challenges stemming from accession, greater regional integration and the
establishment of a common market with the main trading partners generate realistic
expectations of gradual harmonization and long-term economic gains. In the short term, the
trends of global trade and regional integration, the emergence of new East-West trading routes
and altered EU-Russia trade patterns may provide innovative venues of development for the
Kyrgyz Republic.

What is more, thanks to recent achievements (notably the international recognition by ILAC),
the Kyrgyz NQI is poised to becoming a point of reference for other countries and companies in
the region for the provision of reliable quality related services. The upcoming international
recognition of four calibration laboratories, the presence of a few food safety laboratories
internationally accredited and an internationally accepted Accreditation Body may position the
Kyrgyz NQI as a service provider for potential entrants to the CU (i.e. Tajikistan) as well as for
companies operating in the region.

The Russian ban on food products from selected countries may represent an opportunity to
open market niches for selected Kyrgyz goods. According to European official statistics, EU
countries are the most affected by the ban, with an aggregate value of exports of 5.2 EUR Bn
(2013 values); the products most impacted by the ban are fruits and vegetables, diary and meat
products. The combination of CU, physical and cultural proximity could represent an
opportunity for the Kyrgyz agribusiness sector to tap into the Russian market. While the Kyrgyz
agricultural sector is still affected by structural hindrances, opportunities may lie in specific
niches and products for which alternative suppliers for the Russian market are still being
identified.

Continued support to the NQI is a requirement for the Kyrgyz Republic to reap the benefits of
accession to the CU and seize short-term opportunities. The government is faced with the dual
challenge of investment in infrastructure and capacity or NQI agencies to maintain and improve
technical capacity and credibility in the domain of quality. Above all, an imperative is to
maintain the international ILAC recognition of the Kyrgyz Center for Accreditation: this entails
investments in both infrastructure and capacity building across the NQI system, from
accreditation, to metrology and testing laboratories.

In addition, for the country to capitalize on immediate opportunities stemming from global
trends and increased regional integration, the Kyrgyz government should formulate a thorough
short-term plan with a multi-pronged approach aiming to:

   1. Continue support to the domestic NQI, at both infrastructural and institutional levels

                                               17
   2. Deploy concrete awareness campaigns on opportunities and implications of CU/EEU for
      local SMEs (including creating Internet portals and databases that facilitate access to
      information about technical regulations and trade conditions with the EEU)
   3. Identify product specific niches for Kyrgyz suppliers towards the Russian market




The Building Blocks of a National Quality Infrastructure

A National Quality Infrastructure is generally referred to as the set of entities that carry out
functions in support of economic and social activities that pertain to - or are affected by -
measurement, quality and safety. Such entities can be public and private institutions, agencies
and organizations tasked with the technical, regulatory and market functions to establish,
maintain and control the overall system of standardization, metrology, testing and accreditation.

NQIs have gained increasing importance in the last decades thanks to the process of
globalization and international integration of production and distribution of goods and services:
integrated international value chains and global trade rely on comparable and compatible norms
and measures. International trade hinges upon certainty, trust and safety that can be
implemented and safeguarded only by reliable NQIs. International trade relations have been
traditionally governed by tariffs for import and export; the current global trade patterns are as
well concerned with non-tariff barriers to trade, that within the pertinent World Trade
Organization (WTO) agreements are grouped under Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT) and
Sanitary and Phytosanitary measures (SPS). TBTs pertain to standards and technical regulations
that may constitute a barrier to international trade because of packaging, labelling and marking
requirements to exporters; SPS relate to food safety, animal and plant health standards and
requirements that countries can impose to safeguard public health. Both types of non-tariff
barriers can constitute a means for protective or restrictive trade measures.

International standards are becoming increasingly important in the current global economy as
they minimize transaction costs, enhance international integration, and provide immediate
opportunities for economies of scale and efficiency gains. In such a context, NQIs are pivotal in
providing regulatory, measurement and technical credibility.




                                               18
 While no two NQI systems are alike and not one single model can be considered as a template
 for NQIs, there are key elements that constitute the building blocks of a typical NQI of Metrology,
 Standards, Testing and Quality (MSTQ):



 Metrology and Calibration: metrology is the science of measurement that encompasses
 theoretical, scientific and practical aspects of measuring. Metrology is divided into three
 branches, with varying degrees of sophistication of measurement and level of accuracy: namely

     1. scientific metrology concerns the creation of national measurement standards that in
        turn are used to provide certainty in national calibration services
     2. industrial metrology relates to the accurate implementation of metrology at industry
        level
     3. legal metrology pertains to the control of proper use of measurement – and measuring
        instruments, such as scales, meters, etc. – in trade

     1. Scientific metrology deals with the organization and development of measurement
     standards and with their maintenance (highest level).

     2. Industrial metrology has to ensure the adequate functioning of measurement
     instruments used in industry, in production and testing processes, for ensuring quality of
     life for citizens and for academic research.

     3. Legal metrology is concerned with measurements where these influence the
     transparency of economic transactions, particularly where there is a requirement for
     legal verification of the measuring instrument.

     Above those three categories, “fundamental metrology” has no international definition,
     but it generally signifies the highest level of accuracy within a given field. Fundamental
     metrology may therefore be described as the top level branch of scientific metrology.
         Source: “Metrology - in short” 3rd edition, EURAMET e.V. 2008


 When it comes to identifying the key aspect of metrology, certainty of measurement and
 traceability become crucial: to this effect, seven SI Units are internationally accepted – through
 conventions, treaties and agreements – as the basic units of measurement7.


The practical system of units of measurement is the
International System of Units, also known as SI: SI
consists of a set of base units and derived units (i.e. a
combination of the seven SIs). The seven well-defined
units which by convention are regarded as
dimensionally independent are: the meter, the
kilogram, the second, the ampere, the kelvin, the mole,
and the candela.


 7 The international treaty for standards in measurement is the Meter Convention of 1875: initially meant for
 international cooperation in length and mass (meter and kilogram), the international treaty then expanded its scope
 to cover other SIs and led to the establishment of three international bodies:
 International Bureau of Weights and Measures (Bureau International des Poids et Mesures) – BIPM
 General Conference on Weights and Measures (Conférence Générale des Poids et Mesures) – CGPM
 International Committee for Weights and Measures (Comité International des Poids et Mesures) – CIPM

                                                        19
Each country has a National Metrology Institute (NMI) that hosts the reference laboratory of
measurement with the seven SI units to ensure consistency and coherence between the national
measurement system and the international one. In this case, the individual NMIs constitute a
network of measurement compatibility that is internationally accepted as all the national
institutes ensure traceability to the highest reference for measurement, guaranteed through
international cooperation on weights and measures.

Once established, this traceability between the NMI and the international reference
measurement standards are then “replicated” in the country through the provision of calibration
services that ensure downward traceability: through calibration measurements and
measurement instruments across the country are compatible and comparable with the reference
metrology laboratory established at national level to ensure consistency and coherence of
measurement and traceability.

Technical Regulations and Standards: safety and quality of products and services are a key
concern for policy makers, industry and consumers. In addition to self-evident consumer
protection rationale, safety and quality are the main concern of clients and consumers in their
spending decisions. Safety is commonly guaranteed by regulation: governments enact
legislation that mandate products and services characteristics, such as shape, size, performance,
labelling and packaging. In addition to those requirements mandated by law, industry develop
quality standards that are voluntary in nature to provide a reference and indication of quality of
their products and services. The difference between mandatory and voluntary standards for
safety and quality of products and services is reflected in the difference between Technical
Regulation (TR) that identify the minimum safety requirements for products and services in
safeguard of consumer protection (human and animal health) and safety of the environment and
Standards that outline the characteristics that determine the quality of a certain product and
service and are of voluntary nature.

Each country has its own TRs and Standards, with standards developed at national level under
the aegis of a National Standards Body (NSB) that is typically a public-sector body. The NSB
drives the consultative process with industry for the development of “consensus based”
standards that outline the characteristics of a service, process or product. It will then be the
choice of industry and market players to abide by the Standard that is of voluntary nature. Once
the Standard is referenced to in a Technical Regulation, the characteristics of the given service,
process or product then become a mandatory requirement to which industry and market
players will need to comply in order to produce, distribute and sell that specific product, process
or service.

In the current global economy, standards are generally developed at international level8 to
overcome the possible fragmentations deriving from a plethora of different national standards:
international trade would become too cumbersome without a common international standard
framework that facilitates the international integration of value chains and distribution. By the

8 Standardization at international level is supported by the crucial role of international cooperation
frameworks established within the International Standardization Organization (ISO), the International
Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) and the International Telecommunication Union (ITU), all three fora
devoted to the development of international standards in the various fields of industrial products.


                                                 20
same token, Technical Regulations are increasingly being harmonized at international level to
reduce those technical barriers to trade (i.e. non-tariff barriers) that may arise from specific
requirements for the safety of consumer and the protection of health and environment defined
by countries in their national legal framework.

The development of standards and harmonization of technical regulations at international levels
are facilitated by international organizations like the International Organization for
Standardization (ISO), International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) and International
Telecommunication Union (ITU) for standards and the WTO for Technical Regulations, under
the Technical Barriers to Trade Agreement. The WTO encourages member countries to rely as
much as possible on international standards when developing their technical regulations so as to
minimize “adjustment costs” and transaction costs for international trade, or as put by the
Agreement “not to create an unnecessary obstacle to international trade”.

In addition, the WTO created a notification mechanism to increase transparency and facilitate
access to information on TR and standardization among its member countries: each WTO
member establishes Enquiry Points for both TBT and SPS requirements to facilitate all
interested parties to access detailed information about the specific technical requirements for
international trade. In addition, the Enquiry Points serve the purpose of submitting notifications
to the WTO Secretariat about developments in the area of TR. The establishment of Enquiry
Points for TBT and SPS is a mandatory requirement of WTO membership.

Testing and certification: the confirmation that a product complies with the characteristics
outlines in a standard (or Technical Regulation) is a two-step process of testing and certification
supported by testing laboratories and certification bodies. The testing laboratories perform
tests to discern the characteristics of the product; the certification body is a third party that
provides written conformation (certificate) stating whether and how the product meets
pertinent standard’s characteristics on the basis of the test results. Testing and certification are
part of the process of “conformity assessment” that aims at determining the compliance of a
product, process or service to the specific characteristics of standards. When compliance with
such characteristics is a legal requirement, this product, process or service can be subject to
inspection.

Testing laboratories and certification bodies can be either public or private entities. Irrespective
of their nature, they need to ensure reliability and accuracy in the provision of technical service:
such reliability is ensured through the accreditation process that certifies the technical
competence and reliability of services of testing laboratories and certification bodies.

Accreditation: accreditation ensures confidence in the capabilities and competence of the
entities – and people – involved in the conformity assessment process. Such confidence is based
on the assessment and formal recognition (hence the credit) of the ability and capacity to
perform specific technical tasks, such as calibration, testing and certification. Such impartial
recognition is provided by a “super partes” entity: the National Accreditation Body (NAB) that is
typically a public sector entity. The NAB recognizes that on the one hand calibration and testing
laboratories are capable to deliver reliable measurements and services needed to ensure quality
of goods; and on the other hand that certifying bodies are capable to formally demonstrate
compliance of products with technical specifications usually required by regulators and by
import-export partners. If the NAB is internationally recognized, the certificates and testing

                                                21
reports supplied domestically will be internationally recognized by the counterpart signatories
of international agreements.



NAB in fact are themselves internationally recognized if operating under ISO/IEC 17011: in this
case a NAB participates to the International Laboratory Accreditation Cooperation (ILAC) multi-
recognition agreement (laboratories) or to the International Accreditation Forum (IAF)
multilateral agreement.

Role of Public Policy for NQI
Typically, there is a clear role for governmental intervention in the establishment and
maintenance of a functional NQI to serve the public good of societal needs (ranging from health
to consumer protection) and economic growth (from international trade to competitiveness and
innovation). As such, the public sector plays a vital role in any NQI: not only by designing and
implementing relevant regulations, but also by carrying out crucial functions such as metrology
and accreditation. Most importantly, governments – and public policy at large – should be
concerned with defining suitable regulation, ensure transparency and efficiency in the
institutional framework and prevent any possible conflict of interest among the various
technical, scientific, regulatory and enforcement/control functions. Above all, governments have
to carefully consider the funding aspects of building and maintaining a functional NQI: some of
the NQI functions fall within the scope of public goods and public services, and public budget
commitments to ensuring appropriate infrastructure and human resources become
instrumental.

Regulation: the public sector is tasked with regulatory functions that govern the NQI system as a
whole. A wide range of regulations pertain to the overall legal framework of NQI from the
national metrology law to the sector specific Technical Regulations that relate to trade and
competitiveness of the domestic industry.

Institutional framework: governments are also tasked with the definition of the national
institutional setting and framework that relate to a NQI with the need to distinguish and balance
between technical, regulatory and control/enforcement functions. Also within the domain of
technical tasks, of crucial importance is the full independence of any National Accreditation
Body that is by statute devoted to ensuring the performance of reliable technical tasks and
provision of credible testing and certification services.

Financing / Funding: while NQI relevant agencies provide services on a fee basis, it is difficult for
those organizations to reach financial sustainability in the long run; the National Standards Body
sells standards to industry and enterprises; the Accreditation Body charges fees for its
accreditation services; the Metrology institute can charge fees for its metrology and calibration
services. Yet, such revenue streams seldom cover the considerable operational costs of
establishing, running and managing systems to provide NQI-related services that require not
only expensive infrastructure and equipment, but also – and foremost – considerably skilled
staff and personnel. Hence the role of governments that need to consider the budgetary
implications of supporting a reliable and functional NQI in support of the domestic economy.



                                                 22
Building and maintaining an NQI is a financial and policy commitment for governments that
should see NQIs as the backbone of a competitive economy and safe society. Capturing the
economic value and benefit of investment in NQI is a difficult – if not impossible – endeavor due
to the number and type of elements and variables to take into consideration. Nevertheless, some
attempts have been made to capture the economic value and importance of NQI or some of the
NQI building blocks.

A 2007 report by the U.S.A. National Institute of Standards and Technology9 put a conservative
estimate of a 1 to 3 cost-benefit ratio of investments in measurements and standards; similar
reports from the US authorities estimate that between 1996 and 2006, the US semiconductor
industry spent $12 billion on measurement services, generating $51 billion in economic benefits.

Improved certainty of measurement has the potential of producing significant efficiency gains:
estimates put the annual value of trade measurement transactions at about 50% of GDP. A
decrease in the average error of measurement of 0.1% could generate benefits of up to 0.05% of
GDP10. At such direct positive impact, it is safe to argue that public investment generates
tangible return for public expenditures devoted to establishing and maintaining a functional
NQI.

In addition to the economic impact, there is a public good dimension of NQI investment that
strengthens the case for NQI beyond the pure cost/benefit analysis perspective. The most
obvious example is the need for reliable measurement (metrology, calibration and testing
services) to support health systems. On average, OECD countries spend approximately 10% of
their GDP in health11 (with peaks of 16.9% in the USA). In aggregate, some 30% of those
expenditures are related to measurement and testing services: a reliable NQI is necessary not
only to ensure citizens’ welfare and health but also to provide value for public money and fiscal
efficiency for diagnostic and therapeutic services.

At present, global trends show an increase in the Research and Development (R&D) investment
in metrology and measurement-related scientific domains, especially from emerging economies
such as China, India and Korea.

           Exhibit 1: R&D investment in metrology, comparison of yearly change




9NIST: An Assessment of the United States Measurement System: Addressing Measurement
Barriers to Accelerate Innovation. NIST Special Publication 1048
10
  EU Commission, Staff Working Document, SWD(2013) 249 final, Impact Assessment Accompanying the
document “Proposal for a Decision of the European Parliament and of the Council on the participation of
the Union in a European Metrology Programme for Innovation and Research jointly undertaken by several
Member States”
11 OECD Health Statistics 2014, available at http://www.oecd.org/els/health-systems/health-

data.htm

                                                  23
       Source: EU Commission, Staff Working Document, SWD(2013) 249 final, p. 10, on the basis of
       National Physical Laboratory (NPL, UK) internal data.
The Kyrgyz NQI

The NQI of the Kyrgyz Republic is built upon the remainder of the quality infrastructure of the
old Soviet system. In the Soviet Union all functions and activities of a typical NQI – definition of
standards, metrology, calibration and certification – were consolidated under a single agency the
GosStandard. GosStandard would represent the reference metrology laboratory for the entire
Soviet Unions and the National Metrology Institutes of the Soviet Republics represented the
secondary metrological system tracing back to the etalons kept at centralized level. The Soviet
GosStandard system was characterized by its downstream and mandatory nature. The
centralized metrology system provided reference measurement standards to industry and
National Metrology Institutes (NMIs) of Soviet Republics without feedback and input
mechanisms from the bottom. In addition, the GosStandard system was mandatory without
distinction between voluntary standards and mandatory requirements for products and
processes, nor distinction between voluntary calibration of measuring equipment and
mandatory compliance for calibration.

In the domain of NQI, the disintegration of the Soviet Union left behind on the one hand a series
of NMIs in each of the Soviet Republics disconnected from a reliable reference metrology system
and on the other hand a legacy of mandatory apparatus. In the case of the Kyrgyz Republic, low
investment in equipment, facilities and human resources due to the lack of financial resources
led to a gradual deterioration of the NQI. A turning point in the Kyrgyz NQI was the country’s
accession to the WTO in 1998: by joining the international trade system under the aegis of the
WTO, the Kyrgyz Republic had to embark on a significant reform process to align its regulations,
institutions and quality infrastructure to international standards.



The Kyrgyz NQI was based on old and outdated Soviet system, while WTO requirements
mandated an efficient regulatory system for Technical Regulations based on the international
standardization system, a streamlined institutional framework that prevents technical conflict of
interest among the various functions of metrology, conformity assessment, accreditation and
control and a reliable metrology and testing infrastructure. The transition of the Kyrgyz NQI

                                                24
from the Soviet system to an international one was not easy and proved complex: political
commitment coupled with constant donor support led over the years to considerable
improvements. Many donors provided support to the NQI reform process after WTO accession:
European Union (EU), Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ), Japan
International Cooperation Agency (JICA), State Secretariat for Economic Affairs (SECO)/
International Trade Centre (ITC), United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and State
Secretariat for Economic Affairs (USAID). The World Bank implemented the RTBET Project a
comprehensive Metrology, Standards, Testing and Quality (MSTQ) project.

  The World Bank RTBET Project
  The Reducing Technical Barriers for Entrepreneurship and Trade (RTBET) Project was
  launched in 2007 by the Kyrgyz Ministry of Economy to support the Kyrgyz Republic's
  transition from a burdensome regulatory compliance system based on compulsory
  standards inherited from the Soviet era to a leaner WTO-based international standards
  system. The RTBET project was instrumental in supporting the Kyrgyz government
  reform at regulatory, institutional and infrastructure levels: at project closing in 2013, the
  Ministry of Economy had achieved the following:
  - An internationally compliant NQI institutional framework with an independent
      accreditation body
  - 38 sector-specific technical regulations adopted, streamlining the licensing and
      inspection regime for enterprises by eliminating outdated regulatory requirements
      that stemmed from old Soviet standards
  - Harmonization of 46% of national standards with international standards
  - 7 state-of-the-art metrology laboratories installed within Center for Standard and
      Metrology
  - a state-of-the-art microbiology laboratory installed within the Ministry of Health to
      support the agribusiness industry
  - A fully functional WTO TBT Enquiry Point established within the Ministry of Economy

The current Kyrgyz NQI demonstrates areas of competence – and in some instances, excellence –
as well as areas where significant improvements are needed. Key positive features of the Kyrgyz
NQI lie in a relatively reliable infrastructure (in the availability of basic infrastructure and
presence of competent technical staff) and an institutional and regulatory framework with
clearly defined institutional roles and functions.

                  Exhibit 2.      The Kyrgyz NQI Organizational Structure




                                               25
Source: readapted from M. Kellermann “Report on First Mission to the Kyrgyz Republic on the
Implementation of the Law on Fundamentals of Technical Regulation”, WB RTBET Project, 2007


Metrology and Calibration: the metrology system in the Kyrgyz Republic remains uneven and
fragmented, with a relatively adequate scientific and technical infrastructure undermined by
shortcomings in the governance and administrative domains of metrology. The Kyrgyz national
metrology institute, the Center for Standardization and Metrology (CSM), demonstrates a
relatively reliable – both qualitatively and quantitatively – technical infrastructure with the 7
Base Units of measurement available and local technical staff properly trained. Nonetheless, the
lack of participation to CIPM measurement key-comparisons hinders the international and
market recognition.

The Kyrgyz Center for Standardization and Metrology (CSM) is tasked with the functions of
industrial metrology, though it does not have full membership to the International Organization
of Legal Metrology (OIML) and reportedly does not enjoy market recognition. In addition, the
metrology institute does not appear to be supported by an Industry Advisory Council, useful in
the provision of inputs and feedback from the private sector on the economic importance of
metrology for competitiveness. Nonetheless, the CSM is continuing to reinforce its technical
capacity also thanks to technical assistance from GIZ and PTB (the Physikalisch-Technische
Bundesanstalt, the German metrology institute). The CSM is currently restructuring its internal
management system and is seeking international accreditation for four calibration laboratories
in mass, temperature, pressure and volume.

Technical Regulations and Standards: the Kyrgyz system for Technical Regulations has full formal
compliance with WTO / TBT requirements: as WTO member the Kyrgyz Republic shows
compliance with Article 15.2 of the WTO TBT Agreement. A functioning notification system for
TBT is in place and the Ministry of Economy is tasked with the overall responsibility of Technical
Regulations. Moreover, the presence of a normative framework governing Technical Regulations

                                                 26
ensures coherence and a common approach for the development of Technical Regulations in the
country. Significant bottlenecks persist in the implementation and enforcement: the domestic
private sector is still adjusting to the novelty introduced by Technical Regulations and voluntary
standards as a whole. In addition, enforcement agencies are also still adjusting to a system of
enforcement that should be more based on “compliance checking” rather than “control”.
Another key shortcoming in the area of TRs is the lack of a fully-fledged and functional WTO
Enquiry Point for SPS; in addition, the lack of clarity in roles and functions in the SPS domain
generates overlaps or voids in both implementation and enforcement among the various public
institutions and agencies involved, such as the Ministry of Health, Ministry of Agriculture and the
joint Inspectorate. On the positive side, SMEs and business associations are actively invited to
participate in the activities councils and standard setting bodies. Working groups formed the
new TRs includes representatives of the private sector on a mandatory basis.

In the Kyrgyz Republic there is a fully established standards body with relevant legislative
backing. Nonetheless, it is unclear whether the governance of such standard body is vested in a
Council or Board, through which private sector participation to the standards development
process can be guaranteed. Internationally, the Kyrgyz republic is an Associate Member of the
ISO and a full member Codex Alimentarus Commission (CAC), which favorably provides
international exposure to the country. Nonetheless, a few shortcomings undermine Kyrgyz’
administrative aspects for standardization: the Kyrgyz standards body is not a member of the
International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) and it is unclear whether the Kyrgyz standards
body actively participates in Technical Committees. At present, approximately 47% of the
national standards (23,000) are harmonized to international standards.

To continue the transition from mandatory product conformity assessment to voluntary product
conformity assessment it is necessary to introduce principles of modern market surveillance and
new advanced forms of safety and product quality control. To this end, it is necessary to
implement the international system of ISO/IEC 17020 - accreditation of conformity assessment
pertaining to bodies performing inspections in the field of market surveillance. Introducing this
system will help reduce the burden of customs and technical control at the border while
enhancing control inland – a shift that will likely prove cost effective for both public and private
sector stakeholders.

Testing and certification: Reportedly, at present the following operators provide services for
conformity assessment in the Kyrgyz Republic: 14 accredited certification bodies, 79 test
laboratories, 1 calibration laboratory and 4 providers of ILCT (inter-laboratory comparison
tests) programs. Yet, in spite of recent developments like the international accreditation of one
testing laboratory in the food and agribusiness sector, the overall testing infrastructure in the
Kyrgyz Republic remains fragmented and weak. Liberalization in the testing market is needed
to open it to private laboratories and reduce unnecessary restrictions (e.g., veterinary
authorities currently only accept testing results from veterinary laboratories – this need not be
the case). In fact, delays in harmonizing veterinary and phytosanitary control with standards of
the Eurasian Economic Union, held back partially due to delays in the delivery of equipment,
remain the main barriers to opening the borders with Kazakhstan.12




12   Kudryavtseva, Tatyana. Border.kg: wait until fall? July 8, 2015.

                                                             27
Accreditation: in the area of accreditation the Kyrgyz Republic accomplished significant
achievements in a relatively short amount of time. Accreditation functions were spun-off from
the old Kyrgyz Standard in 2007, and the newly established Kyrgyz Center for Accreditation
(KCA) obtained international recognition in 2013. The incorporation of a national accreditation
body as a separate legal entity is a prerequisite for its independence, and an indication of the
autonomy necessary to establish trust both locally and internationally. In the Kyrgyz Republic,
the KCA is a stand-alone legal entity with government mandate to carry out accreditation
functions. While the KCA recently obtained international recognition and is a full member of
ILAC, the Kyrgyz Republic is not a signatory of MRAs, the Mutual Recognition Agreement that
allow the implementation of the “tested once, accepted everywhere” principle: not being an MRA
signatory undermines the competitiveness of domestic firms that need to double test their
products to access export markets, increasing business transaction costs and limiting integration
with global markets.

Notwithstanding the encouraging achievements and continued efforts to modernize its NQI,
certain challenges remain to the realization of a fully functional NQI system: the imminent
accession to the Customs Union (CU) within the Eurasian Economic Union with Belarus,
Kazakhstan and the Russian Federation will exacerbate such challenges and require the Kyrgyz
government to more promptly align its NQI to CU requirements in order to maximize the benefit
of joining the trading bloc.

Challenges for the Kyrgyz NQI upon Customs Union Accession

Accession to the CU is accelerating the pace with which the Kyrgyz Republic should consider
investing and reinforcing its NQI: while this need stems from trade integration with CU
countries, the NQI serves all spheres of society and economy. A NQI should not be considered
only as instrumental for productivity and competitiveness of economic actors, but also as the
basis for reliable and accurate measurement and quality on all aspects of life. The NQI is the
building block of societal and economic development and encompasses all facets of life, from
environment, health and education. NQIs have gained visibility and importance in the last few
decades because of their instrumental role in supporting the competitiveness of economic and
productive sectors, especially in industrialized economies. Such relevance has been increased
by the pace of international value chain integration and globalization that highlight the need to
establish safe and reliable ways to allow for cross-border exchange and interoperability. As
such, NQI components such as metrology and accreditation should be perceived as public goods
rather than mere technological aspects of economic development policy.

The degree of sophistication of NQIs depends on the specific social and economic challenges and
opportunities faced by any given country. NQIs differ from country to country: any NQI should
be designed according to the specific needs and characteristics of the country – i.e. society and
economy – that is meant to serve. In general terms, once the minimum requirements of
international compliance and interoperability are met across the NQI components (metrology,
technical regulations, accreditation and testing) the degree of sophistication of the NQI, its scale
and scope are a function of the specific societal and economic challenges and opportunities to be
faced and nurtured.




                                                28
In the case of the Kyrgyz Republic, the domestic NQI is meant to accommodate the needs of an
economy still in transition and a society with specific needs in the field of human health and
environmental protection. The Kyrgyz economy hinges on the exploitation of natural resources,
agriculture and light manufacturing. Hence, in developing an internationally compliant NQI, the
efforts of the Kyrgyz government focused on specific economic sectors such as mining, agro
processing and food production, as well as light manufacturing in specific sectors like textile and
garments. Such approach led to the development and adoption of sector specific Technical
Regulations that relate to those economic sectors.

On May 08 2015 the Kyrgyz Republic officially singed and formalized its accession to the
Eurasian Economic Union (EAEU) comprising Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan and Russian
Federation. The Kyrgyz Government is currently at the final stage of finalizing its accession to
the Customs Union (CU) with Belarus, Kazakhstan and the Russian Federation. Leaving aside the
trade regime implications and the effect of joining the CU on Kyrgyz terms of trade (due to
Common External Tariffs of the CU that are higher than the current WTO Kyrgyz tariffs: this may
lead to renegotiations of tariffs with WTO trading partners and possible compensations), joining
the CU has implications for the Kyrgyz NQI across the board at infrastructure and regulatory
levels. By joining the CU, for instance, the Kyrgyz Republic will need to harmonize its regulatory
framework, including Technical Regulations, to the common legal regime of the CU.

A first challenge is the large infrastructure needs for the Kyrgyz NQI to comply with CU
requirements: in addition to the need to improve its testing laboratory infrastructure, the
Kyrgyz Republic will need to equip with testing facilities its agencies tasked with
implementation, enforcement and control functions for all the technical aspects of CU, notably
the testing laboratories, certification bodies as well as customs and border control. Reportedly,
the CU accession process for the Kyrgyz Republic included technical and financial assistance
from Kazakhstan and the Russian Federation in the range of, respectively, 100 million USD and
200 million USD in support of infrastructure modernization.

In late 2014 and early 2015 technical experts from Kyrgyz agencies (staff of testing laboratories
from textile to construction materials) developed technical specifications for needed equipment.
In addition, technical staff from border checkpoints as well as airport and railroad checkpoints
provided technical specifications for needed equipment. The corresponding agencies in
Kazakhstan and Russia contributed to the development and fine-tuning of the technical
specifications that are then being consolidated into bidding documents for the identification of
single supplier.

While both Kazakhstan and Russia pledged funds, the process for the selection of the supplier
does not seem to have been concluded and uncertainties remain concerning the timing and
sequencing for delivery and installation of the equipment for the testing laboratories,
certification bodies and border checkpoints to become fully operational in line with CU
requirements. This leaves a considerable infrastructure gap and need for investment in testing
equipment. Liberalizing the testing market may help attract private investment and alleviate
some of the financing needs.

The second challenge is presented by the requirement for firms to adopt an internal
quality management system as mandated by CU Technical Regulations. While CU’s TRs do not
make explicit reference to the requirement for the implementation of the quality management

                                                29
system for food safety, the HACCP system, the mentioning in the regulation that “elements of the
quality management systems should be in place” may generate uncertainty. For instance, in the
case of meat products the CU TR requires that the documentation submitted by the
manufacturer as evidences of conformity includes a certificate for the quality and safety
management system (HACCP based) issued by the agency for certification of management
systems13.

At present, only a handful of Kyrgyz companies have a HACCP compliant system and even less
would be ready to comply with HACCP requirements. In addition, there is no HACCP conformity
assessment capacity in the country, making it difficult and expensive for local companies to
certify their compliance; in addition, the lack of capacity within the Kyrgyz implementing
agencies would generate a void in the enforcement of any HACCP requirement.

HACCP is the quality management system for food safety that includes the analysis and control
of biological, chemical, and physical hazards that could stem from the production, handling,
manufacturing of raw material and distribution and consumption of end products. HACCP is
based on the ISO standard number ISO22000 that requires that organizations are able to:
- plan, implement, operate, maintain and update a food safety management system aimed at
providing products that, according to their intended use, are safe for the consumer
- demonstrate compliance with applicable statutory and regulatory food safety requirements
- evaluate and assess customer requirements and demonstrate conformity with those mutually
agreed customer requirements that relate to food safety, in order to enhance customer
satisfaction
- effectively communicate food safety issues to their suppliers, customers and relevant
interested parties in the food chain
- ensure that the organization conforms to its stated food safety policy
- demonstrate such conformity to relevant interested parties
- seek certification or registration of its food safety management system by an external
organization, or make a self-assessment or self-declaration of conformity to ISO 22000:2005.

       Source: ISO
A third challenge is presented by the harmonization process of Technical Regulations:
back in 2004 with the adoption of the law on Fundamentals of Technical Regulations, the Kyrgyz
Republic embarked on the challenging endeavor of developing an internationally and WTO
compliant system of voluntary standards and technical regulations. This process led to the
adoption of 47 Technical Regulations that have been developed according to international
practice and referencing to international standards. Yet, by joining the CU, the Kyrgyz Republic
will adopt the CU specific Technical Regulations that are based on GOST R and GOST Standards
that apply respectively to Russia and CIS countries. This may generate an issue of
harmonization with international standards: 47% of the Kyrgyz national standards are
harmonized internationally, while 30% of GOST standards are harmonized with ISO and IEC
standards. In addition, the phasing in of CU TRs will imply a transition period in which both
Kyrgyz and CU TRs can apply, to discretion of the companies.



13Scheme 6 D as outlined in Customs Union technical regulation CU TR 034/2013 “On meat and meat
products”, as highlighted by Comparative Analysis of Certain Requirements of Food Legislation in the
European Union and the Customs Union of Russia, Belarus, and Kazakhstan, The World Bank Group, IFC in
collaboration with SECO, May 2015.


                                                 30
While TRs apply to all sectors of the economy (from mining and construction to agro-processing
and light manufacturing) the sector most interested by the challenges of harmonization with CU
requirements appears to be the food sector due to the difficulties in adopting internal quality
management systems at enterprise level in the sector as a whole.

The parallel enforcement of Kyrgyz and CU TRs may generate regulatory uncertainty in
the transition period. While the parallel application of TRs is meant to facilitate firms in the
transition period, uncertainties remain pertaining the possible increase of compliance costs for
companies that may have already complied with Kyrgyz TRs and now face additional
investments for the compliance with CU TRs. In addition, uncertainties may arise at both firm
and implementing agency levels in the transition period on which provisions and requirements
apply to which product or process: such uncertainties may lead to confusion, red-tape or
enforcement voids.

A fourth challenge is presented by the need to strengthen the technical capacity of the NQI
agencies in all building blocks: given the hefty infrastructure investment requirements, the
recent achievements in NQI empower the Kyrgyz Republic to enter the CU with a relatively
sound human capital and technical capacity in the areas of metrology, calibration and
accreditation. Yet, the Kyrgyz Republic should see into reinforcing the technical capacity of its
NQI agencies to fully participate into the CU and benefit from this regional trading bloc:

       Technical Regulations: the Kyrgyz Republic should reinforce the technical capacity of its
       ministries and agencies for the purposeful participation in the definition of CU TRs and
       ensure that the Kyrgyz Republic is not merely adopting TRs from the CU but also
       contributing to their development. This was already the case for the development of two
       CIS Technical Regulations on Honey and Water whose drafts were primarily developed
       by the Kyrgyz representatives. This means that there is technical capacity to be
       supported and enhanced to allow for more proactive participation of Kyrgyz Republic in
       the definition of CU TRs.

       Conformity assessment: the implementation and enforcement aspects are of paramount
       importance for the Kyrgyz Republic to fully reap the benefits of CU. In this instance it is
       crucially important that implementing agencies, inspectorates, testing laboratories and
       certification bodies are fully aware – and empowered – to oversee the implementation of
       CU TRs. A key aspect in this domain is the implementation of quality management
       systems at enterprise levels as mandated by some CU TRs.

       Metrology: the base of etalons in the reference metrology laboratory could be expanded
       so as to widen the scope and scale of measurement accuracy. At the same time,
       international laboratory intercomparison and re-calibration will become essential to
       guaranteeing traceability.

       Accreditation: the ILAC recognition in 2013 is a great achievement for the Kyrgyz
       Republic. Nonetheless, the challenge remains to maintain such international recognition
       and widen the scope of international recognition of the KCA. The present scope of ILAC
       recognition of the KCA is for testing under the ISO 17025 standard; the KCA has the
       ambition of widening the scope of its ILAC recognition to other files, such as ISO 15189
       for medical laboratories and ISO 17020 for inspection bodies.

                                               31
Opportunities for the Kyrgyz Republic

Notwithstanding the challenges outlined above, and taking for granted the greater and long-
term trade policy benefits of joining the CU, there are opportunities for the Kyrgyz Republic to
capitalize on its relative advantage and position itself as potential supplier for NQI related
services in the region as well as leveraging preferential access to the Russian market for its
agricultural and food products now that the Russians are diversifying their suppliers by virtue of
the embargo on European food products.

The pockets of excellence of the Kyrgyz NQI may
become NQI-related service providers for the
region and neighboring countries. The recent
achievements of the Kyrgyz Republic in
metrology and accreditation confirm that both
the CSM and KCA have the technical capacity to
provide reliable services in the domains of
calibration and accreditation. Two specific trends
of regional integration can legitimize the
ambition of becoming a NQI service hub for the
regions as a whole: on the one hand the
enlargement prospect of the CU and on the other
hand the expectations of increased transport and
supply chain integration along the modern version of the Silk Road.

The first trend of an expansion of the CU is already materializing with talks about the potential
accession of Tajikistan in the near future. In this case, the Kyrgyz NQI agencies could become a
service hub for both the NQI agencies and the companies of perspective CU new members: firms
will need to access calibration, testing and accreditation services that could be provided cross-
border by the Kyrgyz NQI. In addition, the Kyrgyz NQI could position itself also in the provision
of calibration and accreditation services to Kazakh companies: reportedly, selected calibration
services are available for more convenient service fees in the Kyrgyz CSM facilities in Bishkek
than in calibration laboratories in Almaty. The CSM is currently seeking international
accreditation for four of its calibration laboratories: once internationally accredited, those
services will become a competitive alternative also for those Kazakh companies willing to
calibrate instruments in Bishkek. This would reverse the trend that insofar saw Kyrgyz
companies having to rely upon calibration services from Kazakhstan.

           Table 1. Cost for Selected Calibration Services in Bishkek and Almaty

                 Service                          CSM, Bishkek             KazInMetr, Almaty
  Calibration of weights E2                            43 $                         68 $
  Calibration of liquid-in–glass
                                                       29 $                         49 $
  thermometers
  Calibration of dead weights pressure
                                                       38 $                        323 $
  gauges
       Source: CSM, 2015. Prices reported in USD according to average exchange rates for April 2015

                                                 32
The second trend of potential regional supply-chain integration emerges from the strategic
interest of the Chinese government to develop and promote overland trade through Central Asia.
While overland trade will never replace maritime transport due to higher costs, it may still
constitute a viable alternative to sea shipping in case of specific value-chains like automotive and
computer manufacturing that could be more time sensitive. Further integration of Central Asian
countries into a modern version of the Silk Road to function both as a facilitator for intra-
regional trade and as a trade corridor linking China with Western Europe could represent an
opportunity for the Kyrgyz Republic to position itself as a quality related service providers.
Increased regional trade traffic may generate prospects for the Kyrgyz NQI system to become a
service provider for the transit goods.

     Central Asia and the Modern Silk Road

     A wealth of studies investigate the possible rebirth of the Silk Road in its modern
     variations; a careful analysis of the potential of trade, logistics and supply integration in
     Central Asian countries is offered by two recent publications:
     World Bank, “The Eurasian Connection: Supply-Chain Efficiency along the Modern Silk
     Route through Central Asia”, 2014
     Retrack Project, funded by the EU Commission, “Potential for Eurasia Land Bridge
     Corridors and Logistics Developments along the Corridor”, 2012 www.retrack.eu

     In addition, the regional transport and trade integration of Central Asia and neighboring
     regions is being supported by the CAREC Program, a joint initiative of 10 countries and six
     donor agencies14 to promote connectivity, development and cooperation in the region.
     The CAREC program operates under the “Strategic Framework for the Central Asia
     Regional Economic Cooperation Program 2011–2020” adopted in 2011 to promote
     cooperation and development projects in the countries involved.


Kyrgyz Regional Strategic Position




14CAREC countries are Afghanistan, Azerbaijan, China, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyz Republic, Mongolia, Pakistan,
Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan. The multilateral institutional partners are: Asian Development
Bank, European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, International Monetary Fund, Islamic
Development Bank, United Nations Development Programme, and World Bank.


                                                  33
Source: CAREC Program


The issue of regional integration among and between Central Asian countries and global trade
was recently discussed at a China-WTO Roundtable on Accessions and Membership held in
Dushanbe on June 2, 2015. This roundtable was a unique opportunity to explore venues for
regional collaboration among Central Asian countries and international organizations to
promote integration in the international trading system of Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan while
providing tailored assistance to current WTO members (Kazakhstan15, Kyrgyz Republic and
Tajikistan). Such continued cooperation could focus on physical and regulatory aspects of trade
and logistics integration, ranging from collaboration in transit corridors as well as trade policy
and regulatory aspects, among which a key reform component could pertain to NQI (especially
in the areas of metrology and accreditation).

Early attempts of establishing Central Asian collaboration at NQI level were undertaken by
USAID regional projects such as the Trade Facilitation and Investment Project in 2003-2006 that
included a component on Central Asian Cooperation on Metrology, Accreditation,
Standardization and Quality (CAC-MAS-Q). Currently, the German cooperation GIZ is
implementing NQI related activities within the framework of the regional project “Support of
Regional Economic Cooperation in Central Asia”. Such initiatives proved effective in establishing
collaboration among NQI institutions of the Central Asian countries: such cross-border
cooperation could be enhanced in relation to the gradual emergence of formalized trading blocs
that are reshaping the regional economic dynamics.

Another key opportunity stemming from the CU for the Kyrgyz Republic would be to tap into the
supply chain for food products destined to the Russian market. Facilitated access to the Russian
market thanks to the CU comes at a particularly interesting time when Russia is imposing a ban
on European food products. The overall volume of EU food products to the Russian market is


15 Kazakhstan’s Accession Package was adopted by the WTO Working Party and WTO General Council in June 2015. It
is pending formal adoption in the General Council by all 161 WTO members.

                                                     34
estimated at 5.2 billion EUR in 2013, with dairy products, fruits and vegetables, meat processed
products representing the most affected categories of products. The Kyrgyz Republic could
position itself as privileged trading partner for some of the products for which Russia is seeking
to diversify suppliers’ base, especially in the low value-added range of products of not-processed
products (fresh fruits and vegetables) and dairy products in which the Kyrgyz Republic could
have a competitive advantage.

Russia is proactively seeking to diversify its imports to mitigate inflationary and price effects of
shortages in supplies: EU goods have been replaced so far by suppliers from Argentina, Ecuador,
Brazil, Chile, Israel, Mexico, Morocco, Paraguay, Turkey, and several other countries16. The
Kyrgyz Republic is positioned to take advantage of this opportunity thanks to a series of factors.
First, access and physical proximity should facilitate Kyrgyz exports: the CU should facilitate
access of Kyrgyz food products to the Russian market and logistics from Bishkek should
reasonably be cheaper and easier than shipment from South America and other countries of
origin. Second, Kyrgyz exporters should be better prepared to penetrate the Russian market
considering the lack of cultural and linguistic barriers.

Realistically, Kyrgyz producers could tap into those market niches that would remain available
due to quantity and climate supply dynamics, for instance in the case of apples17. Suppliers from
Azerbaijan, Turkey and South America replaced Polish apples; still, Azeri and Turkish suppliers
may not be able to quantitatively meet the entire demand while imports from South America are
affected by seasonal production capacity of the Southern Hemisphere. In this case, Kyrgyz
suppliers may provide a suitable alternative or complement in product specific niches.


     The Russian Ban on EU Food Products

     The EU-Russia relations have been recently undermined by geopolitical events in Ukraine
     culminating with upheavals in Ukraine, annexation of Crimea into the Russian Federation
     and hastened instability and violence in Eastern Ukraine. This led the EU to redefine its
     relations with Russia on a combination of increased technical and financial support to the
     new Ukrainian government coupled with diplomatic measures (asset freezing and Visa
     ban for selected Russian individuals) and financial and economic sanctions (denied access
     to EU capital markets, trade restrictions in dual-use technologies and exploration
     services). As a retaliation to those diplomatic and economic measures, Russia in August
     2014 imposed a ban on agricultural products and foodstuffs from Australia, Canada, the
     EU, Norway and the USA. The EU Member States are the most affected, with EU
     production representing 73% of the banned goods.

     Russia is the second most important export market of EU agricultural products with a total
     value of 11.8 Bn EUR in 2013 representing some 10 % of all EU agricultural food exports.
     The Russian ban on EU food products has the potential impact value for EU exporting
     countries of 5.2 Bn EUR, with selected product categories and EU Member States hit the
     most. The sectors potentially worst affected in terms of absolute value are:
         a) dairy products 1,35 Bn EUR value in 2013: 33 % of European cheese is exported to
             Russia and 28 % of EU butter is exported to Russia (2013 values)

16  Alternative suppliers for food products have been identified immediately after the launch of the ban on EU
products. Reportedly, as of August 18 of 2014, new exporters were already certified by the Russian authorities (13
from Peru, 12 from Chile, six from Brazil, one from Armenia, several Serbian suppliers). “Russia’s Restrictions on
Imports of Agricultural and Food Products: an Initial Assessment” FAO, 2014
17 “Russia’s Restrictions on Imports of Agricultural and Food Products: an Initial Assessment” FAO, 2014



                                                       35
          b) fruits for a 2013 value of 1,26 Bn EUR: 29 % of EU fruits and vegetables were
             exported to Russia in 2013
          c) meat and sausages for an approximate value of 1.26 Bn EUR in 2013

       Data source: European Parliament, Policy Department A: Economy and Scientific Policy,
       Briefing PE 536.291 “The Russian Embargo: Impact on the Economic and Employment
       Situation in the EU”, Oct. 2014

Recommendations

A series of actions should be considered for the Kyrgyz Republic to capitalize on its relatively
solid NQI and reap the benefits of accession to the CU that can be grouped into the following

1.       Continued support to and investment in the NQI: the Kyrgyz NQI is relatively ready to
accompany the country into the CU. Yet, the major equipment gaps in the testing and
certification infrastructure will require hefty investments to ensure appropriate implementation
and enforcement of CU regulations. In addition, the ambition of becoming a regional provider of
quality related services requires that the NQI achievements reached so far are maintained and
built upon:

1.A Continue investment in infrastructure to maintain and enhance the Kyrgyz NQI: the
accession to CU highlighted the considerable infrastructure gap that will be required for the
implementation and enforcement of CU Technical Regulations and import control, especially
when it comes to checkpoints at borders and other enforcement agencies tasked with checking
compliance with sanitary and phytosanitary requirements. The Kyrgyz Government should
develop a comprehensive NQI strategy detailing medium-term objectives, with clear distribution
of tasks and functions among the various NQI participants and most importantly with financial
commitment to match investment requirements for the NQI. Such strategy would entail:

   -     run a comprehensive audit of the NQI to identify specific infrastructure gaps in view of
         CU accession, specifically in the area of implementation and enforcement of CU technical
         regulations
   -     develop a staged approach to accommodate the priority areas for equipment
   -     identify financing streams and coordinate with donors
   -     accelerate the liberalization of the testing market

1.B Reinforce the capacity of technical agencies: the technical agencies tasked with metrology,
accreditation and standards/technical regulations are a crucial element of the NQI and require
upskilling to guarantee Kyrgyz participation in the CU, also at regulatory level. In this instance,
the government will need to commit financial resources to retain technically prepared personnel
and maintain their competences. Just as an example, the Kyrgyz Republic cannot afford to lose
its ILAC international recognition in the domain of accreditation. Maintaining ILAC recognition
implies investments in accreditation as well as in the fields of metrology and calibration (to
maintain accuracy of measurement and traceability) as well as standards and Technical
Regulations (to ensure harmonization at industry level and regulatory compliance). The
elements of an NQI are so intertwined that require a holistic vision and specific actions, such as:




                                                36
   -   invest in the maintenance of the quality infrastructure necessary to retain ILAC
       international recognition, specifically in the domains of calibration and metrology, i.e.
       international recalibration
   -   sustain the internal capacity of the Kyrgyz Center for Accreditation also through the
       provision of practical training for technical staff

1.C Strengthen the institutional framework for TR implementation and enforcement: the
implementation and enforcement of Technical Regulations remain fragmented, especially in the
domain of food safety, with control functions scattered across various agencies (Ministry of
Health, Ministry of Agriculture and the related inspectorates), with dual impact of overlaps and
vacuum. The following activities would streamline and reinforce the institutional setting for TR
implementation:

   -   Carry out a functional review for the enforcement and implantation of food safety
   -   Assign functions and distribute responsibilities with clear mandate and budgetary
       appropriations, also with the purpose of consolidating functions whenever possible to
       prevent fragmentation
   -   Establish a functional SPS Enquiry Point

2.      Accompany SMEs into the CU with tailored programmatic assistance: not all Kyrgyz
companies are ready to reap the benefits of CU accession. Participation to a single market will
force Kyrgyz companies to face direct competition with Belarussian, Kazakh and Russian
companies that may reveal lower degree of sophistication of production and business attitude.
The situation is exacerbated by the uneven playing field between Kyrgyz and other CU SMEs
when it comes to quality at enterprise level and Quality Management Systems: a handful of local
companies in the Kyrgyz Republic sought and obtained ISO certification. Moreover, domestic
firms still are not fully aware of the functioning of the new custom procedures and possibilities
offered by the CU. In this instance, the government should consider the following:

2.A Develop and deploy training programs for Quality Management System, especially in the
domain of food safety: at present, the Kyrgyz Republic does not have a fully-fledged supply of
quality management system related services. Accession to the CU will generate demand for
quality services at enterprise level; at the same time, the public sector should also equip
enforcement agencies in the implementation and enforcement of quality management systems
that may be required by CU Technical Regulations, especially in the area of food safety. This will
require both the public and private sectors to become acquainted with the elements of HACCP: a
clear role for the government in this instance is to foster the “culture and mindset of quality”
across the board and:

   -   build the internal capacity within governmental agencies for the adoption, control and
       implementation of quality management systems, including and especially HACCP
   -   explain the benefits of quality management systems for small businesses to encourage
       adoption
   -   produce detailed guides for quality management system adoption at enterprise level
   -   involve the educational system (secondary and tertiary) for the definition of vocational
       and educational curricula that include quality management system

2.B Carry out comprehensive awareness and empowerment campaigns for SMEs on CU: apart
from few exceptions, Kyrgyz business representatives from all sectors are not fully aware of the

                                               37
implications and opportunities stemming from accession to the CU. In spite of the many
visibility events organized by the Ministry of Economy, most businesses still are not familiar
with the importing and exporting procedures, transit trade and customs formalities for export to
CU countries. To facilitate integration of Kyrgyz firms into the CU markets, the government
could take specific actions, such as:

     -   carry out practical awareness campaigns including sector dedicated events for
         businesses with concrete guidance on the CU , i.e. “before & after” or “how to…”
         workshops
     -   establish a CU help-desk for companies. Such CU Help Desk could be housed within the
         One-Stop-Shop already operating under the Ministry of Economy
     -   create Internet portals and databases to ensure that businesses have access to up to date
         information about technical regulations and trade conditions with the EEU

3.      Develop sector and/or product specific export promotion approaches: in addition
to generalized awareness programs for Kyrgyz companies, there is a role for the government to
accompany selected sectors (or products) into the single market created by the CU. In the area
of agribusiness, it will not be realistic for the Kyrgyz Republic to overcome in relatively short
time the many structural rigidities affecting the agricultural sector18; nonetheless, the most
immediate potential for Kyrgyz companies is to tap into the segment of food products in the
Russian market by exploiting niches provided by the combination of factors such as the embargo
on EU goods, quantitative limitations of alternative suppliers and proximity. In order to achieve
this potential, a thorough assessment of specific products’ potential could be developed by the
government in conjunction with the private sector.

The many donors currently operating in the Kyrgyz Republic may prove a useful resource and
source of technical and financial support in accompanying the Kyrgyz Republic in the process of
CU integration to minimize potential adverse risks while maximizing opportunities in traditional
and innovative streams.




18The following are the key structural shortcomings affecting the Kyrgyz agricultural sector identified by the WB
Agricultural Productivity Assistance Project:
    -    lack of access to / poor management of irrigation and pastures
    -    low quality of agro-inputs (fertilizers, chemicals, seeds, etc.)
    -    limited use of sound agro-technical practices (weeding, irrigation, application of fertilizer)
    -    inadequate marketing infrastructure and services (storage, marketing skills and market information)

                                                         38
     Chapter II - Certain Requirements of Food Legislation in the
        Customs Union of Russia, Belarus, and Kazakhstan19

The Kyrgyz Context
Agriculture and food product, while generally decreasing in contribution and
employment, remain significant drivers of the Kyrgyz economy. Agriculture accounted
approximately for 18% to GDP in 2014 (down from 33% in 2006), 20% of exports (in 2013) and
34% of employment (in 2010). Food product exports were US$120 million in 2013, and around
20% were sold to CU member countries. Within the CU, the Kyrgyz Republic has been
particularly competitive in exporting fruits and edible roots with prepared foods accounting for
only about 5% of exports. The vast majority of exports were to Kazakhstan, with some
potentially re-exported to Russia. Exports to Russia were less than 10% of total agriculture
exports. (Comtrade data, 2015).

Agriculture exports within the CU have been decreasing in the past two years. Exports
were lower in 2013 vs. the previous two years, and further decreased in 2014 as adverse
weather reduced agricultural yields (by 0.6% y-o-y) and the slowdown in Russia reduced
demand. In the future, Russia's accession into the WTO may also cause pressure on exports by
reducing Kyrgyz competitiveness as Russia opens its market for imports beyond the CIS region
currently favored under the CIS Free Trade Agreement (World Bank 2014).
While CU accession requires adjustments to tariffs and TRs across trade categories,
agriculture and food imports present a tougher regulatory challenge as they are subject
to costlier NTM barriers. Countries in the CU tend to have in excess of 20,000 standards with a
capacity to review and revise much lower numbers annually (in the Kyrgyz Republic around 80
a year). A number of these standards are outdated and obsolete given that around 75 percent of
standards were introduced during the Soviet period (on the other hand the average age of ISO
standards was approximately 2.5 years) (World Bank 2014).
Table 1 compares the Kyrgyz Republic and its main trading partners within the CU in terms of
the burden imposed on imports and in the agriculture and manufacturing sectors. In all three
cases, trade partners impose costly NTMs on exports, significantly higher than the tariffs alone.
Moreover, the barriers faced within the agriculture sector are higher than those for
manufactured imports.
Table 1 Total and NTM burden as percent of imports

                     Total (tariffs and NTM)                     Ad valorem equivalent to NTM barriers
Country          All           AG            MG                     All           AG            MF
  KGZ           14.6%        35.5%          6.1%                  12.0%         30.7%          4.5%
  KAZ           6.7%         10.0%          6.3%                   5.5%          3.9%          5.7%
  RUS           4.5%         18.1%          3.9%                   3.5%         10.9%          3.1%
(Kee, Nicita, & Olerreaga, 2009; NTM estimation based on World Bank 2012)




19This chapter, except the section “the Kyrgyz Context,” presents the summary of a forthcoming IFC / World Bank
Group report by the same name, with leading author Kateryna Onul (Adviser on Food Legislation, GTCDR) and
produced under the Ukraine IC for Agribusiness Project.

                                                      39
The Kyrgyz Republic has made significant strides to reduce the burden of technical
barriers on trade. The legal framework establishes mandatory (technical regulations) and
voluntary (standards) requirements of products. As of mid-2013, 43 technical regulations were
adopted and since 2006, the number of products subject to compulsory certification has been
reduced from 7,000 to 234. At the same time, national standards are being harmonized with
international standards such as ISO, IEC, and the Codex Alimentarius, although GOST standards
still prevail (as of January 2012, 20,372 out of the 22,542 standards used were GOST) (World
Bank 2014). In 2004, the Kyrgyz Republic began implementing an internationally and WTO
compliant system of voluntary standards and technical regulations. This process led to the
adoption of 47 Technical Regulations that have been developed according to international
practice and referencing to international standards. The CU accession requires a realignment of
the technical regulatory environment with the Russian system, which is based on GOST R and
GOST Standards. This realignment can present a challenge: currently 47% of Kyrgyz standards
are harmonized internationally, while only 30% of GOST Standards are consistent with ISO / IEC
requirements.

In the absence of a market to control quality, GOST standards would control the quality of
products, even if there are no health or safety issues. Such an overly mandatory regulatory
system virtually impacts all producers, regardless of the destination of the product. As opposed
to a system of voluntary standards, such regulatory system makes innovation and adaptation to
the market needs very costly because producers would need to negotiate with regulators if they
are to make changes to a product or a production process (World Bank 2015). These constraints,
coupled with the fact that decisions are now made centrally at the EEU level, may impede the
ability of Kyrgyz firms to innovate and negotiate in terms of their products and production
methodologies. Exports to markets outside the CU may suffer as well as the Kyrgyz system is
aligned with the Russian standards.

The Russian embargo on food imports

In the summer of 2014, Russia imposed an embargo on food imports from the EU and US,
including fruit, vegetables, meat, fish, milk and dairy imports. The embargo presented an
opportunity to shift imports from Western countries to the region and boost Kyrgyz food
exports to Russia.
However, there has not been an increase in food exports to Russia; in fact exports to
Russia have declined across the board in the past year. Table 2 summarizes food and
agriculture exports to the CU in 2014. Out of about $100 million in total food exports, less than
20% had any share exported to Russia directly. Within nealry all categories with exports to
Russia, the Kyrgyz Republic saw a decline in trade (with the exception of fruits and processed
tomatoes). In fact, trade has declined across categories over the past year: exports to Russia
declined by 25% in the first quarter of 2015 (relative to Q1 2014), and exports to Kazakhstan
were a third lower. On the other hand, certain exports to Kazakhstan thrived in 2014 - dairy
exports (1.6x increase), cabbage (where the quantity increase was offset by a price drop), and
the smaller categories of tomatoes, grapes, baked goods also enjoyed more than 1.5x growth.




                                               40
Table 2. Kyrgyz food / agriculture exports in 2014                        Change from 2013
                                                    value      % to      Quantity    Value
Category
                                                   ($'000)    Russia       (%)        (%)
Unmanufactured tobacco/ tobacco refuse             10,088      99.6       102.2      99.2
Dried leguminous vegetables, shelled                4,021      80.7        90.4        90
Fruit, dried, nes                                   1,007      79.9       104.4        99
Food preparations, nes                               780       96.6        70.3        69

Other nuts, fresh or dried, nes                        578     76.8        n/a         n/a
Jams, fruit jellies, marmalades, fruit or nut          499     22.4        92.4        78.1
pure
Natural honey                                          365     58.1        76.5        73.5
Other live plants, cuttings and slips,                 284     37.9         92         92.9
mushroom spawn
Gelatin and derivatives/ isinglass/ glues of           262     100         65.8        62.1
animal origin (excl. 35.01)
Fruit, nuts and other edible parts of                  169     35.4       144.2        159
plants, otherwise prepared or preserved
Tomatoes prepared or preserved                         120     34.5       120.4       116.4
otherwise than by vinegar or acetic acid
Sunflower seeds                                        80      80.9        17.4        17.1
Dried vegetables, whole, cut, sliced, broken           65      100         56.2        75.4
or in powder
Other fixed vegetable fats and oils (incl.             58      100           -           -
jojoba oil) and fractions
Ginger, saffron, turmeric, other spices                21      100         n/a         n/a
Waters, including natural or artificial mineral        11      58          83.2        91.3
waters and aerated waters (not flavored)
Vegetables, fruit, nuts, fruit-peel and other           1      100           -           -
parts of plants, preserved by sugar
Source: Kyrgyz Statistical Office

The quality control infrastructure has not been in place to enable Kyrgyz exporters to
make the most out of the embargo opportunity. Borders with Kazakhstan are not fully open
due to concerns about compliance with veterinary and phytosanitary standards. Testing
laboratories which would allow implementation of CU standards have been delayed due to
delays in the delivery of equipment.
This chapter summarizes certain requirements of food legislation in the CU to help guide
the authorities in accelerating the harmonization process. The report highlights
characteristics of the CU regulatory system in food safety approach and Food Law (and
compares it to western counterparts) but it also analyzes infrastructure aspects of the NQI, such
as testing laboratories and certification mechanisms. The report pinpoints specific technical
requirements for CU food safety that differ from western requirements (Microbiological Criteria
for Foodstuff; Contaminants in Food; Maximum Residue Limits for Residues of Pesticides and
Pharmacologically Active Substances). As such, it is intended to guide the work of the Kyrgyz
authorities as they continue to align the food and agriculture product regulatory environment
and standards to the CU requirements while ensuring that Kyrgyz exports remain competitive
outside the CU as well. The World Bank Group will work closely with the Kyrgyz authorities to
help adapt the findings and recommendations of the report to the Kyrgyz context, including



                                                  41
conducting a training / workshop with representatives from the relevant institutions later this
year.

Certain Requirements of Food Legislation in the Customs Union of Russia,
Belarus, and Kazakhstan

Ensuring food safety is a key shared responsibility of both governments and industry. Failure to
deliver on this commitment has led to illness and death. It impacts a country’s ability to trade
and therefore the economic well-being of the country. For these reasons globally governments
and industry expend signiﬁcant efforts and resources to ensure that food is safe and
governments have established systems for food control. These food control systems have 5
common elements: food laws and regulations that provide the legal basis and regulatory
requirements of the system; food control management systems that establish the roles and
responsibilities of government and industry; inspection services that monitor and enforce the
regulations and ensure that the proper activities are taking place; laboratory services for
monitoring through testing compliance with the regulations; and information, education and
training for industry, government and consumers.

While each food control system has these elements, the approach and speciﬁcs differ. In each
country and union of countries, the food control system reﬂects their speciﬁc needs, historical
context, and culture. The Customs Union food control system is based on ensuring the safety of
food through compliance with ﬁnal product speciﬁcations. In this system, responsibility for food
safety mainly resides with food control bodies, and they accomplish this task by verifying that
the end-product meets the required technical speciﬁcation established by the government. Even
when a producer is required to declare safety and conformity of the product, it is still the
government who authorizes the declaration. The government sets the speciﬁcations which
typically include many attributes related to food quality as well as safety and then veriﬁes
compliance through inspection and testing. Industry is only required to provide a ﬁnal product
that complies with the technical speciﬁcation. In comparison, in western countries food control
system is based on risk control and mitigation. Within the risk- based approach, food business
operators are responsible for identifying food safety hazards and related risks from farm-to-fork
and developing and implementing practices that prevent, minimize or eliminate those hazards
(HACCP)20 while the government is responsible for monitoring and verifying the effectiveness of
the risk control measures. In this risk-based system, food quality at- tributes such as size, color,

20HACCP – Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points – A science-based system that identifies, evaluates and
controls hazards that are significant for food safety. HACCP is a tool to assess hazards and establish control systems
that focus on prevention rather than relying mainly on end-product testing. HACCP is based on seven principles: (1)
identifying any hazards that must be prevented, eliminated or reduced
to acceptable levels (hazard analysis); (2) identifying the critical control points at the step or steps at which control is
essential to prevent or eliminate a hazard or to reduce it to acceptable levels; (3) establishing critical limits at critical
control points which separate acceptability from unacceptability for the prevention, elimination or reduction of
identified hazards; (4) establishing and implementing effective monitoring procedures at critical control points; (5)
establishing corrective actions when monitoring indicates that a critical control point is not under control; (6)
establishing procedures, which shall be carried out regularly, to verify that the measures outlined in paragraphs 1 to 5
are working effectively; (7) establishing documents and records commensurate with the nature and size of the food
business to demonstrate the effective application of the measures outlined in paragraphs 1 to 6. See Codex
Alimentarius document. Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point (HACCP) system and guidelines for its application,
Annex to CAC/RCP 1-1969. Recommended international code of practice general principles of food hygiene, and EU
Guidance document on the implementation of procedures based on the HACCP principles, and on the facilitation of the
implementation of the HACCP principles in certain food businesses, European Commission Health & Consumer
Protection Directorate-General Brussels, 16 November 2005;

                                                             42
shape, smell and taste are not generally a part of the food control system. Instead, they are left to
the market place to judge if they are acceptable. These two approaches to food control are
fundamentally different. The Customs Union is based on end-product compliance to a speciﬁc
technical regulation or standard, whereas in most of western countries it is based on preventive
measures and minimizing risks associated with each process throughout the complete food
chain. These differences have signiﬁcant implications for content and organization of the laws
and regulations, monitoring and control, inspection, testing, labeling, approaches to food quality,
and the responsibilities of government, industry and consumers in ensuring that the food is safe.
Food business operators must understand the speciﬁc requirements including those for each
speciﬁc product, testing, and documentation, as compliance with one system does not mean
compliance with the other.

The differences can be better elucidated through the following. In general, the Customs Union
has adopted an approach to technical regulation that is very similar to the one used, for example,
in the European Union (the so called “new EU approach to technical harmonization and
standards”)21 for a wide range of consumer goods and industrial items (toys, cosmetics, electric
equipment, elevators, high-pressure vessels, and many others) with one signiﬁcant exception, in
the European Union this “new approach” does not cover foodstuffs. The main features of
technical regulation and harmonization common to both Unions for non-food items include:

          legislative harmonization is limited to essential safety requirements; essential safety
           requirements are outlined in mandatory sectorial directives (EU), or in technical
           regulations (CU);
          products for which essential safety requirements are developed may be placed on the
           market only if they do not endanger the safety of persons, goods, etc.;
          drawing up technical production speciﬁcations (standards) is acceptable and is
           entrusted to organizations competent in industrial standardization;
          technical speciﬁcations (standards) are not mandatory;
          the public authorities must ensure the protection of safety (or other requirements
           envisaged) on their territory;
          the public authorities are obliged to recognize that products manufactured in conformity
           with harmonized standards are presumed to conform to the essential requirements; in
           the absence of harmonized standards, public authorities accept conformity with national
           standards;
          member states presume conformity for products which are accompanied by a means of
           attestation, and these products are allowed to freely circulate on the market;
          means of attestation are:
          certiﬁcates and marks of conformity,
          test results,
          a declaration of conformity issued by the manufacturer, which may be coupled with a
           surveillance system;
          member states designate bodies authorized to is- sue marks or certiﬁcates of conformity;
          as a visual sign of conformity, a mark is placed on the label (“EAC” mark in the Customs
           Union, and “CE” mark in the European Union”.
The signiﬁcant difference between the Customs Union and the European Union is that in the
European Union, food is NOT covered by technical harmonization within the “New Approach”, and all
of the above features are not applicable to foodstuffs. In the European Union this “New Approach” has
not been extended to food control as there has been signiﬁcant reluctance to allow food safety to

21   Council Resolution 85/C 136/01 of 7 May 1985 on a new approach to technical harmonization and standards.

                                                         43
be determined by standards bodies (usually representing a third party) that operate outside the
governmental framework and who have little tradition or experience in deﬁning, controlling, or
managing food safety. Food Safety is deemed too important for governments, industry and
consumers to relinquish control. In the Customs Union, the use of technical regulations as an
approach to control safety has been extended to foodstuffs. The extension of the technical
regulations to food by the Customs Union is the fundamental reason for the signiﬁcant
divergence of the Customs Union and European Union food control systems.

It is important to mention that the Customs Union focuses primarily on internal trade between
member states and therefore issues customs policy and rules for allowing commodities into
circulation. In this system there are a number of general and product-speciﬁc technical
regulations that provide a framework for food control within the Customs Union. The common
framework is then supported by member states national laws, regulations, and standards. Also,
within the Customs Union, for food categories where product-speciﬁc technical regulations
have not been developed yet, the national law of member states applies. Figure 1 provides a
graphical representation of the Customs Union food-related legal instruments.




                                              44
Figure 1 Organization of Customs Union Technical Regulations




In order to be compliant with the Customs Union, one has to take into consideration
compliance with the Union’s technical regulations as well as the laws and standards of the
member states. Further, for business operators it is important to note that the Customs Union
system does not ad- dress such aspects as enforcement, ﬁnes, penalties, incident management,
recalls and withdrawals, and authorization/ approval of new substance (pesticides or
veterinary medicines), leaving those to be under the mandate of the national law of the
member states. This increases the complexity of the regulatory environment and compliance
for industry wishing to export to the Union and for governments wishing to model or
harmonize with the Customs Union.



                                             45
 Because the Customs Union focuses on the compliance of the ﬁnal food product to a speciﬁc
 technical regulation or standard, the deﬁnition of food is limited to “products that are of animal,
 plant, microbiological, mineral, artiﬁcial, or biotechnological origin and includes natural,
 processed or reprocessed products intended for human consumption including drinks, chewing
 gum, specialized food products, packaged potable water, potable mineral water, alcoholic
 products (including beer and beer-based drinks), non-alcoholic beverages, biologically active
 supplements (BAS), chewing gum, enzymes and starter cultures of microorganisms, yeast, food
 additives and ﬂavorings as well as food raw material”22.

 The Customs Union established basic requirements relative to food. Food shall be safe, meet
 food safety criteria, be hygienically produced and handled, registered as needed, properly
 packaged, labeled, and be traceable23. This is further elaborated on by the European Union
 that unsafe food takes into account the intended use of food and recognizes that food is unsafe
 when it presents danger to health and is unﬁt for human consumption. The Customs Union
 technical regulations include a number of requirements that relate to its circulation on the
 market24 that are not found, for example, in the European Union, the most important of which
 is that food must pass conformity assessment procedures and bear a special Customs Union
 mark as a proof of conformity. Further, since the Customs Union is based on conformity
 assessments, many food products have to meet compositional standards, as well as
 requirements for chemical and physical properties, nutritional properties, organoleptic
 (appearance, taste, odor) and, in some cases, size.

 In the Customs Union the food control system in- corporates two levels: food control through
 all-Union conformity assessment and individual member state controls (supervision) of
 sanitary, veterinary, phytosanitary aspects25. Implementation of routine food control on a daily
 basis to a signiﬁcant extent relies on the laws, regulations and standards of its member states.
 While the technical regulations set speciﬁcs of conformity and requirements (for
 manufacturers and importers) to the processes of production, processing, transportation,
 storage, sale, disposal for foodstuffs in general as well as for several categories (meat and meat
 products, milk and dairy, juices, oils and fats, grains), the implementation and enforcement
 procedures are mostly those of the individual member states. Therefore for companies wishing
 to export to the Customs Union this means that they have to comply with and understand both
 the Customs Union technical regulations as well as those of the member states to which they
 will export product. In addition, the role of industry is generally limited within the Customs
 Union to ensuring that the products which are produced and/or imported meet the speciﬁc
 technical requirements as set by the Customs Union or the Member States. In the Customs
 Union industry does not bear responsibility to deﬁne other additional self-control measures to
 ensure food safety. Even hazards within HACCP systems are limited to those speciﬁed in the
 technical regulations as criteria for ﬁnished products. The Customs Union institutional
 framework and the scope of the official food control system are represented in Figure 2.

Figure 2 Food Control System of the Customs Union

22Customs Union TR 021/2011“On Food Safety”.
23 Article 5, CU TR 021/2011 “On Food Safety”.
24 The term “circulation on the market” is common within the Customs Union and one that means to sell into the
market place. We have chosen to use the common term so that the readers become familiar with the terms used in
translation of Customs Union documents into English.
25 Other than the Council and the Commission of the Customs Union (currently Eurasian Economic Union
Commission), there are no supranational bodies that are part of the control system.

                                                       46
Enforcement is carried out by national bodies designated as competent authorities for speciﬁc
areas of state control (supervision), and also competent authorities in the area of technical
regulation. Conformity assessment is carried out by authorized certiﬁcation (conformity
assessment) bodies that are listed in a single Customs Union List; testing needed for the
purposes of enforcement is carried out by authorized testing laboratories as well, and there is a
separate Customs Union list of such laboratories. Because for several groups of products (e.g.,
specialized products, GMOs) state registration is required (as one of the forms of assessment
(conﬁrmation) of conformity), for registration of such products specially designated bodies are
responsible.

As mentioned, within the Customs Union foodstuffs are subject to conformity assessment. The
process of conformity assessment is carried out in the form of issuing and registering
declarations of conformity by manufacturers or importers. Schemes of declaring conformity vary
depending on the product, type of production (serial production of a single lot), the
establishment that produces the product and if the product is imported. While each of the
schemes for conformity assessment is different they all contain several similar elements:
creation and analysis of technical documentation; in some cases carrying out of production
control, testing of samples of food products, issuance and registration of a declaration of
conformity, and application of the uniﬁed mark of circulation on the market of the Customs
Union. For some products, such as meat, one of the schemes also re- quires that the
documentation submitted by the manufacturer as evidences of conformity includes a certiﬁcate
for the quality and safety management system (HACCP- based) issued by the agency for

                                               47
certiﬁcation of management systems26.

In addition to conformity assessment, food products are subject to state control (supervision)27
which combines border controls (people, vehicles, goods) and internal controls in the member
states. Food products are divided into three groups that subject to respectively sanitary
(epidemiological, hygiene), veterinary, and phytosanitary control (supervision). The purpose of,
for instance, state sanitary (epidemiological, hygiene) control (super- vision) is to prevent the
introduction and spread of, and to ensure the elimination of infectious and massive poisonings
that are hazardous to human health, to prevent occurrence of emergencies, as well as to prevent
acts of terrorism with the use of biological agents, chemical and radioactive substances28.

Certain speciﬁc products when ﬁrst imported or produced in the Customs Union are subject to
state registration including: mineral, therapeutic, and bottled water; beverages such as tonics
and beer; food for special purposes, including food for babies and older children, food for
pregnant and nursing women; food additives, food- stuffs derived from genetically engineered
or modiﬁed (transgenic) organisms, and some food contact materials29. The fact whether such
products have been registered is veriﬁed during state control (supervision).

Certain production/processing facilities have to be registered as well30. This requirement
extends to the facilities engaged in production and processing of meat and meat products, milk
and dairy products, poultry and poultry products, and ﬁsh and ﬁshery products. State
registration of production/processing facilities is con- ducted by the agencies authorized for
this purpose by the Customs Union member-states. This procedure begins with the application
by the processor and is followed by an inspection of the facility to determine its conformity to
the requirements on processes (production, processing, storage, transportation, sale, disposal)
established by relevant technical regulations. Details of the procedure are established by the
legislation of the Customs Union member-states. Upon satisfactory completion of the inspection
and review of the ﬁndings, the designated agency assigns an identiﬁcation (record) number to
the facility and adds the production facility in the Register of Food Facilities Subject to State
Registration. The state registration of a production/processing facility has no expiration date;
however it can be suspended or cancelled in case of serious breach of the requirements of
technical regulations.

Table 1 summarizes the state control (supervision) framework within the Customs Union.


26 This is specifically scheme 6 D as outlined in Customs Union technical regulation CU TR 034/2013 “On meat and
meat products”.
27 State sanitary control (supervision) is carried out against requirements to products and processes outlined in the
Uniform Sanitary, Epidemiological and Hygiene Requirements over Products Subject to State Control (Supervision);
State veterinary control is carried out according to Uniform Veterinary (Veterinary and Sanitary) Requirements for
Goods Subject to Veterinary Inspection (Supervision).
28 Based on item 2-1 of Decision of the Customs Union Commission No. 299 of May 28, 2010 (with amendments to
item 2-1 introduced by Decision No. 101 of the Eurasian Economic Council of July 7, 2014, the food products and items
that are covered by the scope of certain technical regulations are exempt from the scope of Uniform Sanitary,
Epidemiological and Hygiene Requirements. These include for example materials and articles produced of polymer
and other materials intended for contact with food and food media, labeling requirements, food additives and
flavorings, and technological aids, as well as meat and meat products, and milk and dairy products.
29 The goods from the list, manufactured for the first time on the Customs Union customs territory, as well as
imported for the first time to the Customs Union customs territory, are subject to state registration (Part II, Single List
of Goods Subject to Sanitary-and-Epidemiologic Supervision (control) at the Customs Border and on the Customs
Territory of the Customs Union, as amended by Decision of the Customs Union Commission No 341 of 17.08.2010).
30 CU TR 021/2011 “On Safety of Food Products”, Article 31.

                                                           48
Table 1 General Framework of the State Control (Supervision) in the Customs Union




It is important for governments and industry wishing to export to the Customs Union to
understand the systems of border control. The Union has rigorous system for border control
where a prior notice of the shipment must be submitted to the customs authorities31, border


31 Commission Regulation (EC) No. 136/2004 of 22 January 2004 laying down procedures for veterinary checks at
Community border inspection posts on products imported from third countries (establishes a form of a Common
Veterinary Entry Document (CVED)); Commission Regulation (EC) No. 669/2009 of 24 July 2009 implementing
Regulation (EC) No. 882/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards the increased level of official
controls on imports of certain feed and food of non-animal origin and amending Decision 2006/504/EC. (establishes
the form of Common Entry Document)/CED Decision of the Customs Union Commission No. 899 of December 9, 2011

                                                         49
control of foodstuffs consists of documentary checks, identity checks and physical checks. The
Union is guided by the requirements and rules established by the OIE32 and IPPC33 when it
comes to veterinary and phytosanitary issues at the border.

The Customs Union has requirements related to pre-export approvals of the establishments, in
the exporting country for animal products. According to the Customs Union procedures, food
business operators in third countries who produce, process and/or store food products under
veterinary control (supervision) are subject to joint checks (inspections) by competent
veterinary authorities of the Customs Union member states34. Establishments that passed the
joint checks are added to the List of Establishments in Third Countries. In some cases, such
checks (inspections) can be carried out by a competent veterinary authority of only one member
state; in other cases no checks are carried out, and an establishment can be added to the list
without inspection.

The purpose of border control is to ensure that imported products meet regulatory
requirements of the target market. Thus, border control procedures in the Customs Union reﬂect
the speciﬁcs of its general food control systems.

As mentioned, in the Customs Union, all foodstuffs are divided into 3 groups: products that are
subject to sanitary control (supervision), veterinary control (supervision) and phytosanitary
control (supervision). In none of the Customs Union member states is the food control sys-tem a
single agency or has a clearly deﬁned body that would perform a coordination function;
therefore, each member state designates competent authorities in each of the three areas, and
they have shared responsibilities and roles in border control. Obviously, they cooperate with the
Customs bodies in their respective countries as well. For a potential exporter it means that they
need to clearly deﬁne to which of the three categories the product belongs to (whether it is an
object of veterinary, sanitary or phytosanitary control), and become familiar with details of each
particular border control procedure. There are no speciﬁc requirements to composite products
or detailed rules of attributing foodstuffs to composite products; all foodstuffs with ingredients
of animal origin are subject to veterinary checks35.

The Customs Unions requires that all consignments of food products be accompanied by a
number of documents including a health certiﬁcate or its analogue. Because foodstuffs that are
to be put into circulation at the customs territory of the Customs Union have to pass conformity
assessment (conﬁrmation) procedures, in particular, by means of issuance and registration of
declaration of conformity with technical regulations, a copy of such declaration or information
about it36 shall be presented at the border as well. It should be noted that there is a certain
disconnect in the terminology used: technical regulations establish that conformity declaration
is required for products that are to be “put into circulation”, while all customs regulations and

“On introduction of compulsory prior notice on goods that enter the customs territory of the Customs Union by
automobile vehicles” (establishes requirements to prior notice).
32 World Organization of Animal Health (Offi ce International des Epizooties).
33 International Plant Protection Convention.
34 Procedure on Carrying-out Joint Checks of Objects and Sampling of Products that Subject to Veterinary Control
(Supervision). Approved by Decision of the Customs Union Commission No. 317 of June 18, 2010.
35 Common List of Goods Subject to Veterinary Control (Supervision). Approved by the Decision of the Customs Union
Commission No. 317 on June 18, 2010.
36 Information about declarations of conformity means that it is sufficient to present identification data (e.g.,
registration number), and then the fact it has been issued can be confirmed by checking the Customs Union list (e-
based data-base) of registered declarations of conformity.

                                                       50
procedures say that presenting a copy of declaration of conformity or information about it is
required when product are “released for internal consumption”. There is no deﬁnition for
“putting into circulation,” and whether it is equivalent to “releasing for internal consumption” is
unclear from the legal standpoint. At the same time, in practice the two terms are interpreted as
the same by the Customs Union, customs officials, and importers must present their duly
registered declarations of conformity at the border. Declaration of conformity can be issued and
registered only if a product meets the requirements of all applicable technical regulations. It
means that, for example, in case of the fruit juice, it shall meet requirements of CU TR 005/2011
(safety of packaging), CU TR 021/2011 (general food safety), CU TR 022/2011 (labeling, entered
into force in February 2015), CU TR 023/2011 (fruit and vegetable juice products); and none
can be omitted.

In the Customs Union while the customs procedures are risk-based, the frequency of physical
checks is not deﬁned at the all-union level (or is not made public), and in fact falls under the
national law of the member states.

In the Customs Union conformity assessment and therefore food control is limited to a
narrower group of entities and persons: manufacturers, sellers and persons (entities) who
represent foreign food manufacturers37. Their main responsibility is to ensure that their
products meet the requirements of the technical regulations, and only food manufacturers are
required to implement procedures based on HACCP principles. Therefore, it is assumed that
conformity to technical regulations means that the food is safe. This places a much higher
responsibility in ensuring food safety on the developers of the technical regulations and on
food control bodies who must, by establishing speciﬁcations, providing laboratory services,
registering declarations of conformity and carrying out control (supervision) conﬁrm that
during the period of validity of the declarations the product is safe and complies with
speciﬁcations.

In the Customs Union the technical regulations and rules are applied equally to all operators
regardless of size or the volumes of products produced, and irrespective to production using
traditional methods (e.g., traditional cheeses).38

The Customs Union technical regulations include a signiﬁcant number of speciﬁc provisions
and requirements with respect to processes of production, processing, transportation and so
on. In many cases, they are quite detailed and prescriptive. As a reﬂection of the overall legal
framework, they are a combination of general requirements (applicable to all foodstuffs) and
product- speciﬁc requirements (where those exist, including food of both plant origin (oils,
juice products) and animal origin (fats, meat, milk and dairy), plus specialized foodstuffs that
can be both plant and animal origin. In addition, in the near future when relevant new technical
regulations will be adopted, there will be product-speciﬁc requirements to processes related to
poultry products, ﬁshery products and mineral waters. These requirements do not always
relate to safety or hygiene; for example, some are on sizes.




37 CU TR 021/2011 “On safety of food products”, Article 10.
38 EU Guidelines on implementation of certain provisions of Regulation (EC) No 852/2004.

                                                       51
Important Notes for Governments, Policy Makers and Businesses
Fundamental approaches: The Customs Union food control system is based on establishing
food safety through conformity assessment of the ﬁnal product. In this system the ﬁnal food
product is deemed safe when it conforms to speciﬁc Customs Union technical regulations, or
recognized voluntary standards, and/or member state laws and regulations.

Types and power of legal instruments: In the Customs Union, the main legal instrument used
is technical regulations; there also are standards (voluntary, but de-facto mandatory when they
establish methods of sampling and testing), procedures (established by decisions), and
requirements. They all are directly applicable in the member states (activities in the area of
technical regulation and conformity assessment), but with some exceptions they do not
incorporate implementation mechanisms – those can only be found in the Customs Union
member-states national laws and regulations. Technical regulations while directly applicable are
focused mostly on technical aspects of products and establish speciﬁcations, not policies. It is
important to understand the differences between the legal acts as they help to identify the areas
where possible differences may exist between the member states of each Union.

Organizational arrangements: The legal framework of the Customs Union combines horizontal
legal acts and vertical legal acts. There are several technical regulations (on general food safety,
labeling, packaging, food additives and ﬂavorings) that cover cross-cutting aspects for all food
products (it should be noted though that the technical regulation on packaging also covers
packaging for non-food items). There are plans to develop a technical regulation on food contact
materials that would have a horizontal nature as well. There are also a growing number of
vertical technical regulations that are speciﬁc to certain product groups, in particular grain, oils
and fats, fruit and vegetable juices, meat and meat products, milk and dairy products; several
more are being drafted (on alcoholic products, poultry and poultry products, ﬁsh and ﬁshery
products, and mineral water). For governments and businesses in third countries it means that
there is always a need to identify a range of applicable national laws and regulations of member
states, as procedural details are covered by those and may vary from member state to a member
state.

The institutional perspective: While the Commission of the Customs Union sets policies, there
are no bodies that would execute implementation or provide supervisory roles. The institutional
framework is based on a system of national bodies each designated as responsible for a
particular role (e.g., responsible for sanitary control, veterinary control, phytosanitary control,
technical regulation, certiﬁcation and conformity assessment, registration of specialized food,
registration of novel food, and so on). This supports a “specialization” within the Customs Union
of the existing food control bodies in the member states, and does not burden the member states
with the need of institutional reform, even though one body can be designed for more than one
role. Therefore governments and businesses need to remember that in the Customs Union
member states there is no “single window” on food control issues. The best approach would be
to ﬁrst check on the official Customs Union website (http://www.eurasiancommission.org/) to
determine which body in the target country of export is designated responsible for a speciﬁc
activity.

Speciﬁcs concerning the scope of legal acts, speciﬁc provisions and implementation:
Businesses should keep in mind that it does not necessarily mean that when there is no

                                                52
requirement in the Customs Union technical regulations, the area or speciﬁc issue is not
regulated at all. In most cases it is likely that there are applicable national norms of the Customs
Union member states, and it is important to identify these and comply.

Requirements to Food Quality in the Customs Union
Quality is a term that is used frequently by governments, policy makers, industry, and
consumers to describe products and services. It is a descriptor whose deﬁnition is inﬂuenced
by culture, attitudes, expectations, and stated and unstated needs. Historically, quality has been
primarily understood as the absence of defect, fraud and adulteration. More recently with the
global acceptance of the private standard ISO 9000, quality is deﬁned with- in the business
community and by governments as the totality of characteristics of an entity (product, service,
process, activity, system, organization, and person) that bear on its ability to satisfy stated and
implied needs39. Within the deﬁnition of quality as it relates to goods including food there are
two key points that need to be emphasized: quality is a combination of product characteristics,
and these characteristics must meet consumer needs, both states and implied.

Product characteristics include physical attributes such as shape, size, and weight. For food
additional attributes of appearance, color, smell, taste, packaging, and even freshness further
deﬁne quality. Quality attributes are de- signed to satisfy the needs of consumers. Yet
consumers have stated and implied needs that make deﬁning quality challenging. Consumer
needs and preferences are inﬂuenced by culture, media, personal taste and habits, a nd
economic background and therefore are not homogeneous nor are they static. Consumer needs
change overtime and therefore in order to meet consumer stated and implied needs product
characteristics or attributes change as well.

In order to satisfy the consumers’ ever changing needs and therefore changing deﬁnition of
quality, two common paths are followed by governments and industry. One path is where
industry and governments study consumers and create new products to meet consumer needs.
Alternatively, the other path is where industry and government set consumer preferences and
therefore product quality attributes are static, constant and almost never changing. These options
are not mutually exclusive and are found intertwined between government policy, laws and
regulations and industry standards globally across many industries including food and
agricultural products.

In order to try to satisfy the implied and evolving consumer needs governments and industry
expend enormous efforts into studying consumer preferences and change their products
accordingly. This increases competition and the number of product variations offered to
consumers, and the market grows quickly. For example in the food industry thousands of new
products are offered annually ranging from new varieties of tomatoes, different production
methods, organic/bio, to new products designed to meet the growing variation in buyers. As the
number and variety of food products grow, it becomes unrealistic for governments and policy
makers to regulate all their quality attributes through laws, speciﬁc standards, and enforcement
actions. Therefore, governments attempt only to regulate the key characteristics – those that
relate to health (safety), leaving the remainder of the attributes to be deﬁned and set by the
market place.

39ISO 9000:2000. Quality Management Systems. Fundamentals and Vocabulary. Since we look at the term “quality” in
a historical context, we use an old version of ISO 9000 (of 2002); currently the version ISO 9000:2005 is in force.

                                                        53
An alternative is where the industry and governments dictate consumer needs through
regulation and technical standards. In this situation governments and industry inﬂuence the
consumer in such a way that the products become static and therefore predictable. The outcome
of this is a relatively small number of products offered to the consumer. The products that are
offered are independent of manufacturer as they have same uniform characteristics and are
always the same everywhere. This strategy does not promote competition but instead facilitates
a high level of standardization and allows for long-term planning by governments and industry.
The products do not evolve and over time their uniformity becomes an attribute that consumers
expect and there- fore deﬁne the products attributes. Further, since there is no market inﬂuence
and all product characteristics are ﬁrmly established, it becomes possible for the government to
set laws and technical speciﬁcations that deﬁne the uniform quality of a product.

While quite different in outcomes both models and hybrids of such models exist today across
the world and incorporate many consumer products, as well as agricultural products and
foodstuffs.

At the foundational level, differentiation of products is determined by consumer needs and
purchasing power. Trade-offs are made by consumers based on income, and these trade-offs
deﬁne product size, quantity and attributes including quality. What may be acceptable to one
economic group may not be affordable, acceptable or desired by another.

A key food attribute is food safety. Food safety is a primary attribute of all food as unsafe food is
unacceptable at all levels of food needs and economic purchasing power. Globally two
different approaches to food safety have been taken. Where food safety is determined to be the
most important food attribute, governments have developed speciﬁc regulatory frameworks
establishing food safety as a primary regulatory regime. This regulatory regime establishes a
ﬁnite set of horizontal laws and regulations that cover all products. Alternatively, where food
safety is included as just one of the product speciﬁc attributes and is regulated as such, a
signiﬁcant number of product speciﬁc technical regulations are developed where a limited set
of attributes regulate food safety. Across the world it is common to ﬁnd a mixture of both
regulatory approaches that combine horizontal and product speciﬁc (vertical) regulatory
environments related to food safety and food quality. This hybridization arises from historical
context, cultural differences, as well as governments and industry needs to provide consumer
protection especially in high risk areas such as baby food, and food for special medical purposes.

The Customs Union member states predominantly control food safety and quality attributes
through a signiﬁcant set of Union and National product speciﬁc technical regulations. The
focus of these regulations is to ensure food safety and to clearly deﬁne, regulate and enforce a
harmonized set of technical speciﬁcations for food product introduced to the Customs Union.

Requirements to Food Labeling in the Customs Union

The globalization of the food industry combined with ever changing consumer preferences
and demands has led to explosion in the number and types of food products available to
consumers. Traditional food retail stores carry between 10,000 and 60,000 different food items
and each year thousands of new food items are introduced. Consumers choose products based
on a complex set of criteria such as brand, cost, healthiness, freshness, taste, visual appearance,
culture, and lifestyle. These drivers compel retailers and manufacturers to develop communication

                                                 54
tools to differentiate their products in the market place to retain clients and maximize proﬁts. A
critical component in attracting consumers is the labeling. Labeling provides a range of
information to consumers such as the product name, manufacturer, price, contents of the product,
and directions for use and storage. Some of the product details in the labels are essential (use-by
dates, safety warnings, etc.), other information is considered useful (nutrition labeling, recycling
details, etc.).

The Customs Union has extensive labeling requirements for food products which are designed
to inform and protect consumers. For food business operators, including producers,
manufacturers, importers, and food catering compliance with labeling requirements can be a
difficult and complex task.

The Customs Union is in the process of developing its requirements based on those that exist
in the member states and those that have become the best labeling practice internationally;
technical regulation CU TR 022/2011 on food products labeling became compulsory after
February 15, 2015 when the transition period ended. Also, the Customs Union continues to
develop vertical technical regulations for speciﬁc product groups that contain additional
labeling requirements as well.

Food and Food-related Articles and Materials that Require Special Authorization
The Customs Union has established that there are types of food, classes of sub- stances and/or
materials that when either added to food or come in contact with food require special
authorization to be placed on the market and shall meet special requirements to ensure food
safety. These include novel food, food supplements, food additives and packaging and articles
and materials in contact with food. Novel food basically is food produced with completely
new untraditional technologies or being absolutely unfamiliar to consumers. Dietary
supplements also require special authorization as they are consumed to improve the health and
well-being of consumers. Food additives which are chemicals specially added to food to improve
its taste, ﬂavor or color, or to enable technological processes shall also go through authorization
procedure to establish their safety. Food packaging and food contact materials as they have the
potential to leach chemicals into the food shall be tested ﬁrst to establish they are food-grade.

This area is highly technical and complex. The body of regulations is signiﬁcant and detailed.
Therefore it is especially important for business operators prior to exporting a product or
material to the Union that they undertake a speciﬁc review of the relevant laws, guidance
documents, and technical regulations. Further, it must be noted that compliance with the
Customs Union regulations does not necessarily confer compliance with relevant regulation of
other countries as the speciﬁcs might differ signiﬁcantly. For example, in the area of food
additives, of the 500 or so food additives that are included into the EU and CU lists, there are 43
which are approved for use in the Customs Union but not in the European Union. Similarly, there
are 19 food additives which are approved for use in the European Union which are not approved
for use in the Customs Union.

These topic areas are not static and undergo changes as new information, new materials, new
substances and technologies are made available. Due to the ever changing environment of the
regulatory systems, lists of approved and not approved substances change overtime which
requires that companies continue to monitor these areas and review the speciﬁcs prior to


                                                55
developing a product and exporting to either of the trade Unions.

Laboratory Control and Food Safety Criteria in the Customs Union
The ability to provide safe and nutritious food domestically and for export is a shared
responsibility of industry and governments. In order to deliver on this commitment,
governments and industry must have the ability to identify and control food safety hazards.
Food safety hazards are biological, chemical or physical agents that can be found in food or in
contact with food that have the potential to cause an adverse health effect. These hazards are
found throughout the food supply chain and are a signiﬁcant public health concern. To ensure
that food is safe, governments have established speciﬁc rules and acceptable levels of presence of
hazards in food and in this way differentiate safe food from unsafe food. All food that is placed
on the market must comply with the safety levels of hazards presence in food, and in some
cases, for especially dangerous substances, zero acceptable levels are established. The safety levels
are not arbitrary: they are based on substantial scientiﬁc research, and as new scientiﬁc
information becomes available, safety levels for food hazards are revised. To effectively assess
presence of hazards in food, it is important to have adequate laboratory capacity, to use
statistically sound sampling techniques, and reliable, ac- curate and repeatable analytical test
methods.

The Customs Union food safety control system to a signiﬁcant extent is based on conformity
assessment in which food products are deemed safe based on a comparison with product
speciﬁcations as outlined in legal acts; the comparison is done through testing of the ﬁnal
products attributes including food safety parameters. Therefore, in the Customs Union, the key
to ensuring safe food is to conform/verify that the ﬁnal product conforms in all aspects with the
technical regulations and/ or speciﬁc standards.

In view of the complexity of the topic areas we must point out that for businesses wishing to
export to CU it is key to conduct an in-depth speciﬁc analysis of legal provisions relevant to
products they wish to export as each foodstuff and class of foodstuffs has speciﬁc requirements
that must be met.




                                                 56
          Chapter III - Services Trade in the Kyrgyz Rebpulic

                                 - A competitive Analysis40

The global economy is changing rapidly. In an ever more globalizing and competitive world, it
is important for countries to understand how they fare relative to competitors. The empirical
literature on trade performance demonstrates that services are an important component of
countries competitiveness in two respects. First, these activities contribute to diversification and
to expanding the opportunity frontier of a country’s exports. The second important role of
services is that they are a strategic driver of competitiveness for the whole economy.

Increasingly, countries are seizing service opportunities. Although many services are still
less tradable than most goods, because they typically require face-to-face presence of buyer and
seller, technology changes and countries reforms are enabling new opportunities in trade in
services. As a result, exports of services have picked up for all income groups and the
participation of developing countries in world services exports increased from 18 percent in
1990 to more than 30 percent in 2013.. Services are not only a source of export diversification,
but they also enter in the production of many downstream competitive products: the
competitiveness of most goods exported on the global markets depends not only on access to
raw material inputs but also to critical services inputs.

For this reason, the criticality of services to a country´s competitiveness, trade and
investment barriers to services matter. Absence of flexibility in domestic laws or deficiencies
in domestic services may determine lower productivity and reduce the attractiveness of a
country to foreign investors. Good regulatory policies stand to gain from other measures a
government can implement. These policies are related to the domestic economic and
institutional situation inside the country (the fundamentals) rather than the explicit policies in
place. They are horizontal measures which complement the specific trade and domestic policies.
Domestic enabling factors are broad in scope. They include institutions, governance, business
environment, labor skills, management and entrepreneurial skills, and trade related
infrastructure. Table 1 summarizes the main policy areas and policy objectives that would
support the competiveness in the services sector.

Against this background, this report examines the competitiveness of services sector in
the Kyrgyz Republic. The objective of the report is to identify main trends in the development
of the service sectors, both domestically and in terms of export performance, assess potential to
increase services exports to neighboring markets, to examine linkages between services and
other sectors of the economy and to provide a high level analysis of the regulatory environment
of main service industries. Based on the analysis, the report offers some options to inform
policies to strengthen the competitiveness and export performance of the services sector and
the economy more broadly. Box 1 provides information on methodology and data sources.

The report is organized as follows. The competitiveness assessment of the services sector
begins with evaluating its role in the domestic economy. Cross-country comparisons of basic

40 This chapter was prepared by Sebastian Saez (Senior Trade Economist, GTCDR), Erik van der Marel (Consultant,
GTCDR) and Martin Molinuevo (Consultant, GTCDR) with the overall guidance of Jieun Choi (TTL, GTCDR). The views
presented in this document belong solely to the team.

                                                      57
indicators, such as the share of a country’s value added from services exports and its importance
in relation to the domestic economy constitute an important preliminary assessment. The
second section has the objective of assessing the ability of a country to be competitive in the two
functions of services outlined above, i.e. as source of export diversification and as source of
greater competitiveness to the wider economy. This section also assesses export potential for
expansion and growth. The third section examines the importance of services in exports and in
other export activities on the basis of value-added measured. A diagnostic of the determinants of
services performance is conducted in section fourth. The section identifies factors that facilitate
or constrain competitiveness in the services sector; aiming at linking performance and
determining factors; and identifying policy options to address specific constraints. The final
section concludes and provides general policy recommendations.

Table 1: Domestic Enabling Factors
             Policy area                                        Objective
 Institutions                          Arrangements of optimal governance of relationships
                                       between private economic parties, rather than those
                                       between private parties and the government
 Governance                            Increasing the ability of governments to formulate and
                                       implement sound policies and regulations that allow and
                                       promote private sector development
 Business environment                  Compete and attract FDI in order to profit from export
                                       expansion and increased domestic competitiveness
                                       through MNC establishment.
 Labor skills                          Factor capacity increase to allow for sophisticated
                                       services exports; climbing up the ladder of comparative
                                       advantage in services or from goods to services; notably
                                       professional services, computer and related services and
                                       business services
 Management & Entrepreneur             Enhance the adoption and use of modern technologies
 skills                                which are essential for producing a service or good.
 Trade-related Infrastructure          Reducing cost related to the delivery of goods and
                                       services, i.e. transportation costs, export costs,
                                       transaction costs or searching costs
Source: Sáez el al (2014).

The report finds that services trade role in Kyrgyz competitiveness can be enhanced. This is
illustrated by the low contribution of services inputs linkages, as inputs, into other economic
activities. Services policies are open to Foreign Service suppliers, which suggest that the policies
enhancing domestic and export linkages must be found among the policies that affect other
areas such as service enablers such as human capital, the strength of domestic institutions
(competition enhancing institutions). The main findings of the report are as follows:

    a) While the share of services to GDP is in line to what would be expected for the Kyrgyz
       Republic according to its level of development, the share of total employment in the
       services sector is below peer countries. This means that there is scope for expansion of
       the role services in employment in the future. The challenge for Kyrgyz policy makers is
       to develop those services that enhance the linkages to upstream productive activities
       and to those service activities with the highest impact in productivity growth;
    b) In terms of services export performance, the data suggest that Kyrgyz exports have been
       growing very fast which in great part due to tourism. And yet, although the value of

                                                58
      business services have been growing over the last seven years, their share in total
      services have declined. This altogether means that the Kyrgyz Republic is performing
      well but should pay attention to business services growth due to their linkages to other
      economic and export activities. This is because the importance of business services
      linkages as inputs into other economic activities. This is lack of linkages is also reflected
      in the loss of some export sophistication;



Box 1. Methodology and data sources
The report uses the analytical model proposed in Sáez et al. (2014), which provides for integrated
analysis and diagnostics of the trade competitiveness of the services sector using a wide range of
indicators. Cross-country comparisons are based on World Development Indicators (WDI) and other
publicly available World Bank data, and on two new databases:

(1) The Export in Value-Added database measures trade on a value-added basis based on national
input-output tables from the Global Trade Analysis Project (GATP) project for 1992, 1995, 1997,
2001, 2004, 2007, and 2011. It also measures not only the direct contribution of services to total
exports in terms of value-added but also their indirect contribution through linkages. In other words,
the dataset provides information on how services value-added is distributed among economic
activities and how services linkages relate to trade over time.

The GTAP database represents the most comprehensive, convenient, and internationally-comparable
source of sector-specific data across countries. Of the 129 regions in GTAP v.8, 112 represent
individual countries and 17 represent composite regions. In the case of individual countries, the social
accounting matrix (SAM) for each country relies on the most recent input-output data available from
national sources for each country.1 These are harmonized to a standard 57-sector format for ease of
comparison. Limitations of the GTAP data include infrequency of updates (the most recent GTAP 9 pre-
release takes the data only to 2011) and the fact that some input-output data may be adjusted to
provide consistency with merchandise trade and macroeconomic data also used in the SAM. Therefore,
results should be interpreted cautiously and should be seen as a first attempt to understand trade
performance in developing countries.

(2) For the Trade in Services database, the World Bank merged and reconciled all available sources of
data from the OECD, Eurostat, the United Nations, and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) to create
a database on bilateral services trade. By mirroring flows, it provides a best available estimate of
bilateral flows and their evolution in recent years for 200 countries. Data are reported in million US $
for 1981–2009. This database makes it possible to carry out a wide range of sophisticated
assessments, such as estimating gravity models, measuring of the trade potential of country, trade
diversification, and other analytical techniques.




  c) Other indicators also show that the overall export performance of the Kyrgyz Republic in
     terms of direct export of services is fine, which indicates that the main future challenges
     are focused on their linkages;
  d) Going deeper into the domestic and export linkages of services in value-added, we see
     that these are particularly low in transport, distribution, and communication (to some
     extent) which are critical for the Kyrgyz Republic’s connectivity to the world economy
     and for tourism services which are among the priority sectors identified by government
     authorities;
  e) Moreover, regarding policies, transport services have the highest level of restrictiveness
     for international standards. This sectors, together with business services (i.e.
     professional services among others), are the most important in terms of enhancing


                                                  59
        linkages which are often seen as essential factors of development for emerging
        countries;
     f) While the overall of services trade policies is low, additional factors that can explain
        trade performance are lagging. These additional factors are, regulatory quality (i.e. as
        proxy of the strength of the regulator), the strength of contracting and enforcement
        mechanisms. The quality of these two enablers are important because the quality of
        regulators determines the level of competition and market structured which are
        important once a country has lowered the market access restriction. Regarding the rule
        of law, this is an essential element for development of sophisticated services like
        business services which could therefore enhanced the linkages in the Kyrgyz Republic;
     g) Regarding human capital endowment, the Kyrgyz Republic has a reasonable share of
        services trade given the level of quality of the human capital skills supply. Yet, the Kyrgyz
        Republic seems to be unable to translate this into using these skills in sectors which are
        mostly in need of this (i.e. business services);
     h) The Kyrgyz Republic’s future services trade expansion particularly on services traded on
        cross-border basis or which require access to low cost high quality electronic
        infrastructure will depend critically on the policies affecting telecom and internet
        services. While the overall Kyrgyz performance is adequate considering the level of
        development of the electronic infrastructure, in the future, which can increase the
        attraction of foreign investors such as the establishment of an independent regulator, to
        ensure the continuous development of the sector should be implemented.

The Kyrgyz Republic authorities need to incorporate services trade development among their
policy priorities. Services expertise and policy formulation needs to be enhanced. Lack of
expertise and knowledge of the complexities of services policy reforms, regulatory matters, and
enforcement are generally weak and require urgent attention. Finally, internationalization of
services through negotiations, need as well attention, today there is no clear understanding of
the implications of international commitments and technical assistance is required.

Services in the Kyrgyz Republic’s Domestic Economy

The service sector accounts for a large share in employment in the Kyrgyz Republic.41
Figure 1 shows that the employment share in services in the Kyrgyz Republic is around 45
percent in 2008 (earlier data on this variable for the Kyrgyz Republic is not available) up from a
36 percent in 2000. Figure 1 shows that this services employment share is much lower than
some of the comparators in South America, namely Paraguay and Bolivia but is in line with some
of the peer countries in the region. However, this share for the Kyrgyz Republic has been
increasing substantially over the nine years to the drawback of agriculture which has been
significantly decreasing over the years, and not to industry which actually more than doubled
over the years in terms of employment. Now, the services sector remains the largest source for
employment in the Kyrgyz Republic.




41 Comparator countries are chosen on the basis of two criteria. One is their income basket as defined by the World
Bank on January 2015. Since Kyrgyzstan is a lower middle income group is will compared with other countries within
and outside its region who fall in the same income category. Second, since Kyrgyzstan is a landlocked country, it will
also be compared with some countries who are also landlocked and who fall as well in the same income group.

                                                         60
                                                                 Figure 1: Employment Share by Sector (2000 & 2008)

                                                                     100

                                                                     90
                                                                                              32
                                                                                 38    36            37                  36
                                                                     80    44                                                                44
                                                                                                                   47          45    45
                                                                                                           51
                                                                                                                                                   55
                                                                     70
                                                   percent
                                                                     60                       15
                                                                                 9.8   10                                10
                                                                                                     14
                                                                     50                                                                      15
                                                                           20
                                                                                                                   19          21    21
                                                                     40                                    17
                                                                                                                                                   19

                                                                     30
                                                                                 52    53     53                         53
                                                                                                     49
                                                                     20    37
                                                                                                                                             41
                                                                                                           32      34          34    33
                                                                                                                                                   27
                                                                     10

                                                                      0
                                                                           BOL




                                                                                                                   BOL
                                                                                       KGZ




                                                                                                                               KGZ
                                                                                              MDA




                                                                                                           PRY




                                                                                                                                     MDA




                                                                                                                                                   PRY
                                                                                 GEO




                                                                                                                         GEO
                                                                                                     MNG




                                                                                                                                             MNG
                                                                                        2000                                    2008
                                                                                       Agriculture               Industry.                 Services



                                                                                                     Source: WDI




                                   Services share in GDP for the Kyrgyz Republic is according to what one could expect based
                                   on its level of development. Figure 2 helps to see whether countries have a value added share
                                   of services which is higher or lower than one could expect given their level of development (i.e.
                                   GDP per capita in PPP). The Kyrgyz Republic together with several of its peer countries such as
                                   Moldova, Uzbekistan, Armenia and Georgia (marked in maroon) and some Latin American peer
                                   countries (marked in yellow) are given in the graph. It shows that the Kyrgyz Republic’s services
                                   sector is exactly on this relationship’s prediction since it is placed on the fitted values line.
                                   However, the Kyrgyz Republic is also one of the least developed countries of all comparators. At
                                   the same time one can see that Moldova (another land-locked country) is tapping more services
                                   value added as part of its economy, and also Georgia is doing this successfully as they are placed
                                   above the line. For the Kyrgyz Republic this would mean that there is still some untapped
                                   potential to develop its services sector.

                                                 Figure 2: Services Value Added and Level of Development (2007-13)
                                                   100
Services value added as % of GDP




                                                         80




                                                                                                   MDA
                                                                                                      GEO
                                                         60




                                                                                                BOL PRY
                                                                                             KGZ
                                                                                                UZB MNG
                                                         40




                                                                                                    ARM
                                                         20
                                                             0




                                                                 6                            8                     10                                   12
                                                                                               log GDP per capita PPP



                                                                                                     Source: WDI




                                                                                                           61
          The Kyrgyz Republic’s share of services value added in 2007 was 49 percent and
          therefore gained somewhat more importance over the years up to 55 percent in 2013. In
          the intermediate years, the Kyrgyz Republic has also seen negative growth of services value
          added, namely in 2009 and 2010, but has since recovered.

          The Kyrgyz Republic value added creation compared to other sectors inside its economy
          compares favourably with respect to its peer countries. The increased potential for a greater
          services sector development is visible in Figure 3 and 4. Compared to these countries, the
          Kyrgyz Republic actually has a relatively average agricultural as well as industrial base with
          shares of 18 and 27 percent of GDP respectively. The Kyrgyz Republic has after Moldova and
          Georgia the third largest services sector in terms of value added within it group of peer
          countries. It shows a bigger services share than for instance Mongolia, Armenia as well as
          Paraguay and Bolivia.

          Together this suggests two potential developments. First, while the Kyrgyz Republic’s
          industrial base will most probably increase in the future its services sector could further grow if
          these manufacturing companies outsource services activities such as logistics and
          transportation which are often still performed in-house following a global trend. Indeed, the
          Kyrgyz Republic industry sector in terms of employment has been rapidly increasing over the
          last several years (Figure 1) which could lead to more effective employment opportunities in
          services once these industry firms concentrate on their core activities. Moreover, the growth in
          services value added in industry has been quite robust over the last 13 years when looking at
          Figure 4, as with most of the Kyrgyz Republic’s peer countries. Second, there is additional scope
          for services development through supporting these manufacturing activities. The Kyrgyz
          Republic’s average growth rate of services value added since 2000 is high together with those of
          Mongolia and Uzbekistan. As with these and most other countries which are placed in the same
          income basket, the Kyrgyz Republic’s growth in services value added has been quite impressive.
          Note, however, that the Kyrgyz Republic’s industry growth rate has been somewhat less steep
          compared to some of its peer countries such as Georgia and (again) Mongolia.

          Figure 3: Sectoral services value added and                                                       Source: WDI

          peers (2007)                                                                                         Figure 4: Sectoral services value added
             100
                                                                                                                        growth (2000-2013)
              90
                                                                                                              10




              80
                    47    49                                 50    50
                                        56                                                       55
              70
                                  67                 68
percent




              60
                                                                                                               8
                                                                          Value added % growth




              50

              40
                                                                                                               6




                    31
                                                                   28
                          38                                 33                                  26
              30                        27

                                                     17
                                  24
              20
                                                                                                               4




              10    22                                             22                            19
                                        18           15      16
                          13
                                  9.4
              0
                          BOL




                                        KGZ




                                                                   PRY



                                                                                                 UZB
                                                     MDA
                                  GEO




                                                             MNG
                    ARM




                                                                                                               2




                                              2013
                                                                                                               0




                          Agriculture            Industry.               Services                                   ARM   GEO      KGZ   MDA     MNG   PRY     UZB
                                                                                                                          Agriculture      Industry      Services




                                                                                                       62
The Kyrgyz Republic’s Services Exports Performance42

At an aggregate level of data, the Kyrgyz Republic’s exports performance is relatively high in
transport and travel services although the share of transport services has been declining in
recent years. The share of transport services, which is considered together with travel services a
so-called “traditional” service, has been steadily increasing. On the other hand some “modern”
services have been increasing in share as well, most notably financial services whereas the category
of other business services has remained stable. Modern services are those services that can
increasingly be traded across borders without the necessity of proximity between buyer and
supplier. These services have also shown the most dynamic growths rate in recent years across the
global economy.43


          Box 2: Many   different ways to trade in services


          Clarifying certain aspects of trade in services is helpful. Because many service transactions require
          face-to-face contact between the consumer and the provider (despite the increased scope for
          electronic delivery), defining “trade” in services more broadly than trade in goods to encompass
          the following four modes of supply is now standard:

             Cross-border trade in services, which is analogous to goods trade, involves shipping
              services such as software from one country to another (mode 1)
           Consumption abroad is when consumers (for example, tourists or students) travel
              across borders (mode 2)
           Commercial presence establishes the producer of a commercial presence (for example,
              a subsidiary or branch of a bank) in the country of the consumer (mode 3)
           Movement of natural persons is when the producer (for example, a mining engineer)
              travels across borders (mode 4)
          The modes of supply can either substitute or complement one another in specific services. For
          example, in simple bookkeeping services, modes 1 and 4 may be substitutes, but in the design of
          software suited to a foreign firm’s needs, the two modes may be complements. The relationship
          between modes has implications for the analysis of the impact of regulations on the costs and
          quality of the services. If modes are perfect substitutes, the liberalization of one of them is enough
          to fully reap the gains from liberalization. But when modes are imperfect substitutes or
          complements, effective access to service markets requires the freedom to use a combination of
          modes.
          One important implication of this broad definition of trade in services is that it incorporates the
          international movement of factors—through foreign direct investment (FDI) and temporary labor
          mobility.
          Source: Goswami, Mattoo, and Saez (2012)

The Kyrgyz Republic still shows a relatively high importance in travel and transport services
given its level of development. This is a feature that is more often observed in emerging countries

42 This section analysis is based on the balance of payments statistics. These statistics provide a limited picture of trade in
services transactions. More specifically, these statistics do not cover commercial presence transactions.
43 The classification between traditional and modern services is to a large extent arbitrary due to technology development

which increasingly is affecting services tradability and reducing the proximity burden. The purpose of this classification is
to illustrate international trends which do not have any negative connotation.

                                                             63
(Saez et al, 2014), but compared to other peer countries the Kyrgyz Republic has one of the highest
shares in travel services together with Georgia and Armenia in 2013. This is also true for travel
services in which the Kyrgyz Republic shows high shares although this share is higher for Mongolia
and, as said, declining. Together transport and travel account for more than 64 percent of cross-
border exports in the Kyrgyz Republic which is highest among its peers. For instance, in Mongolia
traditional services export account for 62 percent, and in Georgia this is 59 percent. In the Kyrgyz
Republic, Insurance services takes a share of 34.5 percent which is also higher than in most other
peer countries, apart from Armenia, as shown in Table 2.

               Table 2: Export Share of Disaggregated Services in OCS (2005-06 % 2012-13)

                                                  KGZ                 ARM               GEO               MDA               MNG
                                          05-06      12-13     05-06 12-13 05-06 12-13 05-06 12-13 05-06 12-13
Travel                                     37.6         48.0   53.5     42.7      33.5    56.4      22.4    19.5      44.6    37.7
Transport                                  22.2         16.3    2.4         4.4   1.2         2.5   7.6         8.8   2.8         25
Other business services                    18.4         18.2   21.2     16.2      45.1    32.8      38.5    36.8      45.9    29.2
Government                                 8.3          1.5     1.9         2.5   9.2         3.5   3.4         3.7   0.9         0.5
Insurance                                  6.1          4.5     2.2     19.7       0          0.3   1.7         0.4   0.1         3.5
Telecom, computer                           3           1.7    11.1         9.7   2.1         1.9   13.3    16.7      3.7         2.1
Financial                                  2.6          8.9     1.1         1.8   0.5         0.6   0.1         0.1    0          0
Intellectual property n.i.e.               0.9          0.5     0.7         0.6   2.4         0.5   0.7         0.4   1.6         1.5
Maintenance and repair                     0.6          0.3     0           0     1.3         0.1   0.3         0.5    0          0.2
Personal, cult, and recr                   0.2          0.1     2.1         1.8   1.5         0.7   0.1         0.1   0.3         0.2
Construction                                0            0      3.6         0.5   2.4         0.5   11.6    12.9       0          0.2
Manufacturing services                      0            0      0.1         0.2   0.7         0.1   0.1         0.1    0          0
                                                Source: IMF Balance of Payment Data



In the Kyrgyz Republic, the sub-sector other business services, which are part of modern
services, together with financial services and telecom have been growing in absolute value in
recent years but this have not substantially led to a strengthening of their revealed
comparative advantages. Table 3 looks at the most disaggregated sub-sector level of other
commercial services (OCS).44 Other business services which include, among others, professional
services have remained stable in the Kyrgyz Republic. Similarly, although the level of financial
services in value has been increasing, the Kyrgyz Republic’s share and revealed comparative
advantage have been declining, together with construction and telecoms. In fact, the Kyrgyz Republic
seem to have comparative advantages in only the so-called traditional services. These sectors also
show high figures in terms of market value growth. Other modern services sectors in which these
rates were high are finance and other business services.




44 The IMF Balance of Payments Statistics contemplates three broad categories: Transport, Travel and Other Commercial
Services. Under this last category, the BoPs includes financial services, communication services, construction services, ICT
related services, other business services, Royalties and licenses fees, and personal, cultural and recreational services. This
classification is different from the classification used below in the section on trade in value added.

                                                               64
   Table 3: Revealed Comparative Advantage, Value (mln USD) and Shares (2005-06 % 2012-13)

                                                                                                      05-06                        12-13          0506-1213
                                                                                               Value Share RCA Value Share RCA                      CAGR
              Travel                                                                           120     37.6        1.4     482      48     1.9      16.7
              Other business services                                                          70.9    22.2        1.1     163.5    16.3   0.7       9.7
              Transport                                                                        58.6    18.4        0.9     182.8    18.2    1       13.5
              Government goods and services n.i.e.                                             26.6    8.3         3.6     15.5     1.5    0.9      -5.8
              Construction                                                                     19.3    6.1         3.3     45.3     4.5    2.1       9.9
              Telecom, computer                                                                9.5         3       0.4     17.6     1.7    0.2        7
              Personal, cultural, and recreation                                               8.4     2.6         3.1     89.3     8.9    10.3      30
              Financial                                                                        2.9     0.9         0.1      5.1     0.5    0.1       6.5
              Intellectual property n.i.e.                                                     2.1     0.6         0.1      3       0.3    0.1       4.2
              Insurance                                                                        0.8     0.2         0.1      0.7     0.1     0        -2
              Manufacturing services                                                            0          0           0    0        0      0         -
              Maintenance and repair                                                            0          0           0    0        0      0         -
                                                                                   Source: IMF Balance of Payment Data




The Kyrgyz Republic’s services exports are higher than expected given its level of
development. Figure 5 plots this relationship by displaying on the horizontal axis GDP per capita in
PPP, i.e. level of development, for both periods 2005-07 (left) and 2011-13 (right) whereas the
Kyrgyz Republic’s and other countries’ relative services exports (in GDP) is shown on the vertical
axis for both respective periods. The Kyrgyz Republic is placed above the solid black predicted
values line which means that it is doing relatively better compared to some of the other countries
marked in the graph, notably Moldova, Georgia and Armenia which has more or less a similar level of
development. Hence, the relationship between the Kyrgyz Republic’s services trade and level of
development is actually stronger (overall) than its relationship between domestic value added and
development (Figure 2).

              Figure 5: Services Exports and Level of Development (2005-07 & 2011-13)
         50




                                                                                                           50
               Exports of Services as % of GDP 2011-2013
         40




                                                                                                           40
         30




                                                                                                           30
         20




                                                                                                           20




                                                                 KGZ MDA                                                           KGZ
                                                                       MNG                                                               MDA
                                                                                                                                         GEO
                                                                                                                                            ARM
         10




                                                                                                           10




                                                                     GEO
                                                                        ARM                                                                  MNG
                                                                       BOL
                                                                                                                                           BOL
                                                           LSO                                                              LSO
                                                                      PRY                                                                 PRY
          0




                                                                                                               0




               6                                                   8               10            12                6              8               10          12
                                                            log GDP per capita 2005-2007 PPP                               log GDP per capita 2011-2013 PPP




                                                                                                      65
                                                       Source: WDI

The Kyrgyz Republic’s exports are doing also well in the area of so-called modern services
such as telecoms and computer services in addition to performing also well in traditional
services such as transports and travel. Yet, the outperformance of modern services most likely
comes from the business services sector. Modern services are those services that can increasingly be
traded across borders without the necessity of proximity between buyer and supplier. Worldwide
these services have also shown the most dynamic growth rates in recent years. Examples of such
services include communication, banking, insurance, business-related services, remote access
services, transcribing medical records, call-centers, some educational services, etc. These services
differ significantly from traditional services or “personal” services which requires face-to-face
interaction.

The Kyrgyz Republic exploits the potential for modern services already pretty well. Figure 6
shows the relationship between the exports of both types of services and again the level of
development for the period 2011-13. In this graph modern services are proxied using the services
category Other Commercial Services (OCS) which covers Communications, Construction, Insurance,
Financial, Other Business Services (OBS), Computer and Information, Personal Recreation and
Cultural Services, and finally Royalties. The Kyrgyz Republic´s export structure appears to be more
successful in traditional services than in modern services and outperformed countries such as
Colombia and China. In addition, the right-hand panel also shows that modern services in the Kyrgyz
Republic have overall over-performed compared to other countries. However, modern services are
proxied by the OCS category which also include personal services such as education and
construction. These sectors could thus be responsible for the somewhat higher than expected
outcome in Figure 6 and could therefore be somewhat upward biased. On the other hand, when
taking ICT services only a similar better-than-expected picture emerges.

Box 3: the Kyrgyz Republic’s Services Sophistication and Factor Content of Trade

The Kyrgyz Republic’s services sophistication seems to have declined over the years whereas other peer
countries seemed to have remained stable or perhaps moved downwards as well in terms of export
sophistication. The Kyrgyz Republic still enjoyed a relatively sophisticated export basket compared to other
comparators such as Georgia and Armenia as displayed in Figure 1. Intuitively, measures of export sophistication
capture weather any given country’s exports basket consists primarily of services typically exported by high -
income economies, viewed as relatively sophisticated, or by low-income countries, seen as relatively less
sophisticated. Therefore Figure 1 illustrated the relationship between export sophistication and level of
development (GDP per capita in PPP) for the Kyrgyz Republic with several of its peer countries. It can be seen that
between 2005 and 2013 some of the peer countries have increased their level of sophistication, other have
declined, such as Paraguay, and again others have remained stable such as Georgia.

                         Figure 1: Export Sophistication and Development (2005 & 2012)




                                                           66
                                                                                    2005                                                                                      2012




                                                          3.5




                                                                                                                                                    3.5
                                                       3.25




                                                                                                                                                 3.25
  Services Sophistication




                                                                                     Services Sophistication
                                                                3




                                                                                                                                                          3
                                                                                                                                                                      KGZ MDA MNG
                                                                          KGZ MDA                                                                                       PRY ARM
                                                                                                                                                                       BOLGEO
                                                       2.75




                                                                                                                                                 2.75
                                                                             GEOPRY
                                                                                MNG
                                                                                ARM
                                                                             BOL
                                                          2.5




                                                                                                                                                    2.5
                                                                    6          8              10                                            12                6          8              10            12
                                                                            log GDP per capita PPP                                                                    log GDP per capita PPP



                                                                                   Source: IMF Balance of Payments, WDI

Some of the Kyrgyz Republic’s services that it exports are relatively high-skill intensive. This is illustrated in
Figure 2 where on the horizontal axis the level of services exports (in logs) is represented whilst on the vertical
axis a proxy for human capital intensity of a service is given. As in Figure 2, this proxy measures export
sophistication in terms of human capital: the higher its value the more the export basket consists of skilled services
typically exported by developed countries. Compared to Mongolia (one of the Kyrgyz Republic’s peer countries),
the Kyrgyz Republic compares well in terms of human capital services exports in Travel, Cultural and Recreational,
plus Construction services and also Telecoms as the values on the vertical axis are much higher. The dashed line (in
the left-hand panel) shows this revealed skill index in connection with what the Kyrgyz Republic is exporting in
these services in terms of sheer values. It seems that the Kyrgyz Republic could actually increase some of its
exports in all these sectors apart from travel services which shows highest export values and is place in the upper-
right corner of the pane.

                                                     Figure 2: Factor content of trade for the Kyrgyz Republic and Mongolia (2010)


                                                                                    KGZ                                                                                       MNG
                                                                                                                                                        15
                                                          20
                                                          15
                            Revealed human capital




                                                                                                               Revealed human capital




                                                                                                                                                        10
                                                          10




                                                                                                                                                          5
                                                              5
                                                              0




                                                                                                                                                          0




                                                                    0         2               4                                         6                     0          2               4            6
                                                                        Export value of service (BOP) log                                                         Export value of service (BOP) log




                                                                                   Source: IMF Balance of Payments, WDI




                                                                                                                                                        67
       20           Figure 6: Modern vs. Traditional Exports and Development (2011-13)




                                                                                                       20
                       Modern Services Exports as % of GDP


                                                                   GEO
       10




                                                                                                       10
                                                             KGZ


                                                                       ARM                                      KGZ
                                                                        MNG
                                                                                                                          ARM
                                                                     BOL
                                                                      PRY                                               MNG
                                                               LSO                                                    BOL
                                                                                                                  LSO  PRY
                                                                                                                     GEO
                                                                     UZB
        0




                                                                                                        0
            6                                                   8              10            12             6      8              10     12
                                                             log GDP per capita PPP                             log GDP per capita PPP




                                                                                            Source: WDI

The Kyrgyz Republic’s services sectors structure is relatively dispersed given its level of
development. Some of the richer countries do export a more equally distributed share of each
services sector such as Moldova and Armenia. Figure 7 shows the relationship between the level
of development and diversification for all countries worldwide. The Kyrgyz Republic’s peer
countries are highlighted, which are the comparators in the same regional income basked in sienna
and the comparators in the same land-locked category in yellow. One should also note, however, that
although developed countries have a more equally distributed export basket, they also export more
which is shown by the size of the circles.

                Figure 7: Diversification and Development and the Kyrgyz Republic (2009)
            2




                                                                                            MDA ARM
      1.5




                                                                            KGZ                BOLMNG
                                                                                              UZB
                                                                                               GEO
            1




                                                                                                 PRY

                                                                                      LSO
       .5




                                                                                       ZMB
            0




                6                                                                     8                     10                           12
                                                                                      GDP per capita PPP (log)




                                                                                                  68
                                         Source: World Bank Trade in Services Database; WDI

Poorer countries do seem to have somewhat lower entropy indexes overall, but this graph
shows that this varies significantly. For example, although Lesotho is only a little bit less
developed than the Kyrgyz Republic, the Kyrgyz Republic still shows a more diversified services
export basket, although one should bear in mind that export shares for modern services are across
these sectors still fairly low. On the whole however, the Kyrgyz Republic, is doing rather well given
its level of development, but from this picture one could see that there is more potential to increase
the sheer volume of trade relative to its level of diversification as for the Kyrgyz Republic its circle
remains fairly small. Even though it is doing much better in fact than Georgia, Paraguay or even
Mongolia in terms of diversification, these latter countries are more successful in exporting more
services as such. Hence, one can also infer from the graph that the Kyrgyz Republic’s amount of
services trade is rather small with respect these countries which are on a lower diversification
(vertical axis) level.

The Kyrgyz Republic’s main trading partners in services are Kazakhstan and Russia. Other
important trading partner are also situated in the region such as Uzbekistan and Tajikistan .45
Figure 8 graphically presents some of the most important existing markets for the Kyrgyz Republic
across the world, i.e. the intensive margin for the year 2002 and 2011 (later years were not available
in terms of bilateral services flows). One can see that actually both Kazakhstan and Russia have
gained huge importance for the Kyrgyz Republic’s services flows as well as Uzbekistan. At the same
time, the importance of the USA as a services export partner has declined over time. Also, whereas
some European countries were ranked as important trading partners for the Kyrgyz Republic in
2007, these countries have entirely disappeared in 2011. Instead, countries such as China, Turkey,
Hong-Kong and Lebanon have gained importance over the years. Note that when Kazakhstan and
Russia are taken together more than half of the services exports are going to these two destinations.

                Figure 8: the Kyrgyz Republic’s Intensive Margin of Trade (2005 & 2011)




45 The following analysis uses the Trade in Services Database developed by Francois and Pindyuk (2012). While the Trade
in Services Database should be seen as the best currently available approximation to a comprehensive picture of global
trade flows in services, we acknowledge that this is still only a partial picture of the world.

                                                           69
                                                         2005                                                        2011
                                .3




                                                                                               .3
                                .2




                                                                                               .2
Share in total export




                                                                  Share in total export
                                .1




                                                                                               .1
                                  0




                                                                                                0
                                       KAZ USA RUS UZB TUR POL DEU GBR CAN CHN                      KAZ RUS UZB USA HKG CHN TJK LBN ARE TUR




                                                                Source: World Bank Trade in Services Database

                        The Kyrgyz Republic seems to have added new and existing trading partner since 2005 up to
                        2011 in a gradual manner.46 When looking at one of the Kyrgyz Republic’s most important peer
                        countries, namely Mongolia, one sees that it has steadily gained and lost new existing trading
                        partner over time and has sometimes had some difficulties adding new services importers. Although
                        bilateral records flows for Mongolia are much scarcer one can see that jumps for adding new
                        markets were somewhat more pronounced. However, a lot less number of counted trading markets
                        are detectible for Mongolia. Note that these jumps for both countries may also be due to data issues
                        as explained in this footnote. Nonetheless, various reasons may lay ground to this difference in
                        development between the two countries. For instance, regulatory barriers or domestic enabling
                        factors such as domestic institutions or ICT infrastructure may contribute to the fact there is a
                        difference in performance between the Kyrgyz Republic and Mongolia. Lowering artificial trade
                        barriers helps adding new trade partners.

                                         Figure 9. The Kyrgyz Republic’s Extensive Margin of Trade (1994-2010)




                        46One must bear in mind, however, that much caution needs to be taken since the quality of bilateral trade relations are
                        not as detailed as for goods.

                                                                                          70
                         KGZ                                                     MNG
 200




                                                         25
                                                         20
 150




                                                         15
 100




                                                         10
   50




                                                          5
       0




                                                          0
           1994
           1995
           1996
           1997
           1998
           1999
           2000
           2001
           2002
           2003
           2004
           2005
           2006
           2007
           2008
           2009
           2010
           2011
           2012
           2013




                                                               1994
                                                               1995
                                                               1996
                                                               1997
                                                               1998
                                                               1999
                                                               2000
                                                               2001
                                                               2002
                                                               2003
                                                               2004
                                                               2005
                                                               2006
                                                               2007
                                                               2008
                                                               2009
                                                               2010
                                                               2011
                                                               2012
                                                               2013
                                              Retained                New


                                 Source: World Bank Trade in Services Database

Compared to some of the Kyrgyz Republic’s comparator countries, it has relatively many
markets to which it exports, but also has a high intensive margin of trade. Both types of
information of Figure 8 (i.e. intensive margin of trade) and 9 (i.e. extensive margin of trade) are
combined in Figure 10 and compared to Georgia and Armenia. Compared to these countries one can
see that the Kyrgyz Republic has a much higher amount of markets to which it exports, but also has a
higher volume of trade to which services are flowing. However, the ratio is rather catered towards
the vertical axis meaning that the intensive is rather more important for the Kyrgyz Republic than
the extensive margin, as with the other two comparator countries. Various reasons may be
responsible for this patterns. For one, it could be that the Kyrgyz Republic geographical situation,
encapsulated between other countries such as China and Kazakhstan and close by some other bigger
markets such as India and Russia, makes it that it exports to many other markets. Second, and
perhaps most importantly, the Kyrgyz Republic has a thriving tourist sector which attracts many
visitors around the world, which is likely to show up as export markets in the data. Note as well that
the road of reaching more markets and more exports is rather bumpy: whereas in one year these
margins may increase, a next year this can be set back for various reasons only to be followed by an
increase the year after. Over time, however, there is an upward relationship.




                                                     71
                                            Figure 9b: Intensive Margin and Extensive Margin (2005-2011)
                                                                                                                        2011
                                                                                                                        2009
                              .02                                                                                          2008



                                                                                                                       2007
                           .015



                                                                                                                       2010
Intensive margin




                                                 2006
                                                        2010
                                                        2008                                                    2006
                              .01




                                               2010
                                               2011     2007
                                                         2011
                                               2008
                                               2009
                           .005




                                               2007     2009

                                        2006          2012
                                               2012
                                    0




                                        0                        50                  100                        150                200
                                                                               Extensive margin

                                                                           KGZ           GEO          ARM



                                                                Source: World Bank Trade in Services Database


                   Box 2: The Kyrgyz Republic’s Potential with some of its Trading Partners

                   What markets can services providers target for future development? Is there still potential left to increase trade
                   with some partner countries? If yes, who are these partner countries with which exports are underperforming?
                   To help answer this question a gravity analysis has been performed using bilateral trade data in services to examine the
                   Kyrgyz Republic’s trade potential in services relative to its actual bilateral (observed) trade flows. 47 This procedures has
                   been done in two steps. In a first step we run two separate regressions: one with country-specific fixed effects to capture
                   all factors that influence trade for all countries which should also take care of the STRI measures (i.e. regulations in
                   services trade) that would otherwise be thrown in if we would have done the analysis without fixed effects so as to also
                   control for the trade inhibiting effects as a consequence of regulation in services; and one without country effects (and
                   without STRI).

                   Figure 1 plots for all partner countries around the world, including those of the Kyrgyz Republic, the predicted bilateral
                   trade relations for these two specifications. Predicted trade as obtained with the specification with country-specific
                   effects are depicted on the vertical axis; those without on the horizontal axis. Observations lying below the 45-degree line
                   show that the predicted levels from the specification with country-specific fixed effects are lower than the specification
                   with no country-specific fixed effects.48 This means that because the specification with fixed effects properly controls for
                   country-specific barriers to trade (including regulations) such a result would suggest that there exists barriers to trade at
                   the national level that are lowering a country’s trade potential. As many obs ervations for the Kyrgyz Republic lie below
                   the 45-degree line, this shows that for many countries with whom the Kyrgyz Republic has bilateral trade relations trade
                   potential exists but that these are currently low.

                   Thus, lower potential trade after properly controlling for any country-specific obstacles to trade suggests that these
                   barriers are limiting services trade for the Kyrgyz Republic as well as for other countries in the world. This could suggest
                   that high regulatory restrictions, regulatory heterogeneity or even low regulatory governance are dampening this trade
                   potential. Yet, since country-specific fixed effect also controls for all other factors besides regulatory barriers additional
                   “barriers” that otherwise have an effect on the level of services trade could also play a role. Example in this latter category

                   47 The gravity model has been extensively used in the international trade literature due to its intuitive empirical and
                   theoretical appeal. Anderson and van Wincoop (2003), Feenstra (2004), and Baldwin and Taglioni (2006), amongst others,
                   present exhaustive literature reviews on the gravity equation as applied in the empirical trade literature.
                   48 In the graph, Kyrgyzstan’s bilateral exports with other EU countries are in navy and are labelled according to their 3 -

                   digit ISO-country code. Partner countries situated in the region are given in sienna whereas partners lying East and South
                   East Asian region are given in green. Last, some other countries selected are given in yellow.

                                                                                    72
of factors are lower domestic institutions or a small high-skilled labour force. This will be discussed in the last section.


                             Figure 1: Predicted Trade Estimates with FE and without FE (2009-11)


                                                                  KGZ

                         13
                             8
                             3




                                                                        CHN
                                                                 FRA
                                                                GBR
                                                           DNKNLDITA
                                                            BELESP      RUS
                                                            AUT   UZB
                                                            SWE TUR
                                                     LUX IRL POL
                         -2




                                                           FIN
                                                         ROM
                                                       LVA
                                                        HUN
                                                      ESTCZE
                                                    CYP
                                                   GEO
                                                     ARM
                                                      HRV
                                                       SVK
                                                  MNGSVN
                         -7
                       -12




                                 -10         -5               0              5             10        15
                                             log of predicted services exports, NO FE (09-11)

     Source: Authors’ calculations using WDI; World Bank’s Trade in Services Database; World Bank’s STRI and CEPII

Hence, the gravity model suggests potential markets for growth on the whole as most likely some horizontal measures
plus most probably in addition various sector-specific regulatory costs barriers are inhibiting the Kyrgyz Republic from
reaping greater benefits so that the colored country dots are placed in Figure 1 above the 45 degree line. In a second step
we can now analyze whether the predictions by the model is truly the case for specific partner countries of the Kyrgyz
Republic. Although not all partner countries are included in our Trade in Services Database, the results of the gravity
model nonetheless indicates that the Kyrgyz Republic is over-trading with a number of countries such as (logically) China
and Russia, but also Turkey Mongolia and Armenia. On the other hand, however, the Kyrgyz Republic is under-
performing with several more advanced European countries such as Spain, Sweden and Denmark. Note that most of the
European countries with which the Kyrgyz Republic is over-trading are situated in Eastern Europe.

These outcomes are shown in Figure 2. It shows for the Kyrgyz Republic the actual and predicted bilateral export
relationship of which the latter relationship is given by the country-specific fixed effects gravity equation as used in the
previous diagram.49 The actual trade flows are given on the vertical axis whereas the predicted trade flows from the fixed
effect gravity equation are shown on the horizontal axis. This time, however, we must see the diagram as follows: if an
observation is lying above (below) the 45-degree line, the average observed export relationship in the period 2009-11 is
more (less) than what the gravity model predicts – on the basis of countries’ structural determinants and regulatory
barriers – and the Kyrgyz Republic is said to be over-trading (under-trading) with its these trading partners, including
those specifically marked in Figure 2 for countries close by, countries in Asia and South East Asia, and other developed
countries.

Therefore, Figure 2 shows there is scope to increase the role of services exports in total trade for the Kyrgyz Republic
with some of the emerging countries in Europe, but actually it is already over-trading with quite a number of its
important trading partners which are rather lying closer to home and having larger market sizes such as China and
Russia. Yet, most probably the take away of this analysis is that the Kyrgyz Republic although overtrading with many
countries (likely in its traditional trading sector) is still having difficulties entering markets which are more advanced. It
has the potential to increase its trade in services with these existing partner with whom its shares low export levels.
Trading with advanced countries can be beneficial for the Kyrgyz Republic as it provides opportunities to learning-by-
doing, i.e. exporting. Advanced countries often have know-how and technological or human capital knowledge that can
(in the case of reaching their markets) provide the supplier with spill-over effects, in this case for the Kyrgyz Republic.

49Bilateral trade between Russia and EU countries are given in blue whereas a selection of other countries with whom
Russia trades are given in red. Various East and South-East Asian countries such as Japan, China, Korea and Indonesia are
marked in yellow.

                                                                 73
                         Figure 2: Gravity Model of Trade in Services and Actual Exports (2009-11)
                                                               KGZ's Exports



                         13
                             8

                                                                 RUS
                                                                UZB     CHN
                             3


                                                              TUR
                                                                     FRA
                                                                    GBR
                                                       CYPLVA
                                                             LUX BEL NLD
                                                                    DNK
                                                                      ITA
                                                        CZE
                                                         HUN    SWE
                                                        EST        ESP
                                                                 AUT
                         -2




                                                   SVN
                                                   MNG GEO
                                                      HRVROM
                                                      ARM   POL
                                                            FIN
                                                              IRL
                                                    SVK
                         -7
                       -12




                                 -10         -5                 0              5              10        15
                                                  log of predicted services expots, FE(09-11)


           Source: Authors’ calculations using WDI; World Bank’s Trade in Services Database; World Bank’s STRI and CEPII




The Kyrgyz Republic is next to cross-border trade in Mode 1 also somewhat active in sales of
foreign affiliates in services in Mode 3. Yet, export flows through these channels remains
extremely modest. In services trade there are four modes of supply, namely (1) cross-border trade,
(2) consumption abroad, (3) sales of foreign affiliates, and finally (4) movement of supplier of which
its shares of trade on the whole are respectively, 25-30 percent, 10-15 percent, 55-60 percent, and
less than 5 percent. Although this is true on the whole when taking all services together, large
variances are observable for individual countries, i.e. not countries have a services trade pattern in
which Mode 3 is most important, and so Mode 1 will play a relatively more important role. This
feature is shown the Figure 10 which shows both exports for the Kyrgyz Republic and its peer
countries through Mode 1 (cross-border) and Mode 3 (foreign affiliate sales – FAS) for the most
recent year for which foreign affiliate sales is available in a cross-country setting.50 One can observe
that exports through Mode 3 of supply in the Kyrgyz Republic is extremely small compared to the
world figures described above. Other countries in the bar chart show a similar pattern to that of the
Kyrgyz Republic.

In addition, Figure 11 illustrates the relationship between the two channels of trade for all countries
worldwide in logs for which data is available. Note that for most other peer countries of the Kyrgyz
Republic placed in South America are also showing a services export pattern that is more

50 The data for foreign affiliate sales are obtained using data from Fukui and Lakatos (2012). Although the authors are
using a collection of data sources of foreign affiliate sales in goods and services, their actual data set covering more than
100 countries in the world is based on an econometric exercise. Therefore, the data cannot be used for any causal effect
inferences since this would result in obtaining similar coefficient estimates. Nonetheless, the data can be used for
descriptive and illustrative purposes as done in this section. Note that as with any data in services, numbers in this dataset
should be taken with care.

                                                                     74
concentrated toward cross-border trade (i.e. Mode 1). Russia, on the other hand, seems to have more
exports which is supplied through their foreign affiliates. The fact that for the Kyrgyz Republic Mode
1 is so important has most likely to do (again) with is comparative advantage in travel services and
transport services (which are contingent on each other).

    Figure 10: Per capita of foreign affiliates services and cross-border exports (2007) Figure 11:
                    Relationship between services exports through Mode 1 and 3
    250




                                                                                                                        Mode 1 and 3 exports




                                                                                                  12
    200




                                                                                                  10
                                               log(cross-border exports)
    150




                                                                                                   8
    100




                                                                                                   6
                                                                                                                 GEO    ARM
                                                                                                                KGZ                             RUS
                                                                                                                    MNG
                                                                                                                     PRY
      50




                                                                                                   4
                                                                                                                BOL
          0




                                                                                                   2
              ARM     BOL             GEO                                  KGZ         MNG
                    Sales foreign affiliates                                 Cross-border              -5         0                       5                 10   15
                                                                                                                      log(foregin affiliates sales services)



                                                                           Source: WDI and Fakui and Lakatos (2012)

In the Kyrgyz Republic, generating value added in services through services exports are likely
to be concentrated in Mode 1 for the near future in order to reap value added. This is visible in
Figure 12 which shows in the left-hand panel the relationship between the ratio of foreign affiliate
sales to cross-border supply of services (i.e. Mode 3 to 1) and whether the relative exports through
either mode has any significance to the extent that an economy generates value added from its
services sector. One can see that there is a quadratic relationship which means that first when
countries export more through their foreign affiliates they are more likely to generate a higher
extents of services value added. Yet, this relationship weakens when we look at countries’ export
pattern which are more and more dominated by Mode 3, i.e. shifting to the right on the horizontal
axis. It means that for some countries Mode 3 takes over the dominant vehicle for exports whilst the
marginal benefit in terms of value added becomes less over time. One potential explanation is that
these countries are not exporting enough modern services which is associated with reaping higher
value added gains. Many modern services are delivered through Mode 1, as outlined in Figure 6,
which can be supplied over the net, i.e. at cross-border level. It also shows that the Kyrgyz Republic
with most of its peer countries are situated at the left-side meaning that its exports are concentrated
though Mode 1. In the case of the Kyrgyz Republic is associated with lower than predicted value
added terms.

 Figure 12: Relationship between modes of supply and value added / ICT endowments in services.




                                                                                             75
         4.5




                                                                                              80
                                     Internet users per 100 people
               GEO




                                                                                              60
               4
                   KGZ
                     BOL
                   PRY




                                                                                              40
                        MNG
                        ARM
         3.5




                                                                                              20
                                                                                                   KGZ

                                                                                                     ARM
                                                                                                   PRY
                                                                                                     BOL
                                                                                                   GEO
               3




                                                                                               0
                    0           2         4          6           8                                   0          2         4          6           8
                         Ratio Mode 3 to Mode 1 per capita exports                                       Ratio Mode 3 to Mode 1 per capita exports




                                                                     Source: WDI and Fakui and Lakatos (2012)

The Kyrgyz Republic appears to have overall better per capita foreign affiliate sales
performance in Finance and Insurance although this remains yet extremely small. Some of
the Kyrgyz Republic’s peer countries have better performance in both distribution services through
Mode 3. As such the Kyrgyz Republic is laying behind as some other emerging countries such as
Russia are highly successful in supplying this services through Mode 3. Yet, from the previous
section it became clear that trade through Mode 1 can be an additional way of generating value
added, notably if modern services are modern services are exported through this mode. Looking at
Table 1 one can see that compared to its peer countries the relative importance of Mode 1 for
exports in financial services and insurance services are somewhat higher as they show relatively
higher value ratios. However, the Kyrgyz Republic’s share in both finance and insurance services
remain extremely low and it does not have any comparative advantage in either two.
  Table 3: Relationship per capita exports through Mode 3 and Mode 1 by sector (Mode 3 /
                                          Mode 1)

                          sector                                       KGZ       ARM          BOL         GEO        MNG         RUS
                          Financial                                    0.08       0.01        0.06        0.01        0.02      18.11
                          Insurance                                    0.03                   0.01        0.00        0.09       1.75
                          Trade                                        0.02                   2.36        2.96                  116.54
                          Construction                                 0.02       0.00        1.05        0.04        0.54      13.23
                          Public adm                                   0.01       0.00        0.07        0.00        0.18      188.20
                          Communication                                0.01       0.00        0.01        0.01        0.01      14.33
                          als                                          0.01       0.05        0.01        0.00        0.01       8.63
                          Business nec                                 0.01       0.00        0.05        0.00        0.03       0.10
                                                         Source: Trade in Services Database and Fakui and Lakatos (2012)




Valuing Services in Trade

Tables 5 and 6 provide a clearer picture of the services linkages in the Kyrgyz Republic’s
domestic economy and its exports structure. In other words, the tables allow comparing the
sectoral composition in the domestic economy and the contribution of its economy to exports


                                                                                         76
measured in terms of value-added.51 In both tables, the last column provides the structure of the
Kyrgyz Republic´s total domestic value added and exported value added, respectively in Table 5 and
6, including forward linkages; while the last row in each table provides information on the Kyrgyz
Republic’s total domestic value added and exported value added, respectively, including backward
linkages. For example, services share in the Kyrgyz Republic’s GDP, which include utilities, transport,
distribution, financial, and other business services, is 37.5 percent (last column fourth row). In this
measure both services direct value added are taken into account as well as the forward linkages that
services in the Kyrgyz Republic account for, i.e. bring into other sectors. This figure for the Kyrgyz
Republic is fairly low compared to some other countries such as Mongolia (although a bit lower),
Georgia and Armenia. In Mongolia the direct and forward linkages share in its economy represents
51.8 percent, that one in Georgia 66.9 percent, and in Armenia this figure is 60.4 percent. Trade and
tourism are the sectors which are the most important contributors to the Kyrgyz Republic’s total
value added supply.




51
  The linkages represent the interdependence of sectors of the economy. Industries with strong backward and forward linkages
play an important role in the development strategy of a country. A sector with strong backward linkages means that an increase
in the final demand of these industries’ output will have a large impact on industries that supply inputs in the production of
these industries’ output. On the other hand, a sector with strong forward linkages means that an increase in the final demand of
other industries’ output will have a large impact on that industry. Naturally, strong linkages to value added exports suggest an
important role in the export strategy as well. For example, when assessing the impact of specific policies, the likely impact on
other economic activities may vary depending on the importance of these linkages.


                                                              77
               Table 5: Services in the Domestic Economy for the Kyrgyz Republic (2011)




                                                                                                                                 Trade, Distribution, and hotels




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Other Consumer Services
                                                                                      Electricity, Gas, & Water




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Other Business Services




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Forward/Supply
                                                                                                                                                                               Communication
                                                           Manufacturing




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Other Services
                                                                                                                  Construction



                                                                                                                                                                   Transport




                                                                                                                                                                                                         Insurance
                                                                           Services
                                        Primary




                                                                                                                                                                                               Finance
                                                  Energy
Primary                                19.9 0.0            2.3             1.8        0.0 0.1 1.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0                                                                                                                                                0.6              24.0
Energy                                  5.0       7.7      5.2             7.5        0.5 0.9 1.6 0.9 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.3                                                                                                                                                3.2              25.5
Manufacturing                           0.3       0.2 10.9                 1.5        0.0 0.9 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0                                                                                                                                                0.3              13.0
Services                                1.3       0.4      1.6             34.3 0.4 3.9                                          ## 2.0 1.0 0.3 0.1 0.8 0.9 13.6                                                                                                                          37.5
Electricity, Gas, & Water               0.0       0.0      0.0             0.4        0.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0                                                                                                                                                0.0              0.4
Construction                            0.1       0.1      0.1             3.8        0.0 3.5 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0                                                                                                                                                0.1              4.2
Trade, Distribution, and hotels         0.8       0.1      0.9             11.3 0.0 0.2                                          ## 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0                                                                                                              0.4              13.1
Transport                               0.1       0.0      0.1             1.9        0.0 0.1 0.1 1.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0                                                                                                                                                0.1              2.2
Communication                           0.1       0.0      0.2             1.5        0.0 0.0 0.2 0.1 0.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1                                                                                                                                                0.2              1.7
Finance                                 0.2       0.0      0.1             0.4        0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.3 0.0 0.0 0.0                                                                                                                                                0.0              0.7
Insurance                               0.0       0.0      0.0             0.1        0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0                                                                                                                                                0.0              0.1
Other Business Services                 0.1       0.0      0.1             1.3        0.0 0.0 0.3 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.8 0.0                                                                                                                                                0.1              1.5
Other Consumer Services                 0.0       0.0      0.0             0.8        0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.8                                                                                                                                                0.0              0.8
Other Services                          0.0       0.0      0.0             12.7 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 12.6                                                                                                                                                                  12.8
Backward/ Demand                       26.6 8.4 19.9 45.1 0.9 5.7                                                                ## 3.0 1.1 0.3 0.1 0.9 1.2 17.7 100.0


                 Source: Authors’ calculations using World Bank Trade in Value Added Database; Francois et al. (2013)




                                                                                      78
    Box 2. Measuring Trade in Value-Added
    Exports (of both goods and services) can be measured as:
    Gross exports: The transaction value of a sector’s exports. This captures both the value-
    added embodied in the production of the export and all domestic and imported
    intermediate inputs. Gross measures of trade statistics are registered in customs or
    balance of payments, usually at the transaction value, that is, the price actually paid or
    payable for the goods and services.
    Direct value-added of exports: A sector’s domestic value-added embodied in its own
    exports, measured as gross exports less domestic and foreign inputs. This measure
    captures the true sector-specific, or the direct, value-added contribution of exports.
    Total value-added of exports: This measure adds to the direct value-added of exports the
    value-added of inputs produced domestically. It captures the indirect contribution through
    value chain linkages with other export activities, expressed in terms of forward or
    backward linkages. This is increasingly important in an environment where global
    production is fragmented across production sharing networks.
    Based on these definitions, the following terminology is used when speaking about
    contribution to exports:
    Forward linkages: The value-added when considering the contribution of that particular
    sector as an input to other sectors’ exports. This treats the particular sector as an
    upstream activity. In other words, forward linkages show how important particular
    service is as inputs to other export activities.
   Backward linkages: The value-added when considering the contribution of all other
    sectors to that particular sector’s exports. This treats the particular sector as a
    downstream activity. In other words, backward linkages show how important a service
    sector is for the demand of other sector’s value-added.
    Source: Saez et al. (2014).

Total backward services linkages contribute to 45.1 percent of GDP and is comparable with
most of its peer countries. But these linkages are mainly with other services activities and
represents around 34.3 percent, and is much less so with the primary and energy sector. (Table 4,
intersection between fourth column and fourth row). Among services activities, the biggest
backward linkages are in Trade and tourism services which is 11.3 percent and then Construction
services with 3.8 percent (apart from other services which are government or personal services).
In addition, Table 6 provides information regarding services in terms of value added performance in
the Kyrgyz Republic’s total exports. First, the contribution of services export to total exports is 16.9
percent. This means that services exports for final consumption remains fairly low compared to
most countries in the world. Other peer countries of the Kyrgyz Republic show a higher rate such as
16 (Mongolia), 35.5 (Georgia) and 28.9 (Armenia).

The real value added contribution of services to total exports does increase significantly
when the forward linkages to other export activities are considered. Overall, the share of
services value added exports in total exports 21.6 percent. This is mostly explained by the role of
services value added in exports manufacturing which represent the lion’s share of the total
contribution of service to the Kyrgyz Republic’s total value added exports, namely 3.3 percent. This

                                                  79
figure is quite low as most peer countries have services value added exported through the
Manufacturing sector (such as 16.3 in Georgia and 5.8 in Armenia). Mongolia has most services
exported through the Primary sector.


                     Table 6: Services in Total Exports for the Kyrgyz Republic (2011)




                                                                                                                                                  Trade, Distribution, and hotels
                                                                                                       Electricity, Gas, & Water




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Other Consumer Services
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Other Business Services




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Forward/Supply
                                                                                                                                                                                                Communication




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Other Services
                                                                            Manufacturing




                                                                                                                                   Construction


                                                                                                                                                                                    Transport




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Insurance
                                                        Primary




                                                                                            Services




                                                                                                                                                                                                                Finance
                                                                  Energy
 Pri ma ry                                             10.4 0.0             2.2             0.7 0.0 0.0 0.5 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 13.3
 Energy                                                 3.1 11.8 12.4 4.6 0.1 0.1 0.8 2.6 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.5 0.4 31.8
 Ma nufa cturi ng                                       0.2       0.4 32.4 0.4 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 33.4
 Servi ces                                              0.7       0.6       3.3 17.0 0.0 0.3 5.4 5.4 0.8 0.2 0.2 1.3 1.5 1.8 21.6
 El ectri ci ty, Ga s , & Wa ter                        0.0       0.0       0.0             0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0                                                                                                                                                                    0.1
 Cons truction                                          0.1       0.2       0.3             0.5 0.0 0.3 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0                                                                                                                                                                    0.9
 Tra de, Di s tri bution, a nd hotel s                  0.4       0.2       1.7             5.3 0.0 0.0 5.0 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1                                                                                                                                                                    7.7
 Tra ns port                                            0.1       0.0       0.3             4.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 4.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0                                                                                                                                                                    5.1
 Communi ca tion                                        0.0       0.1       0.4             1.2 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0                                                                                                                                                                    1.7
 Fi na nce                                              0.1       0.0       0.2             0.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0                                                                                                                                                                    0.6
 Ins ura nce                                            0.0       0.0       0.0             0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0                                                                                                                                                                    0.2
 Other Bus i nes s Servi ces                            0.0       0.0       0.3             1.6 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.2 0.0 0.0                                                                                                                                                                    2.0
 Other Cons umer Servi ces                              0.0       0.0       0.0             1.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.3 0.0                                                                                                                                                                    1.3
 Other Servi ces                                        0.0       0.0       0.1             1.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.7                                                                                                                                                                    1.9
 Ba ckwa rd/ Dema nd                                   14.4 12.8 50.2 22.6 0.1 0.4 6.7 8.2 0.9 0.2 0.2 1.5 2.0 2.3 100.0
                  Source: Authors’ calculations using World Bank Trade in Value Added Database; Francois et al. (2013)



The disaggregation of this share across the Kyrgyz Republic’s sectors confirms this patterns. On the
whole most of the services value added exported through manufacturing sectors goes through the
Food processing sector and Metal sector together with the Chemical sector. More specifically,
Transports, Finance and Other Business services are the main sectors linked to manufacturing
exports representing a share of respectively 44.1 percent, 12.4 percent and 27.9 percent
respectively of all services value added into manufacturing. Within the manufacturing sector it’s
mostly Chemical and Metal sector that carry forward services’ value added. In the both industries it’s
mainly Transport and Other Business services that are used as inputs and carried forward in terms
of value added. Finance is also an important services inputs which are carried forward in the exports
of the Metal industry.


                                                                           80
In the Kyrgyz Republic, value added creation is overall much more important for the
domestic market than for exports. This is a feature which is most present among its peer
countries, but the Kyrgyz Republic is lagging behind most other comparators. Table 7 summarizes
both Tables 5 and 6 by taking the direct and forward linkages together in the columns by sector for
the domestic as well as external markets (i.e. exports) and compares it to peer countries.52 The
Kyrgyz Republic shows that, after considering forward linkages, its services share of total domestic
value-added is higher than its services share of export value-added. Indeed, the exported value
added is extremely low compared to other countries apart from Bolivia: total exported value added
of services is only 19.6 percent. This low share is also reflected in the low domestic forward linkages.
One can see that actually in the Kyrgyz Republic the agricultural sector provides much more value
added compared to most other countries, and also its manufacturing sector shows high exported
value added shares.

In the Kyrgyz Republic, the relatively outward oriented services sectors in terms of value
added are Transport, Distribution (together with Tourism), and some Other Business
services. A common observation among developing / emerging countries is that sectors such as
Transport and Distribution (and Travel) contribute most to export value added. However, Table 6
shows that these sectoral shares in some instance remain extremely low compared to other
countries, namely 5.1 for Transport and 7.7 for Distribution (including Travel). On the other hand,
the Business services sector shows increasing shares of value added exports. Some other countries
however export more value added either directly or through forward linkages through other sectors
when it comes to Business services, such as in the case of Georgia (3.1), Russia (6.4) and Bolivia
(3.4). Note the high domestic value added production in Construction compared to other countries,
which is not translated in any exports.




52Note that the sector “other services” is dropped and therefore total figures adds up to a lower share as in the previous
table matrixes of Table 4 and 5.

                                                             81
                 Table 7: Total Value-added in all Sector of the Economy, percentages (2011)

                                     KGZ              ARM             GEO              MNG              RUS              BOL
sector                        Dom      Exp       Dom    Exp     Dom     Exp       Dom    Exp     Dom      Exp       Dom    Exp
Transport                      2.2         5.1   3.5    12.8    8.8     23.7      10.6   12.4     6.7         7.3   10         8
Finance                        0.7         0.6   0.9    0.7     1.8         0.7   3.9     3.3     1.8         2.9   2.3        0.8
Communications                 1.7         1.7   2.3    3.4     2.3         1.5   3.3     1.8      1          0.6   1.8        1.1
Water                          0.4         0.1   3.1    2.1     0.3         0.2   0.4     0.2      1          0.3   0.5        0.2
Construction                   4.2         0.9   28.3   4.3     4.4         0.3   4.4     0.6     9.7         2.2   3.8        0
Distribution                  13.1         7.7   9.4    5.6     15.7    17.1      8.8     4.4    21.6     13.8      10.4       9
Insurance                      0.1         0.2   0.5    1.1     0.4         0.5   0.6     0.4     0.4         0.3   1.3        0.8
Other business services        1.5         2     0.4    1.5     2.9         3.1   2.8     1.5      8          6.4   3.3        3.4
Other Cons services            0.8         1.3    0     0.1     3.4         2.2   1.1     0.3     0.5         0.1   0.6        0.1
Total services                24.7     19.6      48.6   31.6     40     49.3      35.9   24.8    50.8     33.9      34     23.4
Agriculture                   49.5     45.1      21.2   34.6    23.7    23.5      44.2   69.2    19.9     51.1      33.1       66
Manufacturing                  13      33.4      18.3   29.7    9.4     19.2       4      5.1    13.3     14.7      10.7       9
Other                         12.8         1.9   11.9   4.1     26.9        8.1   15.9    0.9     16          0.3   22.2       1.7
                 Source: Authors’ calculations using World Bank Exports in Value Added Database; Francois et al. (2013)




Hence, overall service exports forward linkages are relatively low in the Kyrgyz Republic.
This means that services are mainly a direct export activity to end consumer rather than an input
into other export activities. Table 5 shows that services forward linkages are about 19.6 percent of
total exports. This has important policy implications. First, this may mean that services are still
relatively expensive in for the Kyrgyz Republic’s manufacturing firms. Competitive services inputs
are essential for any economy as it means that low cost high quality services should be a priority for
any diversification and competitiveness strategy. Second, it also means that assessing and
understanding the Kyrgyz Republic’s constraints in services development is key to their
contribution to economic diversification and competitiveness in goods industries. This is something
that will be picked up in the sections below.

The Kyrgyz Republic indeed reveals to no strong specialization pattern of forward linkages in
any of its services sectors, although Transportation is close to 1. This picture largely confirms
the analysis as before. On the other hand, Transport services overall do have some strong forward
linkages but its backward linkages are even stronger. Note that Distribution (and hotels) have higher
backward linkages which is in line with the fact this sectors is exporting mainly directly for external
demand.




                                                                  82
             Figure 13: Revealed Comparative Advantage in forward and backward linkages




                      .08
                      .06
                      .04
                      .02
                            0




                                          distribution finance insurance obsict oconsumer
                                construction                                            oservices transport
                                                      RCA forward               RCA backward



                Source: Authors’ calculations using World Bank Trade in Value Added Database; Francois et al. (2013)




On the whole, services generate greater levels of value added. Figure 14 shows how the Kyrgyz
Republic compares with peer countries when breaking down gross and net measures of exports for
both Machinery and Business services.53 A sharp difference is visible across most countries in the
sense that the share of value added becomes more important for services than for goods. Whereas
gross value shares still add up a significant amount for goods industries, they become much less
important when looking at services for most of the other countries in the graph. The biggest
difference between the two measures are greatest for Armenia, which is also a smaller countries that
hand therefore a natural tendency to specialize in services. Next to the fact that for Business services
the value added creation based on direct and forward linkages for the Kyrgyz Republic is as sizable
as in Georgia, Armenia is able to capture greater value added in business services.




53We select Business services (i.e. “Other Private Services”) here since this sector makes up the most dynamic services
category in recent years. The first bar in each of the two graphs represents the shares of exports in gross terms for both
sectors as trade is measured most of the time. The second bar in each graph shows the shares of value added the two
sectors contribute in total value added exported.

                                                                  83
Figure 14: Gross and Direct Value-added Shares of Exports in Goods and Services (2011)


           .1
         .08
         .06
         .04
         .02
               0




                       ARM      BOL     GEO       KGZ     MNG           ARM      BOL     GEO       KGZ     MNG
                                     Machinery                                Other private services
                                            Gross exports                     Value added exports


                Source: Authors’ calculations using World Bank Trade in Value Added Database; Francois et al. (2013)




On average, the Kyrgyz Republic produces and captures directly as much value added in
services exports as some developed countries (excluding forward linkages). Figure 15 shows
the positive relationship between the significance of the share value added that is exported in goods
directly and the level of development, i.e. GDP per capita in PPP. This implies that most of the value
added in goods exported by developing countries comes from other sectors in the form of
intermediate inputs (such as assembling activities) and is not brought forward by these countries
themselves as most developing countries are situated below a ratio of 1. In contrast, richer countries
seem to export more direct value added produced within their own goods sector. The ratio for the
Kyrgyz Republic is around 0.7 for exports of machinery which is quite somewhat in line compared to
all other countries taken up in the sample.

In contrast, Figure 15 also shows that the positive relationship between value added and
development disappears completely if we look at the services sector, in particular to the Business
services sector, which means that the positive relationship is completely gone. The fitted values line
flattens pointing out that the significance of the exported value added in services is as important for
poor and richer countries. This significance of the value added share compared to the gross value
share is on average but higher than Paraguay or Mongolia for example. The Kyrgyz Republic does
appear to capture some direct value added through exports directly. It suggests that there is
potential in the Kyrgyz Republic for exports in terms of value-added both in the form of forward
linkages (see previous graph) and in direct exports. Yet, one should be careful that another reason
why this ratio is so high for the Kyrgyz Republic is that the gross exports of business services for
both countries is just very low. Nonetheless, it looks somewhat promising to look at the importance
of the value added exports of services in the Kyrgyz Republic.


                                                                84
                                Figure 15: Export Value-added / Gross Exports share and Development (2011)


                                                                                            Machinery                        Business services
                                                     2




                                                                                                                   3
                                                                                                             2.5
Value added share/Gross share




                                                                  Value added share/Gross share
                                               1.5




                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                  GEO
                                                     1




                                                                                                                           KGZ




                                                                                                             1.5
                                                                                                                                  ARM
                                                                                                                                   BOL
                                                              KGZ GEO
                                                                                                                                       PRY
                                               .5




                                                                      PRY




                                                                                                                   1
                                                                   ARM
                                                                    BOL
                                                                  ZMB                                                          MNG
                                                                    MNG

                                                                                                             .5
                                                     0




                                                         7      8        9       10       11                           7      8        9       10       11
                                                             log GDP per capita PPP (2011)                                 log GDP per capita PPP (2011)



                                            Source: Authors’ calculations using World Bank Trade in Value Added Database; Francois et al. (2013); and WDI




                                The role of services as inputs is overall relatively important for the lower middle income group of
                                countries in Central Asia to which the Kyrgyz Republic belongs.54 Figure 16 provides the share of
                                services in total exports (goods and services) for different income groups.55 The general direct
                                value-added of services in total trade varies across different lower middle income groups from
                                different geographical areas and the countries belonging to the high income group. The total
                                category, which sums up together the direct value added of services plus their indirect value added
                                when they are exported as inputs through other sectors, is more or less similar across lower middle
                                income groups, but the Central Asian region has the lowest blue bar. There are differences in terms
                                of linkages between various regional income groups. Latin American countries in the lower income
                                country basket is capturing relatively more value added through indirect exported forward linkages,
                                whereas in European lower middle income countries the direct share is more important. For the
                                Central Asian region, forward linkages are relatively important as measured by the difference
                                between the blue and orange bar.

                                Amongst the Kyrgyz Republic’s peer country group there are some countries for which the
                                direct exports still count more importantly for overall value added rather than forward


                                54 The data refers to 2011.
                                55 There are three measures of this share. First, the gross value (or as reported in the balance of payment statistics) which
                                is indicated as “Gross”, second, the direct measure of services measured in terms of value added represented as “Direct”,
                                and finally the total contribution of services measured in terms of value added. This last measure includes the direct
                                contribution of service sectors to total exports measured in terms of their value added content, as well as their indirect
                                contribution as measured by sectoral forward linkages to other export activities. This considers that services are inputs to
                                other exports of goods and services and shows which sectors contribute to the value added to final exports.

                                                                                                        85
linkage, as with the Kyrgyz Republic itself. When forward linkages are included together with the
direct measure of value-added exports the share percentages for each income group does not differ
much as previously said. However, when looking at individual countries the gap between this direct
measure and the total direct measure when forward linkages are included is greatest for Bolivia and
Mongolia. Hence, forward linkages play a relatively important role on average in these countries.
However, this is not true for some other countries in the region, including the Kyrgyz Republic. The
gap between the direct and total percentage of total trade is opposite: direct value-added exported
for abroad is more important. Moreover total exported value added for the Kyrgyz Republic is also
fairly low compared to all other peer countries (except in the case of Bolivia).



          Figure 16: Share of Services Exports in Total Exports; Gross, Direct and Total (2011)
    50




                                                                  50
    45




                                                                  45
    40




                                                                  40
    35




                                                                  35
    30




                                                                  30
    25




                                                                  25
    20




                                                                  20
    15




                                                                  15
    10




                                                                  10
      5




                                                                      5
      0




                                                                      0




            High Income LMC Asia LMC Europe LMC LAC                         ARM       BOL       GEO       KGZ         MNG

                   Gross              Direct             Total                    Gross              Direct             Total



               Source: Authors’ calculations using World Bank Trade in Value Added Database; Francois et al. (2013)

The total exported value added are barely becoming more important over time for the Kyrgyz
Republic. Figure 17 shows the ratio of the direct value-added exports share including forward
linkages against the share of gross exports where a value greater than 1 indicates that total value-
added exports are larger than gross exports. The fact that services exports in value added terms tend
to be greater than gross exports is something that was shown in Figure 15 (in the case of Business
services), but this may differ as well within income groups and across points in time. In Figure 17,
the Kyrgyz Republic is a country where forward linkages for all services together played a relatively
minor role compared to other countries and this patterns has not been changing much in recent
years. The Kyrgyz Republic’s position is not increasing indicating a lack of dynamism. It shows that
backward linkages take up a relatively more important position in services. The same value for the
manufacturing sectors is below one signifying that this sector uses inputs from other sectors of the
economy or imports them from other countries. Thus, generally it would be expected to have
stronger backward linkages than forward linkages in Manufacturing for these countries. In the


                                                                 86
Kyrgyz Republic, it seems that forward linkages play a relatively more important role in
manufacturing.


Figure 17: Ratio of Total Value-added Exports, including Forward Linkages, to Gross Exports (2011)


                                                                       Services                                                 Manufacturing
                                               7.5
                                           exports




                                                                                                            5
              value added in exports/gross




                                                                                                            4
                                   5




                                                                                                            3
                                                                                                            2
                     2.5




                                                                                                            1
        Total
        0




                                                                                                            0

                                              1995              2000            2005           2010             1995          2000            2005          2010
                                                                         Year                                                          Year

                                                                                       KGZ                 GEO                  ARM
                                                                                       MNG                 BOL                  MDA


                                                     Source: Authors’ calculations using World Bank Trade in Value Added Database; Francois et al. (2013)




When teasing out forward linkages, it becomes clear that in the Kyrgyz Republic does not
have many sectors in which forward linkages play an important role. Indeed, this pattern is
somewhat surprising in the sense the Kyrgyz Republic’s peer countries show at least some forward
linkages in a particular services sector. Figure 17 shows the compositional nature of the value-added
of services by taking the share of services exports in total exports for nine sub-sectors and compares
that with the selection of comparators for the Kyrgyz Republic. For some selected peer countries
such as Mongolia and Georgia the Distribution and tourism sector show that have an important
component in terms of exported forward linkages. But in the case of the Kyrgyz Republic this figure,
together with the figure for Transportation, remain stable when looking at the bar of total exported
value added in services. In part, this is probably mainly due to the low development of the Kyrgyz
Republic’s industrial sector (see Figure 1), which therefore does not allow for a specialization
pattern in these input services. On the other hand, as said, Business services together with Finance
are channelling as forward linkages but this remains extremely small.56 Also, although some
industrial sectors are in dynamic development over the last years (see Figure 1), the services sectors


56Note that Table 6 shows figures for total value-added where direct value-added and forward linkages are added up
whilst in Figure 18 these total value-added is split up into direct and forward linkages, i.e. the difference between total
value-added and direct value-added illustrates forward linkages.

                                                                                                      87
has not caught up with this process which hence may reflect that the Kyrgyz Republic’s market is
still not matured in the sense of a fully competitive markets. The last section will find out more about
this.

                  Figure 18: Share of Gross, Direct and Forward Linkages Sector (2011)
  50
  40
  30
  20
  10
    0




             Gr    Di Tot         Gr     Di Tot          Gr     Di Tot          Gr     Di Tot          Gr    Di Tot
                  KGZ                  MNG                    GEO                    ARM                    RUS
                      Transport                            Finance                              Communications
                      Water & utilities                    Construction                         Distribution & trade
                      Insurance                            Other business                       Other commercial


             Source: Authors’ calculations using World Bank Trade in Value Added Database; Francois et al. (2013)




In the Kyrgyz Republic forward linkages play a comparatively larger role in Construction,
Communication and somewhat in financial services compared to other services as shown in
Figure 19. Countries which are shown below the 45 degree line means that forward linkages are
more important in this sector, if a country is placed above the line it means that backward linkages
are more important. For the Kyrgyz Republic, particularly not many services have a clear forward
linkage patterns but Construction, Communication and somewhat Finance show somewhat more
forward linkages. Other peer countries show as well that in some instance they are clustered around
the 45 degree line. In other instance one can see several countries clearly catered toward the
horizontal axis such as for Distribution services which means that in these countries forward
linkages are important.




                                                              88
                    Figure 19: Backward versus Forward Linkages in Exports of Services (2011)


                                    Transport services                                                                  Financial services




                                                                                                        15
                    40
Backward linkages




                                                           Backward linkages




                                                                                                        10
                                                       GEO
                    20




                                       ARM
                                       MNG




                                                                                                         5
                                RUS
                                 BOL
                              PRY
                               ZMB                                                                           ARM
                                                                                                             GEO  RUS
                                                                                                             BOL PRY
                                                                                                                   MNG ZMB
                     0




                                                                                                         0
                          0                       20                                         40              0             5              10        15
                                         Forward linkages                                                                  Forward linkages

                                 Communication services                                                                  Water services
                    10




                                                                                                         1
Backward linkages




                                                           Backward linkages
                     5




                                         ARM

                            GEO
                           BOLMNG                                                                                  GEO RUS
                          RUS
                            PRY
                          ZMB                                                                                     MNG
                                                                                                                  BOL
                                                                                                                 PRY                ZMB
                     0




                                                                                                         0




                          0                            5                                          10         0                                      1
                                         Forward linkages                                                                  Forward linkages




                                  Construction services                                                             Distribution services
                                                                                                        25
                     6
Backward linkages




                                                           Backward linkages




                                                                                                        20
                     4




                                                                                                        15




                                                                                   ARM
                                                                                                        10
                     2




                                         RUS                                                                       ARM
                                                                                                         5




                                                                                                                          PRY
                          GEO
                         ZMB
                         BOLMNG PRY                                                                               MNG BOL   RUS GEO
                     0




                                                                                                         0




                          0               2                                        4              6          0      5          10    15        20   25
                                         Forward linkages                                                                  Forward linkages

                                   Insurance services                                                             Other business services
                                                                                                        30
                     5
Backward linkages




                                                           Backward linkages
                     4




                                                                                                        20
                     3
                     2




                                   ARM
                                                                                                        10




                                 BOL
                               GEO
                     1




                                PRY                                                                          ARM   RUS
                              RUS
                               ZMB                                                                            PRY
                                                                                                               GEO
                              MNG                                                                            MNG
                                                                                                               BOL
                                                                                                             ZMB
                     0




                                                                                                         0




                          0        1          2                                3         4        5          0            10              20        30
                                         Forward linkages                                                                  Forward linkages


                     Source: Authors’ calculations using World Bank Trade in Value Added Database; Francois et al. (2013)


                                                                                                   89
                                      The fact that the Kyrgyz Republic shows very low forward linkages in services value added
                                      exports is even more surprising in lights of its level of development. Based on the Kyrgyz
                                      Republic’s GDP per capita PPP level one would expect a higher involvement in value added trade,
                                      although it’s doing relatively fine regarding the gross and direct value of exports in services. As for
                                      lack of forward linkages, it is a pattern that we see with some of the other peer countries of the
                                      Kyrgyz Republic as indicated in green in Figure 20, but the Kyrgyz Republic is lagging behind. As
                                      previously stated, this discrepancy between the direct added value added and forward linkages are
                                      become more pronounced in the extreme right-hand panel where most of the comparators move up
                                      significantly in the graph whilst the Kyrgyz Republic is laying behind far below the fitted values line.



                                                      Figure 20: Share of Services Exports in Total Exports and Development (2011)
                                            100




                                                                                                                  100




                                                                                                                                                       100
Direct value added services exports




                                                            Total value added services exports
                                              80




                                                                                                                    80




                                                                                                                                                         80
                                                                                                                                                                     ZMB
                                              60




                                                                                                                    60




                                                                                                                                                         60               GEO
                                                                                                                                     GEO
                                              40




                                                                                                                    40




                                                                                                                                                         40


                                                                                                                                      ARM                                        RUS
                                                                                                 GEO                                                                       ARM
                                                                                                 ARM                                                                       PRY
                                                                                                                                                                           MNG
                                                                                                                                                                          BOL
                                                                                                                                KGZ
                                                            KGZ MNG
                                              20




                                                                                                                    20




                                                                                                                                                         20




                                                                                                                                            RUS                      KGZ
                                                                                                                                ZMB MNG
                                                                                                       RUS
                                                                PRY                                                               BOL
                                                                                                                                    PRY
                                                              BOL
                                                            ZMB
                                                  0




                                                                                                                        0




                                                                                                                                                             0




                                                      6                   8                            10    12             6    8          10    12             6    8          10    12

                                                       GDP per capita PPP                                                   GDP per capita PPP                   GDP per capita PPP

                                                           Source: Authors’ calculations using World Bank Trade in Value Added Database; Francois et al. (2013)




                                      Services Diagnostics

                                      Overall, the regulatory restrictions in the services sector in the Kyrgyz Republic compares
                                      relatively favorably when looking at other countries of similar income level or value added in
                                      services. The empirical services trade literature finds that next to domestic regulatory barriers that
                                      have an impact on the extent a country imports services, these domestic regulatory barriers
                                      (discriminatory or non-discriminatory) also have an effect on the level of a country exports (Saez et
                                      al., 2015; Nordas and Rouzet, 2015). This is most likely due to the fact that the regulatory measures
                                      are also reflecting the general state of competitive forces domestically affecting therefore in addition

                                                                                                                                90
exporting firms in services. Some of the regulatory barriers are even in effect non-discriminatory
applying across the board. In addition, trade liberalization may also induce domestic firms to
become more efficient because of supplementary competitive forces. Last, services firms themselves
use many services from other sectors as inputs in their own production process.

As can be seen in the left-hand panel of Figure 22, where the STRI index is illustrated on the vertical
axis and GDP per capita (in PPP) is depicted on the horizontal axis, the Kyrgyz Republic appears to
have STRI restrictions that are lower with what one could expect based on its level of development.
This is similar to all other peer countries such as Armenia and Georgia, which are marked in sienna.
Other direct comparators such as Uzbekistan, Lesotho and Zambia have somewhat higher
restrictions in place but are still situated below the fitted values line in this figure. Overall there is
also a negative correlation to be found with respect to the level of development and (even much
steeper) with value-added addition of services themselves (right-hand panel) and the STRI index. In
other words, richer countries such as the OECD countries do tend to have lower STRI restrictions.

            Figure 22: STRI and Development & Value added in Services as part of GDP (2013)


                    STRI and Development                                          STRI and Services Value-Added
       80




                                                                        80
       60




                                                                        60
                                STRI (Overall)
       40




                                                                        40




                            LSO
                                UZB                                                          UZB
                              ZMB                                                             ZMB
       20




                                                                        20




                           KGZ                                                             KGZ
                              MNG PRY                                                  MNG PRY
                                 BOL                                                       BOL
                                  ARM
                                GEO                                                       ARM GEO
        0




                                                                         0




              6     7       8            9       10      11                  20        40      60      80

                        ln(GDP per cap PPP)                                             Services VA/GDP

                                                      Source: World Bank STRI; WDI

The Kyrgyz Republic has still relatively high restrictions in Transportation services across all
modes of supply, specifically in Air Transport and Rail Freight transport. Also, most
Professional services such as Auditing in particular are to some extent still regulated




                                                                  91
although to a much lesser extent.57 The high restrictions of Transportation services follows a
pattern which is more common amongst most countries in the world. The Kyrgyz Republic has
relatively few restrictions left in financial services, but more restrictions are to be found in
Insurance services. In addition, Telecommunications are completely liberalized. When looking
across Modes, one can see in Table 7 that both Mode 1 and Mode 4 (in particular the latter) are the
channels through which services are still quite restricted. Mode 3 is rather liberal for most services,
apart from Transportation and some measures are still left in Mode 3 for Auditing services. Mode 4
trade is very much protected in Professional services.


                   Table 7: STRI restrictions by sector across modes for the Kyrgyz Republic
                                                                                          Mode Mode Mode
                      the Kyrgyz Republic                                          Overall
                                                                                            1    3   4
                          Overall                                                    15.2 21.29 8.95  50
                          Financial                                                    8.4   3.23   6.46
                                   Banking                                              0      0      0
                                           Lending by banks                             0      0      0
                                           Acceptance of deposits by banks              0      0      0
                                   Insurance                                         21.7    8.33 16.67
                                           Automobile Insurance                      22.5      0     25
                                           Life Insurance                            22.5      0     25
                                           Reinsurance                                 20     25      0
                          Telecommunications                                            0             0
                                   Fixed-line telecommunications                        0             0
                                   Mobile telecommunications                            0             0
                          Retail                                                        0             0
                          Transportation                                             45.7     75 40.91
                                   Air Passenger Domestic                                            50
                                   Air Passenger International                       67.5     75     50
                                   Road Freight Domestic                                0             0
                                   Rail Freight Domestic                              100           100
                          Professional                                                 28 33.33       5       50
                                   Accounting and Auditing                             35     50    12.5      50
                                           Accounting                                  20      0      0       50
                                           Auditing                                    50    100     25       50
                                   Legal                                             23.3      0      0       50
                                           Legal Advice Foreign Law                    20      0      0       50
                                           Legal Advice Domestic Law                   25             0       50
                                           Legal Representation in Court               25             0       50
                                                         Source: World Bank STRI




57   The professional services indicator refers exclusively to legal and accountancy and auditing services.

                                                                   92
The high restrictions of Transportation services follows a pattern which is more common
amongst worldwide and the Kyrgyz Republic’s peer countries such as Kazakhstan and
Mongolia, particularly in the case of Mode 1. Going deeper by looking at the various modes of
supply, this can be seen in Figure 23. In the case of Insurance services cross-border transactions are
most of the time very much restricted for most of the Kyrgyz Republic’s partner countries when
measuring with the World Bank’s STRI index. It which signifies that these markets are still relatively
closed for this type of trade. Most of the other peer countries also still have some restrictions in
place for Transportation. For Finance and Insurance the Kyrgyz Republic does not hold major
restrictions for Mode 1 trade. As for Mode 3, the Kyrgyz Republic is most protected in
Transportation services compared to its peer countries. On the other hand, Professional services
through Mode 3 holds only some more restricted regulatory barriers in place which means that it is
relatively easy for foreign providers to establish foreign affiliates in the Kyrgyz Republic for selling
their services. Note that the Kyrgyz Republic has no restrictions in place in both Modes for Telecoms,
unlike Uzbekistan.

             Figure 23: STRI and Development & Value added in Services as part of GDP (2013)
       100




                                                                                                    50
         80




                                                                                                    40
                                   Mode 3 services restrictions
         60




                                                                                                    30
         40




                                                                                                    20
         20




                                                                                                    10
             0




                                                                                                     0




                 ARM      BOL      GEO                               KGZ      MNG     UZB                ARM      BOL      GEO      KGZ      MNG     UZB

                       Financial                                  Insurance         Telecom                    Financial         Insurance         Telecom
                       Retail                                     Transport         Professional               Retail            Transport         Professional




                                                                                    Source: World Bank STRI

Empirical studies have shown that there are strong links between FDI (which stands as a proxy for
trade in Mode 3) and cross-border trade in services. In addition, one other conclusion in the trade
literature is that outward FDI and services exports are complementary as well as the fact that there
is complementarity between cross-border trade and direct investment services trade. These findings
are policy relevant since a large proportion of services trade is facilitated through foreign affiliates.
The importance of this complementarity between cross-border trade and direct investment for the
Kyrgyz Republic is illustrated in Figure 24. Both figures show that there is a negative relationship




                                                                                               93
restrictiveness and the share of services exports to GDP.58 For the overall regulatory structure the
panel shows that the Kyrgyz Republic is placed well above the fitted value line having therefore an
very favorable position, which means that there is still not much room left for improvement through
policy regarding finance or and services policy overall.

In services the governance structures are of major importance in order to keep services
markets competitive once liberalization of services trade are implemented. This is because of
market failures from which many services are suffering from. In other words, although markets in
countries can be opened up so that foreign entry is possible, this may not be enough and so
additional regulatory measures correcting for market imperfections are still necessary in order to
increase competition in the services market. Figure 24 depicts a negative relationship between
restrictiveness and regulatory quality across countries. This means that the lower the overall level of
restrictiveness of services trade policies (i.e. lifting discriminatory barriers for foreign services
providers) or restrictions specifically for direct investment in services (right-hand panel) the higher
the regulatory quality of governments. In other words, governments with good regulatory policies in
place are the facilitators of well-functioning and competitive services markets. In terms of policy
recommendations this means that addressing trade restrictiveness is necessary but not a sufficient
condition for increasing competitiveness: there is a complementary role for domestic institutions
that assist in creating competitive markets.

While the Kyrgyz Republic has overall relatively low services trade barriers, its regulatory
governance structures are still laying behind compared many other countries which share an equal
level of STRI with the Kyrgyz Republic. Hence, there is still much room for improvement to steer the
overall deregulation of services policies.59

             Figure 24: Relationship between Mode 3 Restrictions and Mode 1 Trade (2012)




58 The horizontal axis shows the World Bank’s STRI index for direct investment in Telecommunications (left -hand panel)
and in Financial services (right-hand panel) as Russia still shows higher levels of restrictions in direct investment for these
sectors. On both panels the vertical axis depicts services trade (in logs) for cross-border trade and consumption abroad.
59 This is also consistent with the findings of UNCTAD (2013, p.12) which among the findings highlights the lack of legal

consistency and certainty and inadequacies in the quality of legal reforms as important constraints.

                                                              94
                                .2




                                                                                                                                  .2
                                         KGZ
                                                                                                                                           KGZ




                                                    Services exports (Mode 1)/ GDP
                                     MNG
                                       ARM                                                                                             MNG
                                                                                                                                         ARM
                                .1




                                                                                                                                  .1
                                          BOL                                                                                                    BOL
                                            PRY                                                                                                         PRY
                                 0




                                                                                                                                   0
                                     0         20                               40        60      80                       100             0      20        40        60      80    100
                                                                            STRI Overall (Mode 3)                                                       STRI Finance (Mode 3)




                                                                                        Source: World Bank STRI; Trade in Services Database; WDI

                                                                                      Figure 25: STRI and Regulatory Quality (2013)
                                 5




                                                                                                                                  5
                                 4




                                                                                                                                  4
Regulatory quality




                                                                                                 Regulatory quality




                                           GEO                                                                                                 GEO
                                 3




                                                                                                                                  3




                                           ARM                                                                                             ARM

                                               MNG                                                                                         MNG
                                                                                     RUS                                                                         RUS
                                 2




                                                                                                                                  2




                                          KGZ                                                                                          KGZ
                                 1




                                                                                                                                  1




                                                                                UZB                                                                    UZB

                                     0         20                                       40           60               80               0         20        40        60      80    100
                                                                                      STRI (Overall)                                                   STRI (Finance Mode 3)



                                                                                             Source: World Bank STRI; World Bank Governance Indicators




                     The importance of the rule of law and the quality of the human capital is related to the type of
                     services an economy like the Kyrgyz Republic is capable to export. Generally, there are complex
                     and less complex services to be exported, which are to some degree correlated to the extent that
                     these services require strong and a good quality of human capital skills in their production. But

                                                                                                                             95
these complex services also require another type of factors, namely strong domestic institutions, or
rule of law. Services which are more complex generally are also more sophisticated and retain a
higher value-added. The reason for their complexity is the many different undefined (i.e. intangible)
features are included in their production process that depends on contracts. To exploit production
and consequently trade of these services to an optimal level, one needs to have a strong rule of law
to enforce contracts, next to a good quality of human capital.

Figure 26 shows that there is a positive relationship at the high-end of a country’s quality of human
capital and domestic institutions (in the form of rule of law), which appears to increase in a
disproportionate manner the more we move up along the horizontal axis.60 On the horizontal axis in
the left-hand panel there is the quality of education measured by the World Economic forum, which
explicitly takes into account the quality level of the labour skilled supply. The Kyrgyz Republic is
situated below the average fitted values line meaning that it performs in the competitiveness of
complex services relatively lower than expected when looking at its level of quality of its human
capital and the rule of law. Note that the relationship between complex services in connection with
the quality of the human capital is stronger than that one of the rule of law. Nonetheless, empirical
research have found out that both matter in economic transactions in services.



                             Figure 26: Complexity of Services and Rule of Law (2010)
         .3




                                                                                                        .3
                                   Share complex services (% total)
         .2




                                                                                                        .2
         .1




                                                                                                        .1




                             RUS                                                                                                   RUS
                                                                        MNG
                                                                        ARM                                                    MNG
                                                                                                                                 ARM
                                                                         MDA
                                                                          GEO                                                   MDA
                                                                                                                              GEO
          0




                                                                                                         0




                  KGZ                                                                                                        KGZ
              0         20                              40          60                  80       100         -2         -1             0            1   2
                                                         Rule of law                                                         Quality of Education




                                                                      Source: WEF; Trade in Services Database; World Bank Governance Indicators



60The horizontal axis shows the index of Rule of Law taken from the World Bank’s governance indicators. The vertical axis
shows the share of trade in those services sectors which are considered as complex, namely Professional services such as
accounting and legal services, plus Finance and Insurance services. This measure is based on Costinot’s (2007)
calculations.

                                                                                                   96
The Kyrgyz Republic’s services trade performance as part of its economy is much too low
given what one could expect based on its level of human capital endowments and ICT
performance. In the services literature there is evidence that a number of services sectors are
significantly more skill intensive than some goods industries (Nusbaumer, 1987; Gibbs, 1986;
Jensen, 2008; van der Marel, 2012) which is reflected in trade patterns. Examples include so-called
modern services such as Computer and Related services or Other Business services. These services
are mostly ICT intensive and can be unbundled, disembodied, or splintered in the value chain just
like goods (Ghani et al., 2011). Endowments of human capital can therefore be a critical determinant
of export of (modern) services and consequently economic output.

Figure 27 documents the positive association between the two variables showing that countries
which are better endowed with high skilled labour and qualitatively better education export more
services relative to their respective economies. The horizontal axis of the left-hand panel showing
human capital is a measure that also capture the quality of education of each countries taken from
the World Economic Forum. In addition, this measure takes into account once again the qualitative
aspects of education across all levels and includes also information on both the present workforce as
well as the future workforce. The Kyrgyz Republic is placed in the left-hand panel above the fitted
values line meaning on the whole for the Kyrgyz Republic it has a reasonable share of services trade
given the level of quality of the human capital skills supply. Yet, as we know from the previous
analysis, the Kyrgyz Republic seems to be unable to translate this into using these skills in sectors
which are mostly in need of this. Instead, it most likely uses these skills in the transportation sector.
Other countries such as Georgia, Armenia and Moldova are also place above the fitted values line; the
other comparator countries below.



                Figure 27: Relationship between Services Trade and Factor Endowments (2013)

                                                                                                                   Internet
                               Human capital
                                                                                             0
     0




                                     Trade in services (in logs) / GDP
    -1




                                                                                         -1




                             GEO
                            MDA                                                                                     GEO
    -2




                         KGZ ARM                                                                                   MDA
                                                                                         -2




                                                                                                     KGZ         ARM
                               MNG
    -3




                          BOL                                                                        MNG
                          PRY
                                                                                         -3




                                                                                                              BOL
    -4




                                                                                                           PRY
                                                                                         -4
    -5




         -1.5      -1    -.5                           0                 .5   1   1.5            0   20         40             60       80   100
                                Human capital                                                                Internet users (per 100)




                                                                                        97
                                       Source: World Bank WDI; WEF

The growth of telecom infrastructure is the most powerful symbol of vitality of the services sector,
and the Kyrgyz Republic is performing relatively well on this point. At the same time the growth of
internet and telecom structure is an important source for further development of other services, in
particular a wide range of business services such as information and communication technologies
services. The Kyrgyz Republic’s future services trade expansion particularly in Telecom and
Computer services will depend critically on the policies affecting telecom and internet infrastructure
as the right-hand panel of Figure 27 suggests. Together with policies which can increase the
attraction of foreign investors such a strategy to ensure the development of the sector should be
implemented, including the creation of strong and independent regulatory body.

Conclusions

The service sector accounts for a large share in employment in the Kyrgyz Republic. This share for
the Kyrgyz Republic has been increasing substantially to the drawback of agriculture which has been
significantly decreasing over the years, and not to industry which actually more than doubled over
the years in terms of employment. Now, the services sector remains the largest source for
employment in the Kyrgyz Republic.

Services share in GDP for the Kyrgyz Republic is according to what one could expect based on its
level of development. The Kyrgyz Republic value added creation compared to other sectors inside its
economy compares favourably with respect to its peer countries. Together this suggests two
potential developments. In the future its services sector could further grow if manufacturing
companies outsource services activities such as logistics and transportation which are often still
performed in-house. Indeed, the Kyrgyz Republic industry sector in terms of employment has been
rapidly increasing over the last several years which could lead to more effective employment
opportunities in services once these industry firms concentrate on their core activities. Second,
there is additional scope for services development through supporting these manufacturing
activities.

The Kyrgyz Republic’s direct services exports are higher than expected given its level of
development. Exports performance is relatively high in transport and travel services although the
share of transport services has been declining in recent years. Moreover, the Kyrgyz Republic still
shows a relatively high importance in travel and transport services given its level of development. In
the Kyrgyz Republic, the sub-sector other business services, together with financial services and
telecom have been growing in recent years but this have not substantially led to a strengthening of
their revealed comparative advantages. The Kyrgyz Republic exploits the potential for modern
services already well. However, modern services are proxied by the OCS category which also include
personal services such as education and construction. These sectors could thus be responsible for
the somewhat higher than expected outcome in Figure 6 and could therefore be somewhat upward
biased. On the other hand, when taking ICT services only a similar better-than-expected picture
emerges.



                                                  98
The Kyrgyz Republic’s main trading partners in services are Kazakhstan and Russia. Other important
trading partner are also situated in the region such as Uzbekistan and Tajikistan. The Kyrgyz
Republic seems to have added new and existing trading partner since 2005 up to 2011 in a gradual
manner.

Based on the Kyrgyz Republic’s GDP per capita PPP level one would expect a higher involvement in
value added trade, although it’s doing relatively fine regarding the gross and direct value of exports
in services. As for lack of forward linkages, it is a similar pattern for some of the other peer countries
of the Kyrgyz Republic. This means that services should strengthen their link to other economic
activities to boost exports of goods and contributing to diversification.

Overall, the regulatory restrictions in the services sector in the Kyrgyz Republic compares relatively
favorably when looking at other countries of similar income level or value added in services. But, the
Kyrgyz Republic has still relatively high restrictions in Transportation services across all modes of
supply, specifically in Air Transport and Rail Freight transport. Also, most Professional services such
as Auditing in particular are to some extent still regulated although to a much lesser extent. For a
landlocked country wishing to promote the tourism sector, restrictions on services which directly
affect its connectivity to the world economy could be revised.



In services the governance structures are of major importance in order to keep services markets
competitive once liberalization of services trade are implemented. The importance of the rule of law
and the quality of the human capital is related to the type of services an economy like the Kyrgyz
Republic is capable to export. The Kyrgyz Republic performs in the competitiveness of complex
services relatively lower than expected when looking at its level of quality of its human capital and
the rule of law. The Kyrgyz Republic’s services trade performance as part of its economy is much too
low given what one could expect based on its level of human capital endowments and information
and communications technology (ICT) performance. The Kyrgyz Republic seems to be unable to
translate skills endowment in sectors which depend more intensively on skills such as Telecom and
Computer services which also depend critically on the policies affecting telecom and internet
infrastructure. Together with policies which can increase the attraction of foreign investors such as
the reduction of policy restrictiveness, a strategy to ensure the development of the sector should be
implemented, including the adoption of additional regulatory reforms in particular regarding
independence of regulatory authority as provided by international best practices.

The Kyrgyz Republic authorities need to incorporate services trade development among their policy
priorities. Services expertise and policy formulation needs to be enhanced. Lack of expertise and
knowledge of the complexities of services policy reforms, regulatory matters, and enforcement are
generally weak and require urgent attention. Finally, internationalization of services through
negotiations, need as well attention, today there is no clear understanding of the implications of
international commitments and technical assistance is required.




                                                   99
     Chapter IV: The Garment Sector: Impact of Joining the Customs
           Union and Options to Increase Competitiveness61

Executive Summary

Over the last twenty years the garment sector has been a remarkable success story for the
Kyrgyz economy. The country had a successful garment industry when it belonged to the Soviet
bloc but the sector basically collapsed when the Soviet Union broke up. This decline reversed when
local entrepreneurs set up a number of companies in the 1990s. The industry grew rapidly in the
early 2000s and production increased seven times from 2004 to 2012. The sector is now thought to
employ as many as 150,000 people.

The sector now faces challenging times. Over the last few years exports to the Russian Federation
have fallen. This is attributable to Russia’s decision to join the WTO, which reduced market
protection mechanisms and affected the competitiveness of Kyrgyz’s products. Th e sector now faces
the prospect of joining the Eurasian Customs Union. Joining the Customs Union will lead to increased
tariffs on imports and more formalization at the border, both of which can be expected to increase
the cost of textiles. This will reduce the industry’s competitiveness. Simulations described in this
paper suggest that production costs may increase between 3.6 percent and 7.7 percent or perhaps
even more. This would place further pressure on the sector.

To continue to succeed in international markets, the sector will need to overcome a number
of constraints that are harming firms’ ability to compete. To date, firms’ success in the market
has been based on focused strategies that are dependent on better market knowledge. This has
enabled them to find and serve niche market segments that are underserved by foreign competitors.
To continue to succeed, firms need to adapt to increasing competition. To do this they need better
market intelligence and more employees with design and marketing skills. A lack of administrative
and operational management skills, as well as technical skills, are inhibiting firms from increasing
their size to take advantage of economies of scale. This lack of capacities and technical expertise and
new equipment and production processes has made it difficult for firms to implement modern
equipment and production processes. Other factors that are inhibiting firms from taking on new
technology include limited access to finance and advice on which equipment and processes are
needed. The sector is also hampered by poor access to electricity, and by corruption.

To overcome the main constraints holding back the sector, this paper recommends three
interventions. The first involves instituting trade promotion services to improve f irms’ knowledge
of consumers in export markets. This will help companies find and effectively serve niche markets.
The second intervention aims to strengthen education and training. This requires an increase in
funding, and coordination between industry and the institutions providing training. The third set of

61This chapter was prepared by Jieun Choi (Economist), Alberto Portugal (Senior Trade Economist, World Bank Group)
and Andrew Myburgh (Consultant, World Bank Group). Michael Ferrantino (Lead Trade Economist, World Bank Group)
reviewed the document. The views presented in this document belong solely to the team.


                                                        100
interventions focuses on increasing the use of new equipment and production processes. It is
recommended that industrial extension services be provided to advise firms on the improvements
they can make by adopting new equipment and processes. This report suggests establishing a lease-
financing program to support this effort, which will offer firms financing terms that reduce the risks
of purchasing new equipment.

Introduction
This paper describes the impact that joining the Eurasian Customs Union will have on the Kyrgyz
garment industry and what can be done to strengthen the sector’s competitiveness. It starts by
providing an economic context. It then moves on to describe the development of the garment
industry and its importance to the Kyrgyz economy. This is a followed by a discussion of the impact
of joining the Customs Union, which is determined by computing the increase in production costs
that will arise after adopting higher tariffs in textiles and the value-added tax. The findings indicate
that joining the Eurasian Customs Union will raise input costs and subsequently reduce the sector’s
competitiveness. The next section describes a number of recommended interventions to help
increase the sector’s competitiveness, based on an analysis of the factors that supported the sector’s
success in international markets and the constraints that are undermining the sector’s
competitiveness. To overcome these constraints a number of recommendations are made. These
include: supporting trade promotion, strengthening skills and education, and supporting the
adoption of new equipment and production processes. The paper does not discuss two issues
discussed in more depth elsewhere: (a) quality certification for garments, and (b) issues around
changes to the border regime.

Economic context
Despite consistent growth since the mid-1990s, incomes in the Kyrgyz Republic remain
relatively low. With a GNI per capita of under US$1,000 in 2012 the country has one of the lowest
levels of incomes in the ECA region. As can be seen in Figure 1 this is far lower than that of the other
members of the Customs Union (Belarus, Kazakhstan and the Russian Federation). Incomes are low
despite steady growth since the mid to late 1990s and reflect the fact that the country has had a
difficult time recovering in the post-independence period. When the Kyrgyz Republic gained
independence from the USSR, the economy struggled when subsidies and market access were
reduced. In the three years after independence incomes fell by around 40 percent on a purchasing
power parity basis. The economy grew consistently in the years after that, but some of these gains
were reversed due the global economic crisis and political instability.




                                                 101
                                                     Figure 1: GNI per capita in the Kyrgyz Republic



                                          Incomes have grown since the early          Incomes are relatively low compared
                                          2000s                                       to neigbours and members of the
                                                                                      Customs Union in 2012
  GNI per capita, (current US $)




                                   1200

                                   1000
                                                                                                 14                                     12.7
                                   800




                                                                                     Thousands
                                                                                                 12
                                                                                                                                  9.8
                                   600                                                           10
                                                                                                  8                         6.5
                                   400                                                                                5.7
                                                                                                  6
                                   200                                                            4
                                                                                                                1.7
                                                                                                  2   0.9 1.0
                                     0
                                                                                                  0


                                                    Years




Source: WDI



Economic growth has coincided with increasing openness to international trade and
investment. As is shown in Figure 2 trade made up 140 percent of GDP in 2012; this reflects the
steady increase in trade as a percentage of GDP seen since the early 2000s. The country has also
attracted greater volumes of foreign direct investment (FDI) over time. On UNCTAD’s FDI
performance index, the country is currently ranked 36. This increased openness in part reflects a
liberal foreign trade policy, full currency convertibility, and limited restrictions on FDI.




                                                                               102
Figure 2: Summary of Customs Union expected Common External Tariff in 2015 and 2020 for
                                   chapters 50 to 63



                     Trade has increased as a
                        percentage of GDP                                                          As has foreign direct
                                                                                                   investment (FDI)




                                                             Foreign direct investment, net
               160                                                                            12




                                                             inflows (%percent of GDP)
               150
(%percent of




               140                                                                            10
               130                                                                             8
Trade




               120
GDP)




               110                                                                             6
               100                                                                             4
                90
                80                                                                             2
                70                                                                             0
                60
                                                                                              -2
                     1990
                     1992
                     1994
                     1996
                     1998
                     2000
                     2002
                     2004
                     2006
                     2008
                     2010
                     2012




Source: WDI


Trade exports remain concentrated in gold and other minerals. The country’s other exports
include electricity from the country’s hydroelectric plants, agricultural products, garments and
tourism. There is also an industry based on the import and re-export of finished Chinese products. 62
Another important source of foreign exchange is remittances, which made up almost 30 percent of
GDP in 2008.63

The country’s business climate has been successfully reformed in a number of areas but
remains challenging overall. The country is a leading performer on certain Doing Business
indicators such as starting a business, registering a property, and getting credit, where it ranks
among the top twenty in the world. However, the country has performed relatively poorly in several
other components of the Doing Business index. For instance, it is ranked below 120 for the Doing
Business indicators relative to resolving insolvency, paying taxes and getting electricity. Overall, the
country ranked 68 on Doing Business. Another index that rates the environment for private
business, the World Economic Forum’s Global Competitiveness Index (GCI), ranked the Kyrgyz
Republic 127 in 2012–13.



62 Alexander Pavlov, 2011 “Assessing the Economic Effect of Kyrgyzstan’s Accession to the Customs Union” A study on the
Kyrgyz Republic Integration into the EurAsEU Customs Union
(http://www.eabr.org/e/research/centreCIS/projectsandreportsCIS/kyrgyzstan/)
63 World Bank. 2010. ―Kyrgyz Republic Trade Brief.‖ World Trade Indicators 2009/10: Country Trade Briefs. Washington,

DC: World Bank. Available at http://www.worldbank.org/wti.

                                                         103
The garment sector

   A. Development of the sector
The apparel industry in the Kyrgyz Republic has grown dramatically in the last 10 years.
Garment exports increased just over ten-fold from US$14.7 million to US$155 million as shown in
Figure 3, with a brief interruption in 2009 that coincided with the recession that followed the
financial crisis. Industry growth has been the result of the gradual conversion from pure re-
exporting of mainly Chinese apparel to producing garments using foreign inputs and Kyrgyz labor.
Compared to textile production, apparel making is more intensive in low-skilled labor and as such,
low-income countries attract tend to attract this industry.


                           Figure 3: Kyrgyz Apparel Exports (US$ thousands)
              160,000

              140,000
                                                                               Exports of
              120,000                                                          Knitted
                                                                               Apparel
              100,000                                                          (HS61)

                                                                               Exports of
               80,000                                                          Non-knitted
                                                                               Apparel
               60,000                                                          (HS62)

                                                                               Total
               40,000                                                          Apparel
                                                                               Exports
               20,000                                                          (HS61+62)

                   -
                        2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012
                        Source: Staff’s calculation with data from COMTRADE.

Exports in the sector are mainly concentrated in non-knitted apparel (cut and sew) but
knitted apparel exports have been growing in the last four years. Knit apparel production of
knitted is relatively more intensive in capital, whereas the production of non-knitted apparel is more
intensive in labor. There are around 400 firms in “Legprom,” a representative agency that is mainly
comprised of cut and sew companies, and slightly more than twenty companies are currently
registered in the knitted wear representative agency “Soyuztextile.”

Exports of Kyrgyz garment are mainly concentrated in Russia and Kazakhstan. Estimates
indicate that only five percent of production is sold in the domestic market, where it faces fierce
competition from low cost Chinese imports. Russia was the most important market for Kyrgyz
garments until 2011. In 2012, the share of exports to Kazakhstan was higher than the share of
exports to Russia, as shown in Figure 4. It is likely that Kazakhstan has been used as a re-export
platform into Russia as they are part of the Eurasian Customs.


                                                 104
              Figure 4: Share of garment exports to main destinations (in percentage)



                   100
                    90
                    80
                                                                                           KAZ
                    70
                    60                                                                     RUS
                    50                                                                     CHN
                    40
                                                                                           BLR
                    30
                    20                                                                     Other
                    10
                     0
                          2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012


                  Source: Staff calculation with data from COMTRADE.

Diverse factors lie behind the robust expansion of Kyrgyz garments. First, the accession of
Kyrgyz Republic to the WTO in 1998 has been conducive to a more open trade regime with
simplified customs clearances. According to Legprom and Souztextil, garment production
constitutes more than 80 percent of light industry production with over 3,000 small and medium-
sized enterprises (SMEs). Second, a simplified customs clearance procedure has been applied to
imported textiles, which contemplates a tariff that is applied by weight: US$0.35 per 1 kg regardless
of the type of textile64, instead of an ad-valorem tariff (i.e. a percentage of the imported value). The
simplified regime has facilitated the import of cheap fabrics and accessories from China, Turkey and,
at to a lesser extent, from other countries. Notice that the higher the quality and the value of the
textile, the lower the tariff in ad-valorem terms. This procedure was initially applied to support the
Kyrgyz Republic’s re-exportation policy. Naturally, this procedure makes it more difficult to collect
statistics.

Third, a Patent System helped drive the sector by providing garment manufacturers with
favorable tax treatment. The patent system provides for a simplified means to pay taxes. This
provided a good number of SMEs that to formalize who had previously worked in the informal
economy with an incentive to formalize been garments. Yet, it is estimated that 26 percent of firms
are still in the informal sector. Currently, around two thirds of formal companies operate under the
patent system (Jenish, 2014).

Fourth, Kyrgyz garment producers seem to have better knowledge regarding the tastes and
preferences of Russian and Kazak consumers than Chinese competitors. The producers that
have been interviewed agreed that their apparel designs are preferred by Russian consumers
compared to Chinese designs. The presence of a relatively large Kyrgyz diaspora in Russia and
Kazakhstan is likely to improve market knowledge of the region.

64The rate used to be US$0,28 per 1 kg between August 2012 and 2010, US$0,15 per 1 kg prior to 2010, according to Syar
(2011)

                                                         105
Finally, the Kyrgyz Government, multilateral organizations and donors have been actively
promoting the garment industry. For instance, GIZ helped the government develop a National
Strategy for the Textile Sector to support industry competitiveness and exports diversification. ADB,
through its Vocational Education and Skills Development Project, developed a competency-based
modular sewing training curriculum offered at 25 lyceums throughout the Kyrgyz Republic. ITC
provided a series of training programs and advisory services to garment companies.

Firms in the sector tend to range in size from less than twenty employees to around one
hundred. There are a few larger, previously state owned firms with up to a thousand employees.
New entrants into the cut and sew sector tend to establish mini-workshops with five to fifteen
machines. Firms take one to three years to establish a stable client base.65 It appears that the most
productive firms have one hundred workers on staff and were established ten to twenty years ago.
     B. The sector’s importance to the economy

The apparel and textile sector makes a substantial contribution to GDP and employment.
Much of the activity in the sector goes unrecorded, which lends to uncertainty about the sector’s
actual size. Nevertheless, as demonstrated in Table 1, a number of estimates suggest that the sector’s
size is substantial. Estimates indicate that it accounts for 5 to 15 percent of GDP and employs
between 90 and 300 thousand people. This is between 4 and 12 percent of total employment. Many
of the firms are owned by women, who make up around 70 to 85 percent of employees (Birkman,
2012).


Table 1: Estimates of economic activity and employment in the garment sector




                   Source                       Production (US$ million)      Employment         Year


Official (National Statistics Committee)      165                          114,000              2011


Unofficial estimate Birkman, et al. (2012)    300 - 1,320                  150,000 - 300,000    2010


Unofficial estimate SIAR for USAID (2011)     375                          90,000 - 150,000     2010


Figure used in this report (average of mid-
point of Birkman and SIAR)                    593                          172,500


Source: OECD (2014) and staff calculations




65



                                                    106
The sector has the potential to be a stepping stone to higher value added activities.
Historically, for many countries the first step in engaging with the global economy has been to
develop their apparel sector. The United Kingdom, Japan and the United States had an “apparel
phase” during industrialization. The garment sector often acts as a gateway into manufacturing for
countries and workers whose alternatives might be in agriculture, or low productivity services. It
plays this role for three reasons: (a) firms can open with relatively small capital investments and
training costs; (b) the garment sector is integrated into the global economy with nearly 70 percent of
garment exports coming from low income countries and (c) there are opportunities to move up the
value chain. Companies can enter at the simplest stages of production and then move into more
complicated processes with higher value added.

It is relatively easy to diversify within the garment sector. As Figure 5 shows how easy it would
be for the Kyrgyz Republic to diversify into new industries. The sectors in which the Kyrgyz Republic
already has a comparative advantage are represented by black squares and the colored circles show
global export industries. As shown in the key, different colors represent different industries. For
instance, green reflects the garment industry and brown the mining industry. The distance from the
squares to the colored circles is a measure of how easy it should be for Kyrgyz’s economy to
diversify from the industries in which the country has a comparative advantage into new industries.
As can be seen in the diagram, many of the industries in which the Kyrgyz Republic operates (the
black squares) are relatively distant from other industries (the colored circles) and as such do not
provide a good platform for diversification. By contrast, it is relatively easy to diversify within the
garment sector as shown by the cluster of green circles.




                                                 107
Figure 5: Kyrgyz Republic, industries
                     The Kyrgyz       with
                                garment    RCA greater
                                         industry         than 1 in in the product space
                                                  is relatively
                          well positioned to diversify within the
                          garment sector




Key




Notes: The product space provides a visual representation of (a) how difficult it is for a country to move into
particular sectors – the further away a node is the more difficult it is for the country to make the jump to
exporting that product, and (b) what products does the country have a revealed comparative advantage in. For
more explanation on the Product Space please see Hausmann, Hidalgo et al. “Atlas of Economic
Complexity, Mapping the paths to
prosperity”[http://atlas.media.mit.edu/media/atlas/pdf/HarvardM IT_AtlasOfEconomicComplexity.pdf]
Source: The data for the graph comes from the Observatory of Economic Complexity,
http://atlas.media.mit.edu http://atlas.media.mit.edu




                                                      108
The potential impact of joining the Eurasian Customs Union (ECU) on Kyrgyz exports

If the Kyrgyz Republic joins the Eurasian Customs Union (ECU), the Common External Tariff
(CET) should, in principle, replace the current MFN tariffs and the simplified tariff regime in
textiles. The ECU member countries agreed that the Common External Tariff (CET) schedule will be
adjusted over time to reflect Russia’s commitments to the WTO. Russia’s WTO membership was
approved in December 2011. Russia’s WTO commitments imply gradual import tariff cuts for trade
of goods: one-third of Russia’s tariff lines were reduced at the date of accession, one-quarter will be
reduced within 3 years, and the rest within the next 7 years until 2020(mainly cars and planes).
Given a significant phased-in liberalization, the process of fully implementing the ECU tariffs will
involve some transition dynamics. The ECU member countries agreed that the Common External
Tariff (CET) schedule will be adjusted over time to reflect Russia’s commitments to the WTO.
Russia’s WTO membership was approved in December 2011. Russia’s WTO commitments imply
gradual import tariff cuts for trade of goods: one-third of Russia’s tariff lines were reduced at the
date of accession, one-quarter will be reduced within 3 years, and the rest within the next 7 years
until 2020(mainly cars and planes). Given a significant phased-in liberalization, the process of fully


Table 2: Summary of Customs Union expected Common External Tariff in 2015 and 2020 for chapters 50 to 63
Summary of Customs Union expected Common External Tariff in 2015 and 2020 for chapters 50 to 63

implementing the ECU tariffs will involve some transition dynamics.
                                             # of      Customs Union 2015           Customs Union 2020
Chapte
                                             HS6             tariffs                      tariffs
   r             Brief description
                                           product
 (HS2)                                                average      min.    max.    average   min.    max.
                                              s
  50      Silk                               9              4.25    2.25    5.00      4.25    2.25    5.00
  51      Wool, coarse animal hair, etc      38             6.52    3.00   11.30      6.18    3.00   10.00
  52      Cotton                            124             7.74    0.00   12.50      7.61    0.00   10.00
  53      Other fibres                       23             7.48    3.00   12.00      7.13    3.00   10.00
  54      Man-made filaments                 70             6.48    0.00   14.00      6.42    0.00   14.00
  55      Man-mad staple fibres             107             7.18    5.00   10.00      7.18    5.00   10.00
          Wadding and other
  56      nonwovens                          31             7.16    3.75   12.00      6.57    3.75   10.00
  57      Carpets and other                  21             9.04    2.57   15.76      4.97    1.26   14.12
  58      Special woven fabrics              40            13.63   10.00   15.00     10.23   10.00   13.00
          impregnated, coated or
  59      laminated                          24             5.95    5.00   13.71      5.86    5.00   13.71
  60      Knitted fabrics                    43             7.37    5.00    8.00      7.37    5.00    8.00
  61      Knitted apparel                   106             9.58    3.14   27.54      9.58    3.14   27.54
  62      Non knitted apparel               113             9.35    2.08   21.23      9.34    2.08   21.17
  63      Other made up textile articles     52            12.42    4.17   22.01     12.01    4.17   22.01

 50-53    Raw materials                     194            6.50    0.00    12.50      6.29   0.00    10.00
 54-60    Processed materials               336            8.11    0.00    15.76      6.94   0.00    14.12

                                                     109
 61-62 Apparel                                219       9.47    2.08   27.54     9.46    2.08   27.54
Source: Author’s calculations based on data from WTO and Shepotylo
Most ECU tariffs related to the textile and garment sectors will be phased out by 2015, the
year Kyrgyz Republic may join the Customs Union. Table 2 describes the schedule of tariffs for
chapters 50 to 63 in 2015 and 2020 by providing the number of products in each Chapter at the HS6
level of disaggregation as well as the average, the minimum and maximum tariffs. It also provides
aggregate statistics for the following broad categories: Raw Materials (CH50-53), processed
products (CH54-60), and apparel (CH61-62). All tariff lines in chapters 50, 55, 60 and 61 are
expected to be phased out by 2015, as shown by identical tariff schedules. Most tariff lines for other
chapters are also expected to be phased out by 2015, as there are no major changes in the tariff
configuration between 2015 and 2020.

The average CU ad-valorem tariff for processed materials (CH54-60) is expected to be 8.1
percent in 2015 and 6.9 in 2020, as shown in Table 2. .In contrast, a significant share of these
products is currently imported in the Kyrgyz Republic under the simplified tariff regime paying US$
and pay US$0.35 per kilogram. If the Kyrgyz Republic joins the Customs Union and no exceptions
regarding tariffs on textiles are negotiated, CU tariffs should replace the simplified regime.

China, and to a lesser to extent Turkey, provides most of the textiles imported by the Kyrgyz
Republic. According to mirrored import data (i.e. reported by exporters of textiles), China and
Turkey accounted for about 89 percent and 4 percent of all imported textiles respectively in the
Kyrgyz Republic in 2012. Table 3 shows the quantity and value of imported textiles across chapters
52 to 60 that are likely to be imported under the simplified regime as well as the average unit value
per category. On average, the unit value for textiles from China is about US$6.5 per kilo, whereas
this figure is US$5.4 for textiles from Turkey.




                                                  110
   Table 3: Estimated ad-valorem equivalent of tariffs under the simplified tariff regime in
   Kyrgyz Republic for 2012Table 3: Estimated ad-valorem equivalent of tariffs under the
                    simplified tariff regime in Kyrgyz Republic for 2012
                                                                                                    Es tima ted a d-
                           Quantity of Imported        Value of imported      Unit value [V/Q]
           # of textile                                                                        va l orem-equi va l ent
   Chapter               textiles [Q] (in 1'000 Kg) textiles [V] (in 1'000 $)     (in $/Kg)
           products at                                                                         of tari ffs [Q*0.35/V]
     HS2
            HS6 level                                                 from     from      from    from         from
                        from China from Turkey from China
                                                                     Turkey    China Turkey China            Turkey
     52                5     31,200            -        292,000          -         9.4               3.7%
     53                1          2            -              6          -         3.3              10.5%
     54               36     48,200            445      296,000        5,179       6.1    11.6       5.7%        3.0%
     55               11     10,500              51      76,900          306       7.3     6.0       4.8%        5.8%
     56               19      2,889            310        7,549          846       2.6     2.7      13.4%       12.8%
     57                7        433          4,460        2,618       21,900       6.0     4.9       5.8%        7.1%
     58               11        913              42       8,623          267       9.4     6.4       3.7%        5.4%
     59               17     10,500              47      90,100          260       8.6     5.6       4.1%        6.3%
     60               11     50,500
                                -              121
                                               -        236,000
                                                            -            875
                                                                         -         4.7     7.3       7.5%        4.8%
    Total          118      155,137          5,475    1,009,797       29,633
                                                                               5.4 5.38% 6.47%
                                                                                   6.5
   Average
                                                                              6.47    5.41%
                   Source: Staff calculation using mirrored trade data from COMTRADE

Rough estimates show that the ad-valorem equivalent of tariffs collected on textiles imported
by the Kyrgyz Republic was about 5 percent in 2012. Table 3 shows how the estimated ad-
valorem equivalent of tariffs has been calculated for textiles imported from China and Turkey. Ad-
valorem equivalents in table 3 may be slightly overestimated as the value of imported textiles
reported by exporters are FOB (free on board) and do not consider insurance and transport costs. In
contrast, the value of merchandise recorded at customs by importing countries are CIF (cost-
insurance, and freight) including insurance and transport costs.

Average figures may mask the existing heterogeneity as imported textiles are taxed per
weight under the simplified regime at US$0.35 per kilogram. Indeed, importers of cheaper
textiles that pay a lower cost per kilogram will pay more in ad-valorem terms than importers of finer
textiles, which imply a higher cost per kilogram. Therefore, replacing the simplified tariff regime
with the CU’s common external tariff will tend to increase production costs disproportionately for
firms that use more expensive textiles to produce garments.

Assuming that a value added tax (VAT) of 12 percent will be enforced in the Kyrgyz Republic
when it joins the Customs Union, production costs are estimated to increase in the range of
3.7 percent to 7.7 percent. Table 4 below provides the assumptions for the estimating the increase
in total production costs for a high-impact and a low-impact scenario. We assume that the VAT will
only be applied to the value added in the country as a tax system may be implemented in which the




                                                          111
tax paid on imported inputs is deducted from taxes on sales. 66 Figures on the share of imported
textiles and value added are drawn from Annex 1 in Jenish (2014), which provides production costs
for different types of garments in the Kyrgyz Republic and represents upper and lower-bound
figures. 67 We take the average ad-valorem equivalent of the low-impact scenario and the lower
average ad-valorem estimate in Table 4 for the high-impact one. Finally, we take the average CET
tariff for processed materials in 2015 and 2020 reported in Table 2 for the low-impact and high
impact scenarios. Most of the increase in total costs is due to the implementation of a value added
tax (VAT) of 12 percent. If the VAT is higher, its contribution to VAT will be higher. Notice that
these estimates are illustrative and they may hide heterogeneity as less competitive firms may be hit
disproportionately and be less able to absorb the increase in production costs. More competitive
firms producing differentiated garments with their own designs may have more market power
and/or a bigger profit and can better absorb the increase in production costs by reducing profits or
charging a higher sales price in Russia or Kazakhstan up to a certain limit.


     Table 4: Estimates of the total increase in production costs of Kyrgyz garment following
                                  accession to the Customs Union.

                                                                           Low-impact                  High-impact
                         Assumptions
                                                                            scenario                    scenario
Share of imported textiles/fabric costs in total costs (f)                                50%                         70%
Share of production costs in total costs (p)                                              24%                         48%
Ad-valorem equivalent of current tariff regime (t)                                        5.4%                        3.7%
Customs Union Common external tariff (T)                                                  6.9%                        8.1%
Value added tax (VAT)                                                                     12%                         12%

Expected Outcomes
Increase in tariffs (T-t)                                                                 1.5%                        2.7%

Increase in total costs due to :
  - tariff increase (T-t)*f                                                              0.8%                         1.9%
 - collected VAT (VAT*p)                                                                 2.9%                         5.8%
Total increase in total costs: (T-t)*f+(VAT*p)                                           3.7%                         7.7%
Source: Author’s estimates and description in text.




66 A firm’s value added can be seen as the sum of production costs and profits. As our focus is the increase in production
costs, in our estimates VAT only applies to firm production and excludes the portion of VAT that is applied to profits.
67 The share of imported textiles in the low-impact scenario roughly corresponds to men’s shirts, and the share in the high -

impact scenario corresponds to dress “Kacheli”. The share of production costs in the low -impact scenario corresponds to
winter jacket/parka and the share in the high-impact scenario also represents dress “Kacheli”.

                                                            112
Strengthening the garment’s sector’s competitiveness
This section proposes interventions to improve the garment sector’s competitiveness. These
interventions aim to increase garment companies productivity and thus strengthen their
competitiveness in international markets. The analysis has four parts. The first section reviews the
competitive strategies that underpin firm’s competitiveness. The second discusses education and
training needs in the sector. This is followed by a discussion of access to finance and adopting
modern production technology. The fourth section discusses government failures that undermine
the sector’s performance as well as beneficial co-ordination in the sector. This is followed with
recommendations in the fifth section.

The section begins by analyzing the constraints to the sector’s competitiveness. It does this by
reviewing the competitive strategies used by companies to compete in international markets. This is
followed by an analysis that benchmarks companies in Kyrgyz’s garment sector with companies in
several other countries. The benchmarking exercise compares Kyrgyz garment companies to twelve
countries that are garment exporters or are in the Eurasian Customs Union. They reflect a range of
incomes from Bangladesh (which has a lower income than the Kyrgyz Republic’s) to the Russian
Federation and Turkey, which have much higher income levels.

The recommended interventions aim to overcome market and government failures, which
are inhibiting the sector from increasing its productivity. The failures addressed include the
pressing lack of training and education, industrial upgrades and financing. This section does not
discuss two areas that are extensively discussed elsewhere, including formalizing the border and the
quality certification required in the Customs Union.




                                                113
Box5: Benchmarking countries
  This section compares the Kyrgyz Republic to a number of benchmark countries. The
benchmark exercise compares the Kyrgyz Republic’s garment sector to (a) countries whose
 companies compete with Kyrgyz firms, and to (b) countries exporting into the European
   Union and internationally. The countries were selected for inclusion as benchmark
  countries for three reasons (with some countries included for more than one reason):

      Countries whose firms compete directly with garment firms from the Kyrgyz
       Republic firms Companies in the Kyrgyz Republic reported competing most directly
       with firms from Belarus, and to a lesser extent Turkey, in high quality segments,
       and with firms from China in lower quality segments.
      International exporters. This includes countries whose companies largely export
       into the European Union (Bulgaria, Romania, Turkey, and FYR Macedonia), as well
       as companies exporting internationally (Bangladesh, China, Sri Lanka and Vietnam).
      Membership of the Eurasian Customs Union, the Customs Union are the main
       markets for the Kyrgyz Republic’s exports, in particular the Russian Federation.
       These countries have garment companies that can directly compete with sectors
       which Kyrgyz companies from these countries are in a position to compete with
       Kyrgyz firms currently. The countries included were the Russian Federation,
       Kazakhstan and Belarus.
The benchmark countries garment sectors in the benchmark countries represent quite
different levels and types of competitiveness. With few exports, the garment sectors in the
Russian Federation and Kazakhstan garment sectors appear to only be competitive only in
their domestic markets. East and South Asian countries such as Bangladesh and Vietnam
are relatively low cost production centers. In contrast, costs are higher in Eastern Europe
but many companies in these countries able to turn around orders relatively quickly.

The benchmarking exercise is largely conducted using data from the World Bank’s ’Bank’
Enterprise Surveys. These are firm-level surveys of a representative sample of an
economy’s private sector. Since 2002, the World Bank has collected this data from face-to-
face interviews with top managers and business owners in over 130,000 companies in 135
economies. The surveys cover firms in the formal sector that employ more than five
workers.




                                               114
            Figure 6: Comparison between Kyrgyz Republic and benchmark countries

      The Kyrgyz Republic exports far fewer                        However, it exports more when its
      garments than the benchmark                                  relatively small population is taken into
      countries                                                    account



               China*                                              Macedonia, FYR
              Turkey                                                      Bulgaria
            Viet Nam                                                       Turkey
          Bangladesh                                                     Sri Lanka
            Sri Lanka                   *China’s exports                  Romania
             Romania                    are cut off for                  Viet Nam
             Bulgaria                   illustrative                         China                    The Russian
      Macedonia, FYR                    purposes, it exports      Kyrgyz Republic                     Federation and
                                        US$ 170 billion                     Serbia                    Kazakhstan have
              Belarus
                                        (ten times more                                               very low levels of
               Serbia                                                  Bangladesh
                                        than Turkey)                                                  exports relative to
   Russian Federation                                                      Belarus
                                                                                                      population
     Kyrgyz Republic                                            Russian Federation
          Kazakhstan                                                   Kazakhstan

                                                                                     -                          500.00
                        0    5     10      15
            Exports of garments in billions                            Garment exports per working age person


                                                                     In part, this reflects the Kyrgyz
        The sector is relatively large compared to
                                                                     economy’s relatively low GNI per capita
        the size of the economy

         Viet Nam
  Kyrgyz Republic                                               Russian Federation
       Bangladesh                                                          Turkey
   Macedonia, FYR                                                      Kazakhstan
         Sri Lanka                                                        Romania
          Bulgaria                                                        Bulgaria
          Romania                                                          Belarus
             China                                                           China
           Turkey                                                           Serbia
            Serbia                                                 Macedonia, FYR
                                                                         Sri Lanka
           Belarus
                                                                         Viet Nam
Russian Federation
                                                                  Kyrgyz Republic
       Kazakhstan
                                                                       Bangladesh
          -4%        1%      6%         11%      16%                                 -       10,000         20,000
            Garments exports (as % of GNI)
                                                                        GNI per cap 2012 (US$ current)



Note: Export figures are for HS 61, 62 and 63. Figures for Bangladesh are for 2007 (the latest available data),
and the figures for the Kyrgyz Republic have been scaled up in line with the figures shown in Figure 3.

Source: World Development Indicators and UN Comtrade




                                                          115
     A. Kyrgyz Republic companies have succeeded by focusing on under-served market
        segments
Successful Kyrgyz companies have focused on particular customer segments, for example,
selling a particular style of women’s’ jackets in the Russian Federation. Other companies have
produced goods on order from distributors who are familiar with market demand. In some cases
these goods are replicas of goods that have been designed in the Kyrgyz Republic or elsewhere.
Behind this success is the fact that companies in Kyrgyz have been able to serve certain market
segments more effectively than competitors that aim to serve a broader range of customers.

Knowledge of market needs has been crucial to the success of Kyrgyz companies. Firms have
been able to find and serve niche market segments not served effectively by producers from other
countries. Some companies are engaged in brand, design and manufacture. Although, these relatively
small firms don’t fit neatly into standard categories for the sector, they could be described as
Original Brand Manufacturers (OBM). Another important approach has been a distributor –
manufacturer supply chain where distributors in the Kyrgyz Republic have outsourced
manufacturing to Cut-Make-Trim (CMT) and Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) companies.
The resulting supply chain for the industry is shown in Figure 7. Firms earn higher returns from
designing and marketing clothing than from manufacturing. This trend is consistent with a global
trend whereby garment manufacture has become increasingly commoditized and concentrated in
low wage countries. The value added in the industry is increasingly concentrated in points closer to
customers (OECD, 2014). 68


                                Figure 7: Supply chain for garment companies




68For further background on the various levels of firm capabilities and country capabilities in apparel supply chains , see
Gereffi and Frederick (2010) .

                                                            116
High levels of innovation are core elements in the firms’ focused strategies. As shown Figure 8,
Kyrgyz firms are more likely than firms in the benchmark countries to introduce new products and
adopt new marketing as well as management approaches.

Figure 8: Kyrgyz garment firms are relatively innovative in terms of management, marketing,
                          processes and introducing new products

   In Kyrgyz a relatively high                                             New marketing approaches,
   proportion of firms introduce
   new management approaches,

                                                                                      Bulgaria
   Russian Federation
                                                                           Russian Federation
              Serbia
                                                                                       Serbia
             Bulgaria
                                                                             Macedonia, FYR
          Kazakhstan
                                                                                  Kazakhstan
     Macedonia, FYR
                                                                              Kyrgyz Republic
             Belarus
                                                                                      Belarus
      Kyrgyz Republic

                                                                                                 0            .2          .4          .6
                        0    .1     .2      .3        .4   .5                                        % adopting new marketing approaches
                        % adopting new management approaches




       New processes                                                       And new products


          Kazakhstan                                                       Russian Federation

               Serbia                                                             Kazakhstan

             Bulgaria                                                                Bulgaria

   Russian Federation                                                                 Serbia
                                                                             Macedonia, FYR
     Macedonia, FYR
                                                                                     Belarus
      Kyrgyz Republic
                                                                              Kyrgyz Republic
              Belarus

                                                                                                0       .2       .4     .6     .8
                        0          .2            .4             .6                              % of firms introducing new products
                            % of firms adopting a new process




Note: Data only available for Europe and Central Asia
Source: Enterprise Surveys (http://www.enterprisesurveys.org), The World Bank

Firms have been able to sustain relatively high wages. As can be seen in Figure 9, wages are far
higher in Kyrgyz than in low cost producers in Asia such as Bangladesh and Vietnam, which have a
similar level of income. Wages are reported to be comparable to those in Bulgaria and China which


                                                                     117
may indicate of comparable levels of productivity. The presumably high levels of productivity appear
to largely arise from firms’ ability to charge relatively high prices.

The high wages in the sector reflect, in part, integration in regional markets. ILO (2012)
suggests that “the national labor market is competing with foreign markets for the same categories
of labor”. More than half a million Kyrgyz nationals work outside the country, mainly in the Russian
Federation and Kazakhstan. These countries have substantially higher incomes, which can be
expected to lead to upward pressure on wages in the Kyrgyz Republic. When firms pay relatively
high wages, they need to sustain higher levels of productivity and pricing to remain competitive.


                 Figure 9: Wages in the garment sector are relatively high, and firms relatively small

        Firms pay relatively high wages                                                                But are relatively small compared to the
                                                                                                       benchmark countries
                         $450
 garment sectors (US$)




                         $400
                         $350
                                                                                                              Russia
 Monthy wages in




                         $300
                                                                                                         Kazakhstan
                         $250                                                                                Belarus
                         $200                                                                        Kyrgyz Republic
                         $150                                                                                 Serbia
                         $100                                                                               Bulgaria
                                                                                                            SriLanka
                          $50
                                                                                                     Macedonia, FYR
                           $-                                                                              Romania
                                Macedonia, FYR

                                                 China

                                                         Bulgaria

                                                                    Kyrgyz…

                                                                              Vietnam

                                                                                        Bangladesh




                                                                                                              Turkey
                                                                                                               China
                                                                                                         Bangladesh
                                                                                                            Vietnam

                                                                                                                       0     200      400       600     800
                                                                                                                           Number of full time employees



Note: Data shown for countries where data is available. Figures for wages in the benchmark countries are
from 2011, except for those from Bangladesh, which are from 2014. Jenish (2014) reports wage levels for
2013; the wage rate shown is at the lower end of a range of wages reported by Jenish. The ILO (2012) reports
far lower wage rates in the garment sector. This discrepancy may reflect under-reporting by firms or
seasonality’s effects on average wages. That said, it means there is considerable uncertainty regard what true
wages in the sector actually are.

Source: Benchmark countries wages are from Global Development Solutions, LLC, figures for Kyrgyz are from
Jenish (2014). Figures on the number of employees comes from                        Enterprise Surveys
(http://www.enterprisesurveys.org), The World Bank



Firms in the sector appear to be operating below minimum efficient scale. Kyrgyz firms are
notably smaller than companies in most benchmark countries. Kyrgyz firms are far smaller than
countries with the lowest cost base engaged in long turn around Cut Make Trim activities. It is
notable that Kyrgyz firms are smaller than companies in Turkey and China which have similar wage

                                                                                                     118
rates. In both these markets, many firms engage in manufacture and design. This suggests that
Kyrgyz companies could take advantage of economies of scale by expanding. Studies have found that
there are economies of scale in the production of garments (for example see Datta and Christofferen,
(2004)). Branding provides substantial economies of scale. Larger firms find it easier to sell their
products to larger retailers and distributors.

In part, companies can currently operate at lower scale due to fragmentation in the Russian
Federation’s retail sector. The top eight retail chains make up less than 20 percent of sales in the
Russian Federation. There are few retailers in rural areas and open air markets still account for a
notable share of garment sales. This fragmented retail structure has made it easier for smaller firms
to distribute their product. However, this is expected to change as major retailers continue to grow
and traditional retail formats such as markets decline (Kolchenikova, 2013). This will place pressure
on smaller firms, which are likely to find it more difficult to access these markets.

   i.      A lack of skills and education is undermining the sector’s competitiveness

A large proportion of companies report that uneducated workers are an obstacle to their
business operations. As shown in Figure 10, a far higher proportion of firms in the Kyrgyz report
that this is an obstacle than companies in the benchmark countries. As Figure 10 shows firms are
struggling to find a broad range of skills. The most pronounced shortages are in professional level
skills such as designers and dyers. Firms are also struggling to find seamstresses and technician
level positions such as cutters (ILO, 2012). As discussed in STED (2011), the demand for a number of
these skills is expected to continue into the foreseeable future with firms reporting that in the next
five years the most in-demand workers will be designers (23 percent), universal sewing machinists
(18.4 percent), process engineers (15.8 percent) and dress cutters (15.8 percent).




                                                 119
                          Figure 10: Firms report difficulties finding skilled workers


              A lack of education and skills is a                    The most difficult to find skills range
              far larger constraint for Kyrgyz                       from production, to design, and include
                                                                     processing workers, skilled workers
              garment companies than it is for
                                                                     and professional staff
              the benchmark countries
                                                                                           Dyers                       4.5
            Serbia                                                                     Designers                     3.8
          Bulgaria
       Kazakhstan                                                                        Gaugers                     3.8
   Macedonia, FYR
          Vietnam                                                      Repairman and technicians                    3.7
             China
           Belarus                                                                        Cutters                3.3
          SriLanka
            Turkey                                                             Machine adjusters                3.2
            Russia
       Bangladesh                                                                 Administrators                3.1
         Romania
   Kyrgyz Republic                                                     Sewing machine operators                 3.1

                     0            1           2           3             Other machine operators                2.9
                         Inadequate education is an obstacle
                                                                           Administrative / office…           2.7
        Extent to which issue is an obstacle to the current                                         0                  5
        operations of the business measured from 0 “no
        obstacle” to 4 “very severe obstacle”                         Assessment of difficulties related to finding
                                                                      workers with certain skills; 5-points scale (where
                                                                      5-very difficult to find, 1- not difficult to find)



 Source: Enterprise Surveys (http://www.enterprisesurveys.org), The World Bank and for shortages of
 specific skills, STED the Kyrgyz Republic Survey (2011) as reported in ILO (2012), Skills for trade and
 economic diversification in the Kyrgyz garment sector, ILO, Geneva. Only skills with a score above 2.5
 shown.



Relatively little training is being provided by firms. Figure 11 shows that training in Kyrgyz
firms is low compared to that provided in benchmark countries and Belarus in particular, where
more than 50 percent of firms provide training. The problem does not appear to be a lack of basic
education. Figure 11 shows that Kyrgyz workers have more years of schooling than workers in a
number of benchmark countries.

Little industry-specific education is being provided. The ILO (2012) reports that vocational
lyceums focus on training machinists and provide little training for technical or professional
positions. Moreover, the benefits of this training appear to be limited. More than fifty percent of
firms did not know if they employed a graduate of one of these institutions. This suggests that firms
place little weight on the training that the lyceums provide. The Shvei-Profi, which was started with
support from industry associations and the GIZ, was a promising program. Unfortunately, it appears
that this effort has been discontinued (OECD, 2014).


                                                               120
Figure 7: Difficulties finding skilled workers in the garment sector appear to reflect a lack of
                        training rather than low levels of basic education

         Workers’ level of basic education is                    But relatively little training is occurring
         relatively high

      Bangladesh                                                      Kazakhstan
                                                                        Romania
            China                                                 Kyrgyz Republic
         SriLanka                                                          Serbia
                                                                           Russia
  Macedonia, FYR                                                         SriLanka
         Bulgaria                                                          Turkey
           Serbia                                                        Bulgaria
                                                                  Macedonia, FYR
           Russia                                                        Vietnam
  Kyrgyz Republic                                                     Bangladesh
                                                                          Belarus
      Kazakhstan                                                            China

                    0           5          10        15                             0       .2      .4      .6      .8      1
                     Years of education female employees                                Proportion of firms providing training


Note: Level of education for female employees is shown because data on male employees or the
overall workforce was not available
Source: Enterprise Surveys (http://www.enterprisesurveys.org), The World Bank
Training and education will be under-provided if left to market forces. The sector suffers from
a number of market failures. Prospective students often don’t know what skills are needed by the
market and don’t have access to credit to fund their education and training. Firms’ incentives to train
workers are reduced by the possibility that workers will leave their jobs, thus taking the benefits of
their training to another company. This is a particular concern in Kyrgyz’s flexible labor market
where employees move easily and often between jobs.

   ii.        The sector lacks access to finance and new production technology
Firms struggle to access financing and relatively few are adopting foreign technology. For this
reason it is important to increase access to capital, particularly for knitwear companies that are
capital intensive. It is also important to assist companies in accessing and adopting new technologies
– for instance through industrial extension services and financial services such as financial leasing,
which reduces the risk of adopting new technology.

   iii.       The sector is lagging in the adoption of technology

Firms are not investing in innovative machinery and business approaches. This is reflected in


     Figure 8: Kyrgyz firms have low levels of foreign technology and process adoption

12 there is relatively low adoption of technology that requires licensing fees. It also shows that no
garment or textile firms have ISO9001 certificates. The ISO9001 certifies that firms have adopted

                                                           121
systems and processes that ensure quality. It is a measure of firms’ adoption of modern business
practices and is often a requirement to access global value chains.

Small and medium firms that dominate the garment sector often struggle to adopt new
technologies and business practices. This reflects, at least in part, the skill shortages described
above. However, international experience suggests this is common. “Managers often are unaware of
the flaws and opportunities for improvement in their own businesses. When administrators’
responses to questions on their own performance in the use of modern methods and technologies of
industrial management were weighed against the productivity of their businesses, their perceptions
of their performance ranked well above average, but they ranked far below average in their
application of best management practices” (World Bank, 2013). This tendency is one manifestation
of various information-related market failures that inhibit firms from adopting new technologies
and business practices. These market failures can be overcome through manufacturing extension
services and foreign direct investment.


      Figure 8: Kyrgyz firms have low levels of foreign technology and process adoption

      Relatively few firms are paying fees for                           And there are no ISO9001 certificates in
      the use of foreign technology                                      the sector (these certify adoption of up-
                                                                         to-date systems and processes to ensure
                                                                         quality)
                                                                                       Romania
                                                                                         Serbia
             Bulgaria                                                                  Bulgaria
                                                                                          China
             Belarus                                                                    Turkey
   Russian Federation                                                                 Sri Lanka
          Kazakhstan                                                            Macedonia, FYR
                                                                                    Bangladesh
      Kyrgyz Republic
                                                                                      Viet Nam
     Macedonia, FYR                                                                     Belarus
           Romania                                                           Russian Federation
                                                                                    Kazakhstan
              Turkey
                                                                               Kyrgyz Republic
              Serbia
                                                                                                  -          50         100
                        0     .05     .1     .15      .2     .25                     ISO9001 certificates in textiles and
                            % using foreign technology license
                                                                                     garments divided by exports


Source: Firms using foreign technology the source is Enterprise Surveys
(http://www.enterprisesurveys.orghttp://www.enterprisesurveys.org) and data is only available for Europe
and Central Asia, The World Bank, and for the ISO9001 data the source is www.iso.orgwww.iso.org for data on
industry specific ISO9001 adoption and for exports Comtrade

    iv.     Firms have limited access to finance

As shown in Figure 9, Kyrgyz firms report that access to finance is an important obstacle to
conducting business. In an OECD survey, more than 50 percent of firms reported that they lack
access to the financing they need to operate their business. This reflects, at least in part, the

                                                                   122
country’s low bank credit-to-GDP ratio of less than ten, which is substantially lower than the ratio
posted by benchmark countries. Further, 75 percent of firms report that high interest rates are an
issue when seeking financing (OECD, 2014).


             Figure 9: Access to finance is a major constraint for garment companies

     Kyrgyz firms find access to finance to be                          Kyrgyz firms report using few external
     more of an obstacle than companies in                              funds for working capital
     benchmark countries


         Bulgaria                                                     Kyrgyz Republic
            China                                                              Russia
           Turkey                                                         Kazakhstan
         Vietnam
          Belarus                                                               China
           Serbia                                                             Belarus
  Macedonia, FYR                                                          Bangladesh
           Russia                                                     Macedonia, FYR
        Romania                                                              Bulgaria
      Bangladesh
      Kazakhstan                                                             SriLanka
  Kyrgyz Republic                                                            Vietnam
         SriLanka                                                              Serbia

                    0       .5      1       1.5       2                             0       20        40       60       80
                    Extent access to finance is an obstacle                         Use of external funds for working capital

     Extent to which issue is an obstacle to the current
     operations of the business measured from 0 “no
     obstacle” to 4 “very severe obstacle”
Source: Enterprise Surveys                                          Source: World Development Indicators, World
(http://www.enterprisesurveys.org), The World                       Bank
Bank

The absence of financing is a constraint to firms’ working capital. As shown in Figure 13 none of
the Kyrgyz firms in the survey reported access to external financing for working capital. This makes
it more difficult for firms to meet the demand for their goods and makes them more vulnerable to
financial distress. Access to financing is particularly important for joining global value chains. The
OECD/WTO report (2013) indicates that access to financing represents the most significant barrier
when firms attempt to penetrate global value chains. This is due to the fact that firms that enter into
supply chain relationships want to know that their counterparts are financially stable.

Access to financing is likely to be a particularly binding constraint for knitwear companies.
These companies are more capital intensive than sewing companies. This suggests that initiatives to
expand access to financing should focus on these companies.




                                                              123
       v.       There is relatively little FDI in the sector

FDI can bring new technology to the sector, including modern machinery, and improve business
practice. As such, it is troubling that according to Birkman (2012) “most foreign investors in apparel
left the country after the 2010 revolt”. In the rest of the economy, the country has been relatively
successful at attracting relatively high levels of FDI. In fact, it has attracted more FDI to the
manufacturing sector relative to GDP than the benchmark countries.69 The overall level of FDI is
relatively high compared to GDP according to UNCTAD data. The country’s success at drawing FDI is
consistent with policy initiatives to make it attractive for foreign investors, including the Doing
Business reforms.

       B. Supporting institutions and infrastructure have strengths and weaknesses


       i.       Industry level co-operation is a source of strength
The industry currently benefits from strong industry associations. For example, the two largest
industry associations, Legprom and Soyuztextile, actively represent their members’ interests and
provide a range of services. This has included engagement in a number of donor-led initiatives to
strengthen the sector’s competitiveness.

       ii.      Firms show willingness to cooperate.
More than two thirds of firms report that they are willing to cooperate in promoting the sector (76
percent), organizing training to develop employee skills (72 percent) and gather market information
on client tastes, new designs, suppliers and customers (68 percent) (OECD, 2014). Cooperation
between companies is particularly important given the small scale of the majority of firms, as shown
in Figure on page 118.

       iii.     Corruption is a major obstacle
As shown in Figure 14, corruption is a major obstacle. Corruption is more of an obstacle for
Kyrgyz garment companies than it is for companies in the benchmark countries. It is reported to be a
more severe constraint than the lack of access to financing and comparable to the constraint posed
by limited access to electricity. This can be expected to reduce investment and as such, employment
growth (Hallward-Driemeier, 2010).

Simplified regimes have reduced obstacles for businesses. As shown in Figure 14, customs and
regulations are a less onerous constraint for businesses. The same is true for business licenses. The
experience of Kyrgyz’s firms can be contrasted with that of Kazakhstan and Bangladesh, where
customs and trade regulations represent a much greater obstacle.




69   According to FDI data from the FT times

                                                     124
                  Figure 10: Corruption is a major obstacle to conducting business


     Corruption is a major obstacle                                      But customs and trade
                                                                         regulations are not
         Vietnam                                                            Bulgaria
            China                                                    Kyrgyz Republic
  Macedonia, FYR                                                               China
         Bulgaria                                                          Romania
      Kazakhstan                                                              Russia
         SriLanka                                                           Vietnam
          Belarus                                                    Macedonia, FYR
           Serbia                                                            Belarus
           Russia                                                             Turkey
           Turkey                                                             Serbia
        Romania                                                             SriLanka
      Bangladesh                                                         Kazakhstan
  Kyrgyz Republic                                                        Bangladesh

                    0     .5     1     1.5     2       2.5                            0          .5          1          1.5
                          Corruption as an obstacle                                   Customs & trade regulations an obstacle


 Extent to which issue is an obstacle to the current                 Extent to which issue is an obstacle to the current
 operations of the business measured from 0 “no obstacle” to         operations of the business measured from 0 “no
 4 “very severe obstacle”                                            obstacle” to 4 “very severe obstacle”



Source: Enterprise Surveys (http://www.enterprisesurveys.org), The World Bank



   iv.       Firms report that electricity is a major obstacle, but land and transport are not
The difficulties raised by electricity are reflected in Figure 15. The constraint imposed by
electricity is mitigated to some extent by the relatively low cost of electricity in the Kyrgyz Republic
compared to costs in benchmark countries and the fact that the garment industry is not a heavy user
of electricity (electricity represents only a small percentage of costs).




                                                               125
                     Figure 11: Access to electricity is reported to be a major obstacle


      Electricity is reported to be an obstacle                             This is somewhat offset by the lower cost
                                                                            of electricity from the grid



            Serbia                                                                    0.09
            Russia                                                                    0.08
             China
           Belarus                                                                    0.07
          Bulgaria                                                                    0.06
       Kazakhstan                                                                     0.05
          Vietnam                                                                     0.04




                                                                            US$/kWh
            Turkey                                                                    0.03
   Macedonia, FYR
         Romania                                                                      0.02
          SriLanka                                                                    0.01
   Kyrgyz Republic                                                                       0
       Bangladesh

                       0       .5      1      1.5    2     2.5
                                Electricity as an obstacle
  Extent to which issue is an obstacle to the current operations of
  the business measured from 0 “no obstacle” to 4 “very severe
  obstacle”


 Source: Enterprise Surveys (http://www.enterprisesurveys.org), The World Bank for electricity, for costs of
 electricity figures are from Abylaev (2013) and Nathan (2009)


Firms report that land and transportation costs are not obstacles. This can be seen in Figure
12. It is reported that rentals in the Kyrgyz Republic are relatively low. Costs in Kyrgyz are half of
rates charged in Bangladesh and represent around 60 percent of figures reported for China. In
contrast, land and transportation are more problematic in benchmark countries, particularly in Sri
Lanka and Bangladesh.




                                                                      126
             Figure 12: Access to land and transport infrastructure is not an obstacle


         Firms don’t report that land is a                                Nor is transport
         constraint to their operations


  Kyrgyz Republic                                                           Bulgaria
      Kazakhstan                                                     Macedonia, FYR
           Turkey                                                    Kyrgyz Republic
         Bulgaria                                                              China
  Macedonia, FYR                                                             Belarus
           Serbia                                                             Serbia
           Russia                                                             Russia
            China                                                             Turkey
         Vietnam                                                         Kazakhstan
          Belarus                                                           Vietnam
         SriLanka                                                          Romania
        Romania                                                             SriLanka
      Bangladesh                                                         Bangladesh

                    0      .5        1        1.5     2                                0          .5          1            1.5
                         Access to land is a obstacle                                         Transport as an obstacle


 Extent to which issue is an obstacle to the current                 Extent to which issue is an obstacle to the current
 operations of the business measured from 0 “no obstacle” to         operations of the business measured from 0 “no
 4 “very severe obstacle”                                            obstacle” to 4 “very severe obstacle”

Source: Enterprise Surveys (http://www.enterprisesurveys.org), The World Bank



Recommendations
This section first proposes three initiatives to strengthen the sector.                           It then provides three
approaches to guide implementation of these initiatives.

   A. Initiatives to strengthen the sector


   i.        Improve market information through trade promotion
The sector’s trade promotion programs should be extended and strengthened. The industry
associations are engaged in trade promotion, and GIZ and ITC have established a trade promotion
program that has assisted companies in their efforts to participate in trade shows abroad and
develop communication materials. These activities should be continued and increased. They could
be complemented by providing research into customer markets, fashion and design trends.

   ii.       Strengthening skills through education and training
There is a strong rationale for the government, the donor community and industry to fund initiatives
to increase training and education in the sector. These initiatives should aim to reduce the cost
borne by students and by companies that receive training. Training is needed for all activities in the
sector. That said, the country needs to develop more professional skills such as management and


                                                               127
administration as well as technical skills, such as those employed designers and dyers. The courses
taught should be closely coordinated with industry. This will ensure that the curriculum reflects
industry needs and will link students to potential employers. Representatives of industry could
engage in the governance of training and education institutions to bolster results.

   iii.    Increase the adoption of new equipment through lease financing and industrial
           extension
The initiatives to strengthen education and training are important to efforts to increase the
sector’s absorption of new technology. It is recommended that the following points be implemented:

   a) An industrial extension program. This would guide companies on ways to improve their
      production processes and educate them about machinery they are unfamiliar with. This
      advice should initially be provided for free and as such be fully subsidized. Once companies
      have established relationships with the program, they should pay fees and start to bear a
      larger portion of the cost of service provision.
   b) A financial leasing program focused on financing modern equipment acquisitions and the
      knitwear sectors. Financial leases can be structured to reduce the risk of purchasing new
      equipment. The firm finances the purchase of the equipment with a lease. If the purchase is
      successful, the firm can purchase the equipment. However, if the purchase of the equipment
      was not successful, the firm can return the equipment after paying a moderate fee. This
      reduces the loss for the firm if the new equipment is not successfully incorporated into the
      business. A large proportion of the cost of this program can be covered with the interest and
      fees charged to lease recipients.
A number of initiatives have been implemented to increase access to finance and technology.
For instance, the revolving loan program provides money for the purchase of new equipment. Firms
are only given a year to pay back the amount borrowed but no interest is charged. Another example
is the USAID program. This was a similar to a manufacturing extension program. Around thirty firms
were provided with innovative machinery garment companies received training. Companies were
provided the equipment for little or no charge. The programs have been well received by the
garment companies that have benefitted from them. The USAID program has found significant
increases in productivity in firms that received equipment and training.

   B. Approaches to Implement the Recommended Interventions


   i.      Create permanent institutions
Consideration should be given to establishing public-private partnerships to implement programs to
strengthen the sector’s competitiveness. These institutions would help ensure continuity, retain
institutional knowledge and make it easier to scale up programs.

   ii.     Leverage industry associations and cooperation between firms

The sector benefits from established industry associations and the firms’ willingness to cooperate.
Policies should take advantage of this by including representatives of industry in governance



                                               128
structures. The sector should also actively work to strength coordination by promoting social
networks among industry players.

   iii.    Increase the sustainability of funding for the sector

Consideration should be given to increase coordination of funding in the sector. Funding for
initiatives in the sector comes from industry, the donor community and government. This funding
does not appear to be coordinated and there is little long term commitment to funding programs. A
sector-wide approach (SWAP) would strengthen coordination and allow for more long term
planning.

Conclusion
This paper has focused on four topics:

   1.      The importance of the garment sector – The sector makes a substantial contribution
           to economic activity. It also has plays an important strategic role. The garment sector has
           been an important stepping stone for economies in the process of industrializing.
   2.      How the sector will be affected by joining the Eurasian Customs Union – The
           analysis suggests that the impact of joining the Customs Union will be reflected in an
           increase in the cost of material inputs for the garment sector. This will reduce the
           sector’s competitiveness.
   3.      A number of interventions are proposed to increase competitiveness. This includes
           promoting trade, increasing training and education, and extending the program and
           support for a financial leasing program.
   4.      These interventions will overcome a number of constraints that undermine the
           sector’s competitiveness if implemented effectively. These constraints include a
           dramatic shortage of skills, difficulty in accessing financing and low levels of technology
           adoption.




                                                129
                                        Bibliography
Abylaev, M (2013) Kyrgyz Textile Companies’ resilience features in the post-soviet regionalization
       process, The Swedish School of Textiles, University of Borås, Bryggaregatan 17, SE – 501 90
       Borås, Sweden
Anderson, J. E. and E. van Wincoop (2003). “Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution to the Border Puzzle.”
      American Economic Review, 93(1): 170–92.
Arnold, Jens J. M. & A. Mattoo, Aaditya & G. Narciso, Gaia (2008) "Services Inputs and Firm
       Productivity in Sub-Saharan Africa: Evidence from Firm-Level Data," Journal of African
       Economies, Vol. 17, No. 4, pages 578-599.
Arnold, Jens J. M. & B. Javorcik, Beata S. & A. Mattoo, Aaditya, (2011). "Does services liberalization
       benefit manufacturing firms?: Evidence from the Czech Republic," Journal of International
       Economics, Vol. 85, No. 1, pp. 136-146, September.
Arnold, Jens,., Beata B. Javorcik, Molly M. Lipscomb & Aaditya A. Mattoo, (2010). "Services Reform
       and Manufacturing Performance: Evidence from India," CEPR Discussion Papers 8011,
       C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers.
Baldwin, R., and D. Taglioni. 2006. “Gravity for Dummies and Dummies for Gravity Equations.” NBER
       Working Paper No. 12516, National Bur eau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Birkman, L. Kaloshkina, M, Khan, M, Shavurov, U and Smallhouse, S (2012), Textile and Apparel
      Cluster in the Kyrgyz Republic, Harvard Kennedy School and Harvard Business School,
      Cambridge, MA.
Borchert, Ingo, Batshur Gootiiz, and Aaditya Mattoo. (2012a2012). “Policy Barriers to International
       Trade in Services: New Empirical Evidence,” Policy Research Working Paper Series No. 6109,
       World Bank, Washington, DC.
Datta, A and Christofferen, S, (2004), Production Costs, Scale Economies and Technical Change In
        U.S. Textile and Apparel Industries, Working Paper
Dubashov, Bakyt (2015) Kyrgyz Republic Economic Update Spring 2015: Adjusting to a challenging
      regional economic environment. World Bank
EU Commission: Customs Union between Russia, Kazakhstan and Belarus, English Translation of the
      Customs Code, 2010UNOFFICIAL TRANSLATION, not a precise legal translation and
      facilitative only. The definitive legal text is in Russian.
European Parliament, Policy Department A: Economy and Scientific Policy, Briefing PE 536.291 “The
      Russian Embargo: Impact on the Economic and Employment Situation in the EU”, Oct. 2014
FAO, “Russia’s Restrictions on Imports of Agricultural and Food Products: an Initial Assessment”,
       2014
Feenstra, R. C. (2004). Advanced International Trade: Theory and Evidence. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
       University Press.
Feenstra, Robert C. 2010. Offshoring in the Global Economy: Microeconomic Structure and
       Macroeconomic Implications. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Francois, J., and O. Pindyuk (2012). “Explanatory Note: Consolidated Data on International Trade in
       Services.” Unpublished.



                                                 130
Francois, Joseph, and Bernard Hoekman. 2010. “Services Trade and Policy.” Journal of Economic
       Literature 48 (3): 642–92.
Francois, Joseph, and Julia Woerz. 2008. "Producer Services, Manufacturing Linkages, and Trade."
       Journal of Industry, Competition and Trade, 8 (3): 199–229.
Francois, Joseph, Miriam Manchin, and Patrick Tomberger. 2013. “Services Linkages and the Value
       Added Content of Trade.” Working Paper 6432, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Francois, Joseph, Olga Pindyuk, and Julie Woerz. 2009. “Trends in International Trade and FDI in
       Services.” IIDE Discussion Paper 200908-02, IIDE, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
Freund, Caroline, and Diana Weinhold. 2002. “The Internet and International Trade in Services.”
       American Economic Review 92 (2): 236–40.
Gereffi, G., and S. Frederick (2010), The Global Apparel Value Chain, Trade, and the Crisis. In
        Cattaneo, G., Gereffi, G. and C. Staritz, Global Value Chains in a Postcrisis World: A
        Development Perspective. Washington, DC: The World Bank Group, 157-208.
Ghani, Ejaz, ed. (2010). The Service Revolution in South Asia. New York: Oxford University Press.
Gibbs, J. Murray. (1986). “Services, Development, and TNCs.” CTC Reporter 21 (Spring): 51–53.
Gill, Indermit S., Ivailo Izvorski, Willem van Eeghen, and Donato De Rosa. (2014). “Diversified
        Development: Making the Most of Natural Resources in Eurasia”. Washington, DC: World
        Bank.
Goswami, Arti Grover, Aaditya Mattoo, and Sebastián Sáez, eds. . (2012. ). Exporting Services: A
      Developing Country Perspective. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Hallward-Driemeier, Mary, Gita Khun-Jush, and Lant Pritchett (2010) Deals versus Rules Policy
       Implementation Uncertainty and Why Firms Hate It – World Bank Policy Research Working
       Paper No. 5321.
Hausmann, Ricardo, Jason Hwang, and Dani Rodrik. ( 2007). “What You Export Matters.” Journal of
      Economic Growth 12(1): 1–25. http://www.worldbank.org/wtis
ILO (2012), Skills for trade and economic diversification in the Kyrgyz garment sector, ILO, Geneva
IMF (2015) “Kyrgyz Republic: Request for a three-year arrangement under the extended credit
      facility – staff report.” IMF Country Report No. 15/113
IMF, (2013), Kyrgyz Republic: Selected Issues, International Monetary Fund June 2013 IMF Country
       Report No. 13/176 July 29, 2012 January 29, 2001 January 29, 2001
Inklaar, R., M. Timmer, B.van Ark (2008). “Market Services Productivity across Europe and the US.”
        Economic Policy 23: 141–94.
Inklaar, R., Timmer, M., & Ark, B. v. ( 2007. ) “Mind the Gap! International Comparisons of
        Productivity in Services and Goods Production.” German Economic Review 8 (5): 281–307.
Jenish, Nurbek (2014): Export-driven SME Development in the Kyrgyz Republic: The Garment
        Manufacturing Sector, Institute of Public Policy and Administration Working Paper No. 26,
        University of Central Asia, Bishkek
Jensen, Bradford. (2008). “Trade in High-Tech Services.” Journal of Industry, Competition, and Trade
        8 (3–4): 181–97.
Jensen, Jesper, Thomas F. Rutherford, and David G. Tarr. (2004). “The Impact of Liberalizing
       Barriers to Foreign Direct Investment in Services: The Case of Russian Accession to the

                                                131
       World Trade Organization.” Policy and Research Working Paper No. 3391, World Bank,
       Washington, DC.
Kee, Hiau Looi, Alessandro Nicita and Marcelo Olarreaga. "Estimating trade restrictiveness
      indices",Economic Journal, 2009, vol. 119, p. 172--199.
Kolchenikova, O and Konstantinova, I, (2013) Russian Federation Retail Foods Retail Sector
       Continues to Expand, GAIN Report Number: RSATO 1312, 9/3/2013
Lederman, D, Olarreaga, M, and Payton, L, (2006) Export Promotion Agencies: What Works and
      What Doesn't, World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 4044
Lennon, Carolina & Mirza, Daniel & Nicoletti, Giuseppe (2009) “Complementarity of Inputs in
      Services Trade”, Annales d’Economie et de Statistiques, Number 93/94, April/June.
Malouche, Mariem. (2013. ) “Non-tariff Measures in Kazakhstan.” Background paper.
Mogilevskii, Roman (2012a): Trends and Patterns in Foreign Trade of Central Asian Countries,
       University of Central Asia Institute of Public Policy and Administration, Working Paper No.1.
Mogilevskii, Roman (2012b): Re-export Activities in the Kyrgyz Republic: Issues and Prospects,
       University of Central Asia Institute of Public Policy and Administration, Working PaperNo.9.
Nathan, (2009) Bringing HOPE to Haiti’s Apparel Industry Improving Competitiveness through
       Factory-level
OECD/WTO (2013), Aid for Trade and Value Chains in Textiles and Apparel, OECD, Paris
Pavlov, A (2011) , Assessing the Economic Effect of the Kyrgyz Republic’s Accession to the Customs
        Union, A study on the Kyrgyz Republic Integration into the EurAsEU Customs Union
        (http://www.eabr.org/e/research/centreCIS/projectsandreportsCIS/the                 Kyrgyz
        Republic/http://www.eabr.org/e/research/centreCIS/projectsandreportsCIS/the         Kyrgyz
        Republic/)
Plechero, M (2009) “The Role of Local Universities in Improving Traditional SMEs Innovative
       Performances: The Veneto Region Case”Paper no. 2009/11 CIRCLE, Lund University
World Bank RACINERacine, Jean-Louis (Editor) (2010) “Harnessing quality for global
      competitiveness in Easter Europe and Central Asia”. World Bank., 2010 ISBN: 978-0-8213-
      8509-
Retrack Project, funded by the EU Commission, “Potential for Eurasia Land Bridge Corridors and
       Logistics Developments along the Corridor”, 2012
World Bank (2005. ) “Telecommunications Reform within Russia’s Accession to the World Trade
      Organization,” Policy Research Working Paper 3501, World Bank, Washington, DC.
World Bank. (2010. ) ―Kyrgyz Republic Trade Brief.‖ World Trade Indicators 2009/10: Country
       Trade Briefs. Washington, DC: World Bank. Available at:
World Bank (2012). “Guide to the Services Trade Restrictions Database.” Policy Research Working
      Paper Series No. 6108, World Bank, Washington DC.
World Bank (2012). “Assessment of Costs and Benefits of the Customs Union for Kazakhstan”
World Bank (2013), Technology extension services, Innovation Policy Platform, Issue Brief
World Bank (2014), Quality for Competitiveness – Assessment Toolkit, Country Assessment Report
      Kyrgyz Republic, 2014


                                                132
World Bank (2015) “Republic of Armenia: An Assessment of Challenges and Opportunities in the
       Eurasian Economic Union”
World Bank Group, IFC in collaboration with SECO, (2015) Comparative Analysis of Certain
      Requirements of Food Legislation in the European Union and the Customs Union of Russia,
      Belarus, and Kazakhstan, May 2015




                                        Appendix:

 Letter from the Ministry of the Economy of the Kyrgyz Republic


                                 September 4, 2014




                                              133
                           Ministry of Economy of the Kyrgyz Republic
                                  106, Chui Ave., Bishkek, 720002

September 4, 2014
# 13-2/9031


                                                                                  World Bank Office


The implementation of activities under the Roadmap for accession of the Kyrgyz Republic to the CU,
which was approved by the CU countries and the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic, is currently
underway. In addition, the Government has prepared preliminary version of the Roadmap for
accession of the Kyrgyz Republic to CES.

Majority of the activities must be completed within very short timeframe and the next few months.

The Ministry of Economy of the KR is requesting you to send a representative of your organization to
the meeting, at which the Deputy Minister of Economy of the KR will present the information on the
ongoing preparation activities on accession to the CU and CES.

The meeting will take place on 8th of September at 14.00.

Considering the large volume of work and the tight deadlines for implementation fo activities on
accession to the CU and CES, we hope that your organization will be able to provide the required
expert support for implementation of the stated activities.

The list of activities on accession of the Kyrgyz Republic to the CU and CES, for which expert support
is required, is attached herewith.

Deputy Minister,
D.T. Ibraev




                                                 134
     Activities on accession of the Kyrgyz Republic to the CU and CES, for which expert support,
                       including support from donor organizations, is required

                                                                                    Form of
                                                                               implementation
I.      Within the Road Map on the Accession to the Customs Union,         Draft regulatory acts, RIA
        prepare draft regulatory acts on the following:                    materials

        - customs administration;
        - technical regulation;
        - sanitary, veterinarian and phytosanitary measures;
        - transport and infrastructure;
        - customs-tariff and non-tariff regulation;
        - application of special protective, antidumping             and
        compensation measures;
        - trade policy;
        - fiscal policy;
        - statistics.

        Of which, on the customs-tariff and non-tariff regulation:

        a) analyzed consequences of the KR accession to the following    Analytical notes
        international treaties:
          - Treaty on the Uniform Customs-Tariff Regulation dated 25
        January 2008, Agreement on the Conditions and Mechanism of
        Tariff Quotas Application dated 12 December 2008, Protocol on
        the Provision of Tariff Preferences dated 12 December 2008 and
        Protocol on the Conditions and Procedure of Exceptional
        Application of Entry Customs Duties Different from the Uniform
        Customs Tariff dated 12 December 2008;
          - Treaty on the Identification of Customs Value of the Goods
        Transported through the Customs Border of the Customs Union
        dated 25 January 2008;
          - Treaty on the Uniform Measures of Non-tariff Regulation in
        Relation to Third Countries dated 25 January 2008, Agreement
        on the Procedure of Introduction and Application of the Measures
        Affecting Foreign Trade in Goods in the Common Customs
        Territory in Relation to the Third Parties dated 9 June 2009 and
        Agreement on the Rules of Licensing in the Foreign Trade in
        Goods dated 9 June 2009;

        b) on an established list of goods, application of entry customs
        duties different from the rates established by the CU Uniform
        Customs Tariff: analysis of consequences;

        c) prepare proposals on the identification of a mechanism and
        content of negotiations with WTO-member countries on the
        changes in the KR’s obligations to the WTO in accordance with
        the GATT Articles XXIV and XXVIII;


                                                   135
       d) comparative analysis of the regime when tariff preferences are
       provided in accordance with the KR legislation and contractual
       framework of the CU.



II.    Within the Road Map on the accession to the CES:                     Draft regulatory acts, RIA
                                                                            materials
       Prepare draft regulatory acts on the following:

       Development of industries in:
       Agribusiness;
       Natural monopolies;
       Energy sector;
       Competition policy;
       Public procurement;
       Trade in services, and institution, operations and implementation
       of investments;
       Intellectual property;
       Labour migration;
       Information interoperability;
       Exchange policy;
       Financial markets;
       Transport and infrastructure.


III.   Development of programmes on:                                        Draft programmes

       1) structural transformation of the economy in the mid- and long-
       term perspective for its adaptation to the new conditions of the
       integrated market in the CU countries and increased standard of
       living of the Kyrgyz citizens;

       1.1. Analyze the active strategies of the Kyrgyz Republic on:

       - industrial development;
       - processing industry;
       - agribusiness;
       - energy sector;
       - transport and infrastructure.

       1.2. Analyze programmatic documents on the implementation of
       economic policy and prepare proposals on its adjustment in the
       following areas:

       - macroeconomics;
       - policy on natural monopolies;
       - competitive (antimonopoly) policy;
       - public procurement;
       - trade in services, and institution, operation and implementation

                                                  136
      of investments;
      - intellectual property;
      - labour migration;
      - information interoperability;
      - financial markets;

      2) mitigation of negative consequences after joining the CU,
      including measures to prevent a significant fall in the standard of
      living, especially of the vulnerable population groups, including
      the extended payment of unemployment benefits, allowances for
      the poor, disabled, implementation of broad programmes to
      retrain the persons made redundant, relief work programmes,
      etc.

      2.1. Analyze the impact of the Kyrgyz Republic joining the CU,
      including changes in the structure of branches and inflation rate
      growth, impact on the standard of living, employment and
      growth of unemployment by sectors and regions.

      2.2. Assess the needs in budget funding for the measures to
      prevent a fall in the standard of living, first of all, of risky social
      groups, in case of a consumer price spiral and other negative
      consequences.


IV.   Prepare proposals on the development of foreign trade                     Analytical notes, draft
      infrastructure, including:                                                programmes

      - development and deployment of laboratories;
      - modernization and streamlined deployment of check points,
      including customs, sanitary, veterinary and phytosanitary
      services control points;
      - development of logistics terminals network;
      - transport and logistics companies.

V.    Prepare proposals to support exports, including measures to               Analytical notes, draft
      alleviate tax burden, simplify procedures, provide preferences,           regulatory acts, RIA
      subsidies, expand services of lending, insurance of export-import         materials
      transactions, etc.




                                                      137
