Women in Development and the World Bank Group


NUMBER 085
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: MARCH 2014




                         January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
Women in Development and the World Bank Group

In advance of International Women’s Day 2014, the
World Bank Group Archives is taking a look at the
World Bank Group’s early initiatives relating to
women in development, a topic that became
increasingly important for the Bank in the mid-1970s.
Coinciding with the United Nations’ “Decade for
Women” (1976-1985), the Bank began to investigate
how women in developing countries fared in sectors
such as education, water, maternal health, food
production, and agriculture. Issues related to
women’s legal rights and recognition were also
explored. Research was increasingly geared towards
the topic, and conferences and workshops were
organized and attended. Project evaluations also
                                                           Gloria Scott, the World
began to include a focus on the effect individual        Bank Group's first Adviser
projects had on women.                                   on Women in Development

A key development within the Bank was the creation of the Bank’s Adviser on
Women in Development in 1977. The position, first held by Gloria Scott, “focused
attention on the subject [of women in development], [and] promoted an
understanding of the key issues and ways to address them in the Bank’s
operational work and in countries which the Bank assists” (The Bank’s World,
Volume 4: Number 9, September 1985, page 11). One important result of this
attention, and Scott’s work in particular, was the 1979 publication “Recognizing
the ‘Invisible’ Woman in Development: The World Bank’s Experience”.
While an increasing amount of information was being generated with regard to
the plight and potential of women in developing countries, the incorporation of
women’s issues into the design of Bank projects was tentative throughout the
1980s. The subject continued to grow in importance, however, and in the spring
of 1987 a Women in Development Division (PHRWD) was created in the Bank’s
Population and Human Resources Department. The Division’s primary function
was to support the inclusion of women in development in project development,
implementation, and evaluation. Division Chief Barbara Herz said at the time:
“We want to get beyond studies and training. We want to show what can actually
be done to include women in development programs and how that contributes to
economic performance, easing of poverty, and other development activities” (The
Bank’s World, Volume 6: Number 11, November 1987, page 9).
                              But by 1989, World Bank President Barber Conable
                              was still not satisfied with the Bank’s commitment to
                              women in developing countries. In a letter to then
                              Senior Vice President, Operations, Moeen Qureshi,
                              Conable requested a more systematic and
                              operational approach to the issue. In the letter, he
                              tasks individual Country Departments with the
                              preparation of an assessment of women’s role in
                              development and an action program which should
                              be put in place. Conable’s letter to Qureshi, along
                              with an attached “Proposed Bank Approach and
                              Plan of Action” template and a forwarding letter from
                              Qureshi to Bank Regional Vice Presidents, are
The Bank's World (Volume 4:   reproduced in part and linked to below.
Number 9, September 1985),    Interestingly, these records are attachments to a
 special issue on women in    piece of correspondence from Marianne Haug,
        development
                              Executive Assistant to the President, to Mr.
                              Conable’s wife, Mrs. Charlotte Conable who had a
                              special interest in women in development.

Haug's correspondence is found in the Subject Files series of the Records of
Executive Assistant to the President, Marianne Haug (WB IBRD/IDA EXC-11-03-
5445S). Along with other Bank reports and memoranda related to the topic of
women in development, the series contains the results of Conable’s request in
the form of twenty-one summaries of the Country Departments’ Women in
Development Country Assessments.

Records related to women in development and gender issues can be found in a
variety of fonds in the World Bank Group Archives. If you are interested in this
topic or others related to the World Bank Group’s history, visit our list of Finding
Aids or visit our Access to Information page to submit a request or to
communicate with an archivist. You can also search our Documents & Reports
database to view research and project reports related to the topic of Women in
Development. Oral histories of former Bank staff are also searchable in the
Documents & Reports database or can be found at the Archives’ Oral History
page. These interviews are an especially rich resource for investigation into all
sorts of Bank-related topics; for example, see Katherine Marshall’s and Catherine
Gwin’s oral histories for discussion of the evolution of the women in development
sector.
