Digitized Records of the Bali Tourism Project


NUMBER 083
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: OCTOBER 2013




                            January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
Digitized Records of the Bali Tourism Project

For many developing countries in the 1960s, tourism was an increasingly viable
contributor to their economic growth. The World Bank recognized this potential
and, in 1969, it established a Tourism Projects Department to assist member
countries in identifying, preparing, and implementing projects to encourage and
facilitate tourism. Subsequently,
the Bank provided loans to finance
integrated programs of
infrastructure in areas where the
main activity was tourism and/or to
support the construction of hotels
and other tourist facilities. The Bali
Tourism Project for Indonesia
(Credit 479-IND, Project ID
#P003738), which was approved in
June of 1974, incorporated both of
these objectives. The project was
initially designed to create
“infrastructure to promote tourism      Indonesian and World Bank officials signing Credit
development in Bali, [and] included      479-IND and Project #P003738 documents on 14
a 310 [hectare] tourism estate at                          June 1974.
Nusa Dua, facilities for hotel
training, an access road from the airport, road improvements outside Nusa Dua
[…], and technical assistance for implementing the project and the mas ter plan
for tourism in Bali? (Indonesia: Bali Tourism Project, Project Completion Report).
The World Bank Group and its Archives provides different ways in which you can
learn about and access records related to projects such as the Bali Tourism
Project. The Projects & Operations page for the Bali Tourism Project provides an
overview of the project as well as details related to financials, procurement,
results, and media coverage. The “Documents? tab contains links to project
documents which are created according to the World Bank’s Project Cycle, such
as Project Completion Reports and Staff Appraisal Reports. In the “Archival
Records? sub-tab, researchers will find a list of project records relative to a given
project.
As part of the Archives’ digitization initiative, World Bank records are being
digitized and made available to off-site researchers. Declassified records of the
Bali Tourism Project have been digitized and can be viewed by clicking on the
hyperlinked file unit titles in the “Archival Records? sub-tab. Bali Tourism project
records relate not only to the negotiation and early stages of the loan through its
completion in 1983 but also to the UNDP-financed study of Bali tourism (for
which the Bank served as Executing Agency) in 1968 and an additional
Technical Assistance Credit (275-IND) which produced additional site
development studies during 1972 and 1973. The records consist almost
exclusively of correspondence in the form of letters and cables between Bank
project staff, Indonesian government officials, and consultants.
The digitization of World Bank Group records is ongoing. Newly scanned project
records are regularly uploaded into the Projects & Operations portal. However, if
you are interested in viewing records that are not yet digitized but which are
eligible for review, visit the World Bank's Access to Information website.
