Seventh Annual Meetings of the Boards of Governors
of the WBG and IMF, Mexico City, Sept. 1952

NUMBER 066
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: OCTOBER 2009




                            January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
Seventh Annual Meetings of the Boards of Governors of the WBG
and the IMF, Mexico City, September 1952

The Boards of Governors of the
International Monetary Fund and the World
Bank Group meet once a year in the fall to
discuss the work of their respective
institutions. Following the established
tradition to meet in a member country every
third year, the 2009 Annual Meetings take
place in Istanbul, Turkey on September 6-7,
2009.
                                                 Seventh Annual Meetings participants
                                                at the session, Mexico City, September
The 7th Annual Meetings were held in                             1952
Mexico City, Mexico on September 3-12,
1952 under the chairmanship of the Honorable Horacio Lafer, Minister of Finance
of Brazil. The Opening Session of the Meetings of the Boards of Governors of the
Bank and Fund took place in the Palace of Fine Arts in Mexico City.

The President of Mexico, Miguel Aleman, addressed members of the Boards and
the public to begin conference’s proceedings. "The care which the Bank
authorities take, in the study of every project that is submitted to them, with
regard to its social purpose as well as to its economic productivity and technical
                                         convenience, is a guarantee that the loans
                                         the Bank allows will never prove to be a
                                         heavy charge for the peoples that receive
                                         them as was the case in other epochs
                                         when the investing countries granted
                                         loans, to cover budget deficits or for
                                         destructive ends, that carries in
                                         themselves the uncertainty of fulfillment
                                         on the part of the debtor country." (From
                                         the Address by the President of Mexico,
  Seventh Annual Meetings participants   Miguel Aleman, September 3, 1952)
    attend the exhibit, Mexico City,
           September 1952
                                       The Minister of Finance of Brazil, Horacio
                                       Lafer, who presided over the Annual
Meetings continued the session with the speech about the world problems
challenging Bank and Fund. He talked about the persistent inflation, the rapid
growth in world population, and the widespread balance of payments
disequilibrium affecting many countries.
                            "As for the International Bank, I do not regard its
                            mission as encompassed within the narrow definitions
                            of reconstruction and development: its mission is ever
                            broadening in scope. No institution is better placed to
                            meet the long run challenge of increasing the food
                            production and distribution for a rapidly growing world
                            population... The great contribution that the Bank can
                            make to all member countries is to combine sound
                            banking principles with a creative effort to help in the
                            world development of transportation, electric power and
                            food production." (From the Address of Horacio Lafer,
 Horacio Lafer, Chairman    Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Bank, at the
of the Board of Governors   Opening Session, September 3, 1952)
 of the Bank, September
          1952


The meeting agenda included:

      Seventh Annual Report
      Financial Statements and Annual Audit
      Administrative Budget for Fiscal Year Ending
       June 30, 1953
      Allocation of Income to Reserve
      Regulations Relating to Executive Directors and
       Alternates
      Fourth Regular Election of Executive Directors
      Application of Republic of Indonesia for
       Membership in the Bank
      “Draft Resolution to be submitted by the           Summary Proceedings of
       Governor for Czechoslovakia Proposing                the Seventh Annual
                                                           Meetings, Mexico City,
       Exclusion of the Kuomintang Group from All          September 3-12, 1952
       Organs of the Bank?
      Place and Date of Eighth Annual Meeting
      Election of Officers and Procedures Committee for 1952-53
