Creating a New World Bank: The Strategic Forum


NUMBER 074
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: JULY 2011




                          January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
Creating a New World Bank: The Strategic Forum

The World Bank was fifty years old when James D.
Wolfensohn became president in June of
1995. World War II and the reconstruction of
Europe, which led to the creation of the World
Bank, had ended long before. By 1995, the world of
development aid had changed, and new
technologies were in the process of completely
reshaping the way services and products were
delivered and how people communicate. Though
the World Bank adapted to meet these changes,
Wolfensohn entered office believing the institution
needed to evolve further and faster to remain
relevant. In his Address at the 1995 Annual
Meetings, entitled New Directions and New
Partnerships, Wolfensohn stated the
problem succinctly: "The world around us has                  James D. Wolfensohn, 9th
                                                             President of the World Bank
changed, and its expectations from, and demands                         Group
on, our institution have become ever more
complex. I regard this as a difficult period, but one
of enormous opportunity." During President Wolfensohn’s Oral History
                           Interview, which was conducted after his tenure as
                           Bank President, he stressed that when he first came
                           into office "the institution...had gotten soft in terms of
                           objectives and in terms of accountability." Wolfensohn,
                           therefore, spent the first years of his presidency
                           creating the Strategic Compact to address what he
                           believed most challenged the World Bank. Specifically,
                           that "there has been too much emphasis on
                           lending volume and not enough on results on the
                           ground; too much focus on economic response and not
                           enough on the effectiveness of the policy
                           dialogue" (New Directions and New Partnerships
                           Address to the Board of Governors, 10/10/1995).

                            The Strategic Compact set forth goals for the World
                            Bank, namely "strengthening the development
"The New World Bank" in
 Bank's World, February     effectiveness of our lending and non-lending services;
 27, 1998. See below for    improving our responsiveness to client needs;
      larger version        developing a broader range of products and services;
reducing overhead and shifting resources to the front line; further decentralizing
our activities; rebuilding our professional expertise and technical capacity; and
sharing the best global knowledge on development with our clients and partners."
(Implementing the Strategic Compact: First Semi-Annual Progress
Report, 8/20/1997, Archives Folder 1662710). To discuss how to implement
these lofty goals, management met in January of 1998 at the Strategic Forum.
The Strategic Forum took place
in a room that was later
described as very unusual for the
Bank at the time. The walls were
covered with colorful hand-made
posters, charts and graphs.
These items displayed the latest
information from client surveys,
staff surveys, the Strategic
Compact, the Annual Report,
and cost-effectiveness review.
The posters set the tone; the        One of the posters used during the Strategic Forum:
meeting was largely informal,          Participants were tasked with filling in the blank
with open discussion among                                  areas.
small groups, and plenty of
chances for large scale discussions.

The basic attitude, as laid down by moderator Chris McGoff, was that the
attendees were "engaging in dialogue rather than debate" about a question that
had "many right answers." Over two days the attendees discussed several
aspects of the "new World Bank" centered mainly on corporate priorities and new
options for allocating the budget. Through the Strategic Forum the managers of
the Bank achieved what VP Mark Baird described as 'Real change - and deep
cultural change... [with a] strong and enduring commitment to succeed."
