World Bank Concerns and Policies during the
1973-74 OPEC Embargo

NUMBER 071
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: MARCH 2011




                          January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
World Bank Concerns and Policies during the 1973-74 OPEC
Embargo

To mark Energy Week 2011 at the World
bank, and to consider the current issue of
rising oil prices, the Archives has chosen
to highlight a drawing by Pedro-Pablo
Kuczynski, created during the 1973-74
OPEC oil embargo. This sketch, entitled
“Energy crisis – gen. policy paper,? is in
two parts, a before and after picture of how
the oil embargo will affect transportation.
The “before? picture is that of a man driving
a large car -- the exhaust particularly
prominent -- and cruising from gas station
to gas station without any concern. The
“after? picture is that of the same man, only
now he is walking great distances to buy
new shoes, dutifully followed by his
dachshund, which inexplicably has a bottle
of scotch strapped to its back. While a
fascinating record on its own, this cartoon
is even more interesting when placed in            The cartoonist Ranga drew this line
the larger context of World Bank policy at          sketch of Barber Conable during
the beginning of the embargo in the early             Conable's 1987 trip to India
1970s.
The Bank was tracking the causes and implications of the dramatic rise in prices
that were occurring (from 88¢ per barrel in 1970 to $3.11 per barrel at the
beginning of October 1973), however there was no projection for any major
shortage or crisis. Even before the embargo, the Bank was taking a global view
of the prices. Their interest was focused on two separate, but related, issues.

The first issue examined how developing countries, which were dependent on
the importation of oil for their energy needs, would be financially challenged by
the rising costs. James P. Grant’s “Energy Shock and the Development
Prospect? [Archives folder 30020127] sums up this concern:

“The admittedly limited goal of increasing growth rates was jeopardized in a
majority of developing countries… by the jolt of sudden, massive price increases
in their essential imports, primarily oil, food and fertilizers, and by the impending
                              global economic slowdown. The development
                              prospects of some of the most populous poor
                              countries… were thus even more gravely
                              endangered for the balance of the decade. And
                              some of the higher-income developing countries…
                              now faced serious short-term disruption.?

                               The second issue examined how the rise in prices
                               will alter the global economic situation, and thus the
                               ability of the U.S. and other industrialized nations to
                               provide aid to the developing world. Concerns were
                               directed towards the embargo’s effect on
 The World Bank was closely
  monitoring the situation in  international markets, capitalist economies, and how
  regards to rising oil prices the newly found “financial power? of OPEC countries
  even before the embargo      will enable them to interact with other nations. A
began, as shown by this draft
                               memo from 11/30/1973 entitled “Oil to start affecting
   report. [Archives folder
         30020125]             German aid,? shows the reality of this concern. The
                               opening sentence reads “The short-lived era of
                               idealistic German
development aid…which was based on an
extremely affluent economy… may have come to
an unforeseen and undesired end? (From an office
memorandum between J.W. Strobl and Mr. William
Clark, [Archives folder 30020125]).

With oil prices on the rise, thought was being given
to the idea of reducing dependence on foreign oil.
In March of 1973, “An increased level of energy
costs, particularly in the U.S., could encourage the
development of domestic sources of energy and
thereby reduce the ever-growing need to import oil
and gas? (From office memorandum titled
                                                            Background Paper for the
Projections of Oil Revenues of OPEC Member              Washington Energy Conference.
Countries, between John Foster and Mr. M.               The paper provided information
Shoaib [Archives folder 30020125]).                     on how scientific advancements
                                                          might alleviate future energy
                                                       crises [Archives folder 30020127]
In February 1974, World Bank representatives
attended the Washington Energy Conference. At
this Conference, alternative energy sources were discussed as evidenced in the
Energy Research and Development Background paper [Archives folder
30020127]. The report states, “Hydrogen itself, either in elemental form or in
compounds such as ammonia, is an excellent fuel, transportable as a gas or a
liquid.? Discussions about domestic energy sources and the possibility for
vehicles powered by hydrogen fuel cells are as current today as they were in the
mid-1970s. The archival records related to the Bank's response to the OPEC oil
embargo during these years show us how prominent these same issues are
today.
