Robert S. McNamara, World Bank President:
April 1, 1968 – June 30, 1981

NUMBER 064
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: JULY 2009




                          January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
Robert S. McNamara, World Bank President: April 1, 1968 – June
30, 1981

Robert S. McNamara became World Bank
President on April 1, 1968 and served two full five-
year terms and a partial term, leaving on June 30,
1981. When McNamara came to the World Bank, it
was lending about $1 billion per year.

When he left in 1981, Bank lending stood at about
$12 billion a year. In addition to the dramatic
increase in volume of loans, McNamara refocused
Bank lending beyond infrastructure and projects to
basic human needs and poverty reduction. The
Bank that McNamara left in 1981 was completely
transformed from the institution thirteen years
earlier, when he became President. It was a much          Robert S. McNamara, 1981
larger organization, and much more complex.

McNamara's Annual Meetings speech in Nairobi in 1973, when he first used the
term "absolute poverty" was a turning point in his presidency. He proposed
forming the Consultative Group for International Agricultural Research (CGIAR),
                           which makes major contributions to increasing global
                           food production and reducing hunger.

                           He mobilized Bank resources to launch an
                           international onchocerciasis (river blindness) control
                           program. And in 1978 the World Development Report,
                           the Bank's flagship publication on development
                           issues, was launched.

                           The strengthening of the research staff stimulated
                           interaction with the academic community and allowed
                           the Bank to claim a role as an intellectual leader in
                           development matters. The World Bank was, to
                           McNamara, "an innovative, problem-solving
                           mechanism…to help fashion a better life for mankind
in the decades ahead."
                              Message to World Bank
                                  staff, May 1968
From the Opening            (International Bank Notes,   Statement by Mr. George
                                        1968)
Woods, President of the World Bank Group at a meeting with the press,
Washington, D.C., November 30, 1967: “Both the Executive Directors and I are
enormously pleased that Secretary McNamara has agreed to serve as the fifth
president of the World Bank. In my judgment, the problems of economic
development, which is the Bank’s principal business, are one of the two or three
most important influences which will determine the course of international events
over the rest of this century. Secretary McNamara has for a long time had a deep
interest in these problems and he will bring to them qualities of creative
imagination and leadership that are unexcelled."

"In unanimously selecting Secretary
McNamara, the Executive Directors –
who represent 107 countries – have, I
believe, recognized that the United
States nominated one of its
outstanding public servants to lead
this world organization."

"More than any man I can think of,
Secretary McNamara can give the
Bank group of institutions the impetus
                                                Mr. McNamara at the UNCTAD meeting in
that will enable them to continue to                       Chile, April 1972
meet with increasing effectiveness
their world-wide responsibilities. I feel entirely confident in turning the presidency
of these institutions over to him.?
