Creating Community at the World Bank Group


NUMBER 078
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: FEBRUARY 2012




                          January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
Creating Community at the World Bank Group

The first issue of International Bank Notes was published on April 25, 1947,
shortly after the World Bank opened for business. While it was a newsletter
designed specifically for staff, it also reveals how the World Bank created a
community.
The first issue highlighted the personal aspect of working at the World Bank:
weddings; visitors to Washington staff; sightseeing in Washington; lectures at the
National Gallery of Art; as well as introducing new staff and their countries of
origin. The first issue also solicited a name for the newsletter, which did not yet
have a title.




The header for the first issue of International Bank Notes (April 1947), which did not yet have
                                              a title

By the time the second newsletter was issued on May 9, 1947 the publication
had a name: International Bank Notes. The third issue of June 6, 1947 outlined
the purpose of International Bank Notes: “The purpose of this newsletter is to
give you information of a personal nature rather than to attempt to duplicate
                             press releases, digests, and what could be termed
                             ‘official’ memoranda….in that way all will become
                             better acquainted.?
                                  While the newsletter continued to print information
                                  such as Bank picnics, carpools, and birthdays, the
                                  June 20, 1947 issue published the first biography of
                                  senior persons in the Bank, namely Sir Gordon
                                  Munro, the Executive Director for the United
                                  Kingdom. From then on, each newsletter published
                                  a biography. In this issue, the international nature
                                  of the World Bank was confirmed by the
                                  announcement of language classes in Spanish and
Lobster Bisque recipe in July
 1947 issue of International
        Bank Notes
French for staff.
The July newsletter gave the following facts and figures about World Bank Staff.
“The Bank now has 322 people. The Administrative Department is leading with
88, Research and Loan follow with 56 and 54, respectively…..Of the 44 member
nations, 19 are represented on the staff. The United States is leading, with
Canada, United Kingdom, France, Netherlands, China and Belgium running a
close race. Czechoslovakia and Poland came next with Chile and Cuba
following them closely. Then come Denmark, Greece, Guatemala, India, Iran,
New Zealand, Norway and South Africa.?

The July newsletter also began a tradition of publishing recipes submitted by
staff. The first recipe published in the newsletter was for a tasty lobster bisque.
In the following issues for 1947, information on group health insurance, a new
circulating library, the teletype system between Washington DC and London, the
staff salary policy, as well as information on the most recent Bank loans was
published.
In the space of nine months, International Bank Notes changed from a newsletter
that published only staff personals and announcements, to an important
internal tool that reflected both the community of staff and the organization’s
initiatives and objectives.
