50th Anniversary of the First Loan to Kenya, African
Agriculture and Roads Project, May 27, 1960

NUMBER 068
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: MAY 2010




                              January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
50th Anniversary of the First Loan to Kenya, African Agriculture
and Roads Project, May 27, 1960

The first loan to Kenya, approved on May 27, 1960 was for the African
Agriculture and Roads Project. The first component of the project included
completion of land consolidation and registration of land rights. The farmers were
assisted in modernizing their farms by an enlarged extension service, and the
establishment of farm training centers, demonstration farms and a system of farm
loans.




 Men working at the construction of the new   Equipment at work on the construction of a
  highway between Embu and Meru, near          new road between Embu and Meru, near
      Mount Kenya, November, 1960.                   Mount Kenya, April, 1961.


The project was structured to help farmers to develop cash crops, to establish
small herds of milk cattle and improve their beef cattle. Cooperatives for
marketing and processing were organized. The second component of this project
was the construction of one new road and the improvement of 22 roads located
in 12 districts in four provinces. About two-thirds of the roads in the second
component connected production areas and marketing points with the existing
main road network.
 Sawing timber, November,        A tea buying center at      Plucking tea and pruning the
           1960                 Gaikuyu Center in Kenya,     shrubs at Gaikuyu in Kenya,
                                    November, 1960.                  April, 1961.

The Bank’s first loan to Kenya was for $5.6 million and in the 50 years since,
there have been close to one hundred credits and grants by the International
Development Association (IDA) with a total net commitment of about $ 4.5
billion. As of March 2010, the World Bank’s portfolio in Kenya consists of 16
active operations (including a grant from the Global Environment Facility), with
total commitments of over $1.4 billion. The largest share of commitments is in
infrastructure, including transport, energy, water and sanitation, and agriculture
and rural development.




                                                Two senior Agricultural Instructors inspect
 The Nandi Agricultural Show at Kapsabet in
                                                 two year old tea growing in the Kiambu
         Kenya, November, 1960.
                                                   District in kenya, November, 1960.
Other project sectors include education, health, private sector development,
public sector governance, and economic policy. The Bank is also financing five
projects with a regional focus (covering more than three countries) with a total
commitment of $320 million for Kenya in transport and trade, agriculture,
environment, and telecommunications infrastructure.




  Cattle farm in Kiambu District in Kenya,   Pyrethrum farm in Kiambu District in Kenya,
             November, 1960.                              November, 1960.
