Poland Rejoins the IBRD, Bringing It to
150 Member Countries

NUMBER 073
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: MAY 2011




                            January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
Poland Rejoins the IBRD, Bringing It to 150 Member Countries

When delegates from Poland signed
the Articles of Agreement on June 27th
1986, Poland officially became the
150th member country of the
International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development. A milestone for both
the Bank and Poland, this act opened
new lines of communication and aid
between the two parties. Yet the act
had a ring of familiarity to it. Over 50
years before, on January 10th 1946,          Zbigniew Karcz, Director of the Foreign
Poland became the 31st member                Department of the Ministry of Finance of
country of the World Bank.                   Poland signs the Articles of Agreement,
                                             making Poland the 150th member of the
                                                           World Bank
Poland participated in the Bretton
Woods conference that created the
World Bank in 1944 and two years later they would sign the Articles of
Agreement. Poland applied for a $600 million loan to develop their economy in
October 1946, and a smaller loan in spring of 1947 for the coal mining industry.
As a result, the first mission the Bank ever sent abroad was to Poland in June
1947. At the time, it was known that the mission was only a fact-finding mission,
and not a precursor to any loan approvals.

The two loans which Poland applied for were not realized; the Polish government
and the Bank were unable to agree upon terms and the negotiations were
abandoned in early 1948. Furthermore, Poland was concerned with a section in
the Bank's Second Annual Report which discussed revitalizing German industry
and the work of a technical team, which was sent to analyze Germany's Ruhr
coal fields. The Polish delegation argued that Germany was not a member of the
Bank, and put forth a resolution asking for strict interpretation of the Bank's
Articles of Agreement, which promise aid exclusively for the benefit of members
and the enterprises within their territories. The resolution was not adopted by the
Board, and Germany continued to be considered a special case.

On March 14th, 1950 Poland became the first country to withdraw its
membership. The Ambassador to Poland, the Honorable J. Winiewicz, wrote that
the Bank had violated its statutory requirements in that it had not contributed to
the reconstruction of nations ravaged by war, but had instead "adapted its policy
entirely to the needs and directions of the United States Government to the
detriment of the other countries." The letter stated
that Poland had been denied a loan solely
because the country would not accede to the so-
called Marshall Plan, which "had as its aim the
subordination of Europe to the United States and
the rebuilding of the war potential of Germany.
Today there can be no possible doubt as to the
injurious political and economic results of this
Plan." President Eugene Black responded: "The
statements in your letter in explanation of the
action of the Polish Government cannot be
accepted. The Bank's Annual Reports and other
statements to its members and the public
demonstrate that the Bank's operations have
been conducted in accordance with the provisions        The Polish government in Exile
of the Articles of Agreement."                         sent an appeal for assistance to
                                                         the "Free World" from their
                                                           headquarters in London
Thirty-one years later, on November 10th 1981, a       [Archives Folder 1160486]. See
Polish delegation met with President Clausen to            below for larger version
present a letter of application for entry into the
Bank. According to the memo titled “POLAND - Meeting of the Polish Delegation
with Mr. Clausen” (Archives folder 1160486, see below), "[Zbigniew Karcz]
recalled that Poland had been trying to re-enter the Bank since 1956" though all
of their efforts to that point were not successful. Unfortunately, this application
would similarly fail, since in December of that year the Polish military declared
martial law. This "military junta" lasted more than 18 months, during which the
World Bank had little choice but to reject the application.

Poland's final application for membership was submitted in February of 1985. As
the application moved forward, Mr. Karcz informed the Bank that Poland's
primary concerns were the industry, agriculture and energy sectors. In
anticipation of Polish re-entry, the Bank began to analyze the requirements for
the revitalization of these sectors. With the application for membership and
recovery plans in motion, the rest of the process went smoothly and Poland
became a member of the Bank once more.
