19the Annual Meetings in Tokyo, Japan –
September 1964

NUMBER 079
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: MAY 2012




                          January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the World Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
19th Annual Meetings in Tokyo, Japan – September 1964

The headquarters of the World Bank
Group is located in Washington, DC, and
the telltale sign of spring in this area is the
blossoming of cherry trees. The first
cherry trees planted in Washington DC
were a gift from the City of Tokyo in 1912,
and to celebrate the arrival of spring, the
World Bank Group Archives is highlighting
the 19th Annual Meeting of the Bank
Group, which was held from September 7
– 11, 1964 in Tokyo, Japan.
                                                   A pin commemorating the World Bank
                                                   Group’s 19th Annual Meeting in Tokyo,
There are many archival materials in the                          Japan
custody of the World Bank Group Archives
which tell the story of the 1964 Annual Meetings in Japan. These records
originated from many units across the Bank, and they illuminate the day-to-day
work of Bank staff who were preparing for the meeting in 1964. The records
show the discussions in the spring of 1963 about the selection of Tokyo, Japan
as the host city for the meeting, as well as all the logistical work needed to
organize the event. In his address to the Annual Meeting delegates, the
President of the World Bank Group, George Woods, expressed his pleasure at
the selection of Tokyo as the host city for the meetings:

                                          “…I am particularly pleased that our Annual
                                         Meetings are in Tokyo this year, for Japan is
                                         a vibrant example of both reconstruction and
                                         development. From a state of economic
                                         prostration, this nation has risen to take its
                                         place among the industrial leaders of the
                                         world. The record of economic development
                                         in Japan has been magnificent and truly
                                         remarkable. Many policies, practices and
                                          procedures followed by Japan are worthy of
Prime Minister of Japan, Hayato Ikeda,
                                          consideration by officials of countries which
speaks at the 19th Annual Meetings of
 the World Bank Group in September        are traveling the path of development.” --
                 1964                     “Annual Address by George D. Woods,
                                          President of the Bank and its Affiliate.” in
                                          1964 Annual Meetings of the Boards of
                                          Governors: Summary Proceedings, pg. 8.
A June 11th, 1964 internal memorandum reproduced below from the Director of
Operations for South Asia and Middle East, Escott Reid, to all of the leaders in
his Department, illustrates a typical request for briefing papers. For any one
country or region, the briefing papers detailed: the state of relations with the
country; the political and economic situation at the time; and topics needing
Management attention. The briefing papers were distributed across the Bank,
but were primarily authored for the benefit of the President. The briefing papers
were an essential tool that helped the President prepare for the Annual Meetings,
where the issues of economic development would be discussed. A few months
later, in August, the briefing papers from Mr. Reid’s department (as well as those
from the other regions) were completed and sent to the Office of the President,
and these can now be found within the holdings of the World Bank Group
Archives. A description of these archival records from the Office of the President
during George Woods' presidency can be found on the Archives’ website here.
These and many other stories about the 19th Annual Meeting in Japan can be
found in the World Bank Group Archives - find out more about our holdings!
                                u,
             i




                       CO~:ln U~l1a
                     brll~ag   Pl!fPel:O&l




        ()




        (~

                                             •
        ()




•


    •            e
                       • Hart   at th late t   OIl   30   "th




cq:   Mesr   -. (U'1




 Jij-
DH~twic.b/
