World Bank Lending in the Health
Sector (1968-2009)

NUMBER 067
ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED: APRIL 2010




                           January 2016
The World Bank Group Archives Exhibit Series contains exhibits originally
published on the Archives’ external website beginning in 2002. When the
Archives’ website was transferred to a new platform in 2015, it was decided that
older exhibits would be converted to pdf format and made available as a series
on the W orld Bank’s external database, Documents & Reports.

These exhibits, authored by World Bank archivists, highlight key events,
personalities, and publications in the history of the World Bank. They also bring
attention to some of the more fascinating archival records contained in the
Archives’ holdings.

To view current exhibits, visit the Exhibits page on the Archives’ website.
World Bank Lending in the Health Sector (1968-2009)

Background

The Art Program’s Capacity Project exhibit on the World Bank Lending in the
Health Sector was created in collaboration with the World Bank’s Information
Solution Group’s Library and Archives of Development (ISGLA). The Library and
Archives of Development contributed to the creation of the exhibit by providing
the information for the timeline of the World Bank’s involvement in health and the
photographs from its extensive collection of development information.

Displayed in the Preston Lounge of the World Bank’s Main Complex during fall
2009, the panels focused on the Bank's loans for health-related projects between
1968 and 2009. The nine panels were curated by ISGLA’s Barbara Murek and
designed by the Particia Hord Graphik Design. They are now displayed in the
World Bank Group Archives Reading Room.

World Bank’s Lending in the Health Sector

The ultimate objective of the World Bank’s work in health, nutrition and
population is to improve the health conditions of the people in client countries,
particularly the poor and the vulnerable within the context of its overall strategy
for poverty alleviation. The World Bank began its work in the health sector by
focusing on population. It then moved to include both nutrition and health lending.

Today, in addition to the World Bank, new multilateral organizations, initiatives,
and foundation have assumed a prominent role in financing health, nutrition and
population, among them the Global Fund to Fight Aids, Tuberculosis and Malaria,
the Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunization (GAVI), Global Alliance for
Improved Nutrition (GAIN) and the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. Bilateral
aid has also increased substantially. Much of this new funding is earmarked for
combating priority diseases such HIV/AIDS, malaria, tuberculosis, and some
vaccine-preventable diseases; but also for health systems strengthening at the
country level, for maternal and child health, for nutrition, and for population
priorities.
