                                 DOCUMENT OF
                                THE WORLD BANK

                             FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY


                   FIDUCIARY ASSESSMENT REPORT
                                        ON A

                                 PROPOSED LOAN

                      IN THE AMOUNT EURO 460 MILLION

                         (US$500 MILLION EQUIVALENT)

                                       TO THE

                         PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF CHINA

                                         FOR


       Innovative Financing for Air Pollution Control in JING-JIN-JI


                                   JANUARY 2016




This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed
without World Bank authorization.




                                           1
         Fiduciary Assessment Report – Procurement and Financial Management

Background:

Program: The Innovative Financing for Air Pollution Control in Jing-Jin-Ji (JJJ) Program
is focused on supporting energy efficiency and green energy in the Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei
and its neighboring region, including Shandong, Shanxi, Inner Mongolia, and Henan
provinces (hereinafter referred to as Jing-Jin-Ji or JJJ region). The total cost of program is
US$1 billion, in which US$500 million will be financed by the Bank. The IBRD loan will
be on-lent by the GOC to Huaxia bank (HXB) – a commercial bank. Huaxia bank in turn
will lend the funds to industrial enterprises (regardless of ownership) for energy
conservation investment sub-projects. Huaxia bank will be responsible for identifying,
appraising, and financing eligible investments that meet the criteria in the Operational
Manual, measuring and verifying results, and bearing the full default risks.

Purpose of Assessment: Purpose of Assessment) is (i) to identify the risk which may cause
problem in procurement and FM; (ii) to establish governance system for reduce the
fiduciary risk and ensure that the program will be implemented to achieve the PDOs. This
Fiduciary Assessment follows the principles governing fiduciary management for
Program-for-Results as set out in Policy and Directive on Program for Results Financing.
As noted in the Policy and Directive on Program for Results Financing, the program
fiduciary systems should provide “reasonable assurances that the financing proceeds will
be used for intended purposes, with due attention to the principles of economy, efficiency,
effectiveness, transparency, and accountability.” The Program procurement systems were
assessed to determine the degree to which the planning, bidding, evaluation, contract award
and contract administration arrangements and practices provide a reasonable assurance that
the Program will achieve intended results through its procurement processes and
procedures. The financial management systems were assessed to determine the degree to
which the relevant planning, budgeting, accounting, internal controls, funds flow, financial
reporting and auditing arrangements provide a reasonable assurance on the appropriate use
of Program funds and safeguarding of its assets.

Scope of Assessment: The Fiduciary Assessment will be conducted to Huaxia Bank and
its operation / governance system in accordance with the Huaxia’s past performance in
CHEEF project financed by the Bank and the preparation works done by Huaxia for this
PforR program from two aspects: procurement and Financial Management. The potential
sub-project/sub-borrower is also overall assessed if possible.

Fiduciary Assessment

Hua Xia Bank is the implementing agency of the operation, who will on-lend the Program
funds at market rates to commercial enterprises for financing of eligible investments in
accordance with HXB’s existing institutional arrangements, procedures and requirements,
assessment and appraisal of sub-projects, supervision, and oversight arrangements. The
institutional arrangements, lending practices, eligibility criteria, and governance and risk

                                              2
controls are included in the OM which has been reviewed by the World Bank and to be
agreed no later than negotiations. HXB will be responsible for repayment of the loan to the
GoC and they will assume all financial risks as well. The Corporate Business Division
(CBD) of HXB has accumulated extensive experience with World Bank operations from
the CHEEF Project. The Green Credit Center, to be established within CBD, will continue
to take primary responsibility in marketing and developing pipeline under the Program,
appraise and approve potential sub-projects against eligibility criteria outlined in the OM,
day-to-day program related disbursement and financial management (FM) work including
accounting and financial reporting, and coordination with the World Bank.

Hua Xia Bank has demonstrated capacity and experience and mainstreamed EE and clean
energy financing in their current business lines. HXB has fully disbursed IBRD funds under
the CHEEF project, and its fiduciary performance on procurement and financial
management under the CHEEF Program has been satisfactory. HXB has adequate systems
in place for oversight, appraisal and supervision of sub-projects to avoid misuse of the loan
and to reduce the risk of non-performing loans. For sub-project loan appraisal, Hua Xia
Bank assesses the reasonableness of cost estimates, the capacity of the beneficiary to
implement the sub-project, including its FM and procurement capacity. With the exception
of the requirements for accounting, financial reporting and introduction of disbursement
linked indicators and the associated protocols for verification under PforR policy, the
Program fiduciary systems for HXB will largely be the same as the existing systems in
place within HXB. Therefore, the integrated FM and procurement risk is considered to be
Moderate.

The detailed assessments in procurement and Financial Management are described below:

PROCUREMENT ASSESSMENT

CHEEF Experience: Under CHEEF project, the procurement was carried out by
beneficiaries (sub-projects) in line with the commercial practices. The beneficiaries are
private sector enterprises, small and medium enterprises, or autonomous commercial
enterprises of the public sector for the partial financing of sub-projects, etc. Huaxia as the
financial intermediary institution (FI) managed the procurement through the Project
Operational Manual which was prepared by Huaxia and agreed by the Bank. CHEEF has
been successfully implemented, no irregularity procurement activities was observed. With
the CHEEF project implementation, Huaxia has built its technical capacity and a qualified
team to finance the program in EE sector.

PforR operation: Huaxia confirms that the same team in Huaxia is assigned to
implementing this new PforR operation. During the preparation, Huaxia Team is closely
worked with the Bank team to identify the program scope; updated its existed governance
and risk control system; and improved responsibilities of Huaxia and potential beneficiaries
on Anti-corruption and fraud, complaint handling mechanism, as well as following the
Bank’s Debarred/Suspended Firms and Individuals List. Considering the potential sub-
projects are not confirmed, the assessment, therefore, is focused on the institutional
arrangement and procurement management in Huaxia bank. An overall and basic
assessment for potential sub-projects will be conducted too.

                                              3
The assessment covers two aspects: Institutional Arrangement and Procurement
Management. In addition, the weakness/gaps will be addressed with mitigation measures.

Institutional arrangement.

(The assessment conducted to the institutional arrangement in Huaxia bank and the
potential sub-project.)

   (i)     Functions/Responsibility:
           At National Level – Policy Supporting: The relevant government agencies will
           ensure that the investments made under this operation support government
           priority areas and contribute to achieving the results in the government
           program.

           Within HXB at Implementing Level – three levels: (a) a JJJ Leading Group in
           charge of bank-wide investments in the JJJ Region was established in Huaxia
           bank to coordinate involved departments in Huaxia HQ and involved different
           local branches allocated in JJJ area, which will ensure the program being moved
           forward and speedy; (b) at the HQ, the Green Finance Center to be established
           is the practical unit to identify sub-project; manage implementation and ensure
           the outputs expected. The chain for sub-project management in Huaxia bank
           from lending, implementation, including procurement activities and outputs
           confirmation is well completely established; and (c) the branches are
           responsible for deal origination and supervision, and the HXB also plans to
           assign designated units in the JJJ Region branches to take the lead in green
           credit.

   (ii)    Staff:
           At least 3-4 well educated staff who are able to carry out the fiduciary functions
           with adequate Energy sector experience have been assigned in Huaxia Bank.
           They have obtained the appropriate experience which can be used for this
           program from previous CHEEF project financed by the Bank since 2008. As
           for this PforR operation, these staff closely joined program design and
           appraisal, so they are already familiar with the industrial and sector as well the
           program. There is no serious problem for Huaxia bank to start the
           implementation. In addition, the Operation Manual is followed by these staff as
           the key instruction document for procurement management during the
           implementation.

   (iii)   Potential Sub-projects:
           To have a leading group and a working team established under sub-project/sub-
           borrower for sub-project implementation and the OM shall be followed are the
           mandatory requirements as the on-lending condition regulated by Huaxia,


                                             4
           through which Huaxia wants to ensure the good quality of the sub-projects’
           implementation including procurement activities.


Procurement Management

Procurement under the proposed Program mostly includes (i) goods; non-consulting
services and supply and installation of equipment and production line re-
building/reforming for the purpose of energy conservation; and (ii) civil works of small
and medium size and associated designing or consulting services for such works. There are
no large contracts valued at or above Operational Procurement Review Committee (OPRC)
thresholds under the Program.

All practical procurement activity is in charge of by sub-project in line with the
procurement plan shown in the sub-project proposal agreed by Huaxia Bank. Huaxia bank
plays the role to monitor and supervise the procurement activities done by sub-projects.
The responsibilities of Huaxia bank and potential sub-project/sub-borrowers are
summarized as follows:

Huaxia bank:

OM: Huaxia bank will work out their Operational Manual (OM) accepted by the Bank
including the program implementation and governance regulations for this PforR program
to ensure the loan being used for program objectives and to reduce the risk of corruption
and fraud (refer to the Anti-corruption para. In PAD). During the program implementation,
the OM can be updated in line with the implementation needs.

As for the management purpose, a chapter: “procurement management framework” is
prepared in OM. Huaxia bank made two sessions: Commercial Practices and Payment in
this chapter of OM. The definition and process of Commercial Practices are given in OM:
(i) opening bidding; comparison of quotations; reversed auction and direct contracting, etc.
(ii) the effective competition among several suppliers or contractors is encouraged in
accordance with the naturalness and scope of the contract to be procured; and (iii) any other
procedures accepted.

Governance and risk control: Internal control; external Auditing; Procurement records
keeping for monitoring, Complaint Handling System and Anti-corruption regulation are
the tools to guarantee a transparency and fair procurement transitions.
     Internal control – Official documents to guide the internal control of Huaxia bank
        are issued by HQ for all levels and covering various areas of operation. The internal
        control unit’s responsibility is ensuring that the loan are used for the intended
        purposes and to reduce the risk.
     External Auditing - An independent external Auditor invited by Huaxia is
        conducting auditing once a year. Findings of auditor is followed up by Huaxia to
        improve its work. This auditor may cover the program procurement post review in
        line with the OM during the program live cycle.

                                             5
      Procurement records keeping – Huaxia requests sub-projects to keep all
       procurement records for monitoring and supervision purposes. In addition, Huaxia
       is allowing the Bank to conduct supervision for some exceptional cases if needed.
      Complaint handling – Huaxia requests all sub-projects to have complaint handling
       mechanism.
      Anti-corruption and fraud – Huaxia agreed that the Bank’s Anti-Corruption
       Guidelines in PforR Financing will apply to the program and addressed the anti-
       corruption and fraud in OM with the definition of Corruption and Fraud. Huaxia
       bank also emphasized in OM that the conditions of “Anti-corruption and fraud”.
       The rule of Governance and Anti-corruption and Fraud hall be added to the contract
       signed with sub-borrowers financed by the program as a condition.
      Debarred/Suspended Firms and Individuals by the Bank will apply to the Program
       procurement and addressed in OM.


Monitor and supervision: Huaxia bank is arranging its working teams to monitor and
supervise the sub-projects during the program implementation, at least twice a year.

Potential sub-projects:

The general rule for enterprises is to carry out a market analysis of available
products/technologies/providers, and then through a series of negotiations, try to establish
long term mutually beneficial relationships with the providers. In order to better manage
the project implementation, Huaxia requested that the Sub-project/sub-borrower:

      PP - As part of the sub-project proposal, the sub-borrower shall prepare a
       procurement plan including (i) a brief description of goods, works and/or non-
       consulting services required for the sub-project; (ii) the proposed procurement
       procedure or methods; and (iii) cost estimates and the time schedule. PP is agreed
       by the Huaxia before the procurement started.
      Methods and procedures - the potential sub-project will follow procurement
       methods: opening bidding; comparison of quotations; reversed auction and direct
       contracting, etc. The accepted procedures are in accordance with well-established
       private sector/commercial practices in China.
      Payment review – The payment from Huaxia Bank to the sub-project is in line with
       the signed contracts and invoice with delivery evidence, and the disbursement
       procedures are following the existed requirements in Huaxia Bank.
      Anti-corruption system and Complaint Handling mechanism shall be established b
       sub-project/sub-borrower as an a lending condition,

Weakness and Mitigations:

Based on the information provided by Huaxia bank, the following gaps which are
identified by the Bank team are addressed through appropriate actions in the Program

                                             6
Action Plan agreed with Hua Xia prior to program negotiations: (a) award of contracts by
beneficiaries to their parent or affiliate companies; (b) non-application of Bank
debarment/suspension lists which may result in unacceptable contract awards to Bank
debarred/suspended firms or individuals; (c) the complaint mechanisms in HXB and sub-
borrowers need to be strengthened; (d) while Hua Xia staff have adequate experience in
banking, financing and program management additional expertise is required for the
assessment of procurement strategy and planning for sub-projects; market analysis,
fiduciary risk analysis and mitigation, and sub-project supervision to ensure efficiency
and effectiveness.

The mitigation measures agreed for the Program are as follows: (i) in line with Article 34
of the Regulation on the Implementation of the Tendering and Bidding Law of the People’s
Republic of China, the sub-project application and the sub-loan agreement with
beneficiaries shall include a mandatory provision that the beneficiaries shall not award
contracts to their parent or affiliate companies unless there is an established arms-length
arrangement, with the exception for ESCOs on the basis they are Providers and are sourced
by their Clients through Commercial Practices to provide EE/RE services under
Performance Based Contracts. The procurement plan accompanying the application for the
ESCOs should identify those contracts which will be procured directly from parent or
affiliated companies and HXB as part of the application review process should satisfy itself
that the products offer Value for Money; (ii) HXB shall set up a complaints handling
mechanism and reporting procedures, details of which will be included in the sub-project
application package and on HXB’s website; (iii) beneficiaries shall confirm as part of the
sub-loan agreement that they will not award contracts to firms and individuals on
temporary suspension or debarment by the Bank and other Multilateral Development
Banks; and (iv) HXB shall strengthen its capacity to assess the capacity of beneficiaries to
carry out procurement and contract management efficiently as part of sub-project appraisal
and provide guidance to beneficiaries with weak procurement capacity. HXB and
beneficiary enterprises will hire expertise as needed to strengthen procurement and contract
management.

Summarized Assessment Conclusion:

Firstly, the assessment was conducted on Hua Xia Bank’s existed governance and
institutional arrangements and its systems, processes and controls for screening,
appraising, approving sub-projects and supervising procurement and implementation under
the sub-projects, and special field visits were paid to some entities with ongoing sub-
projects financed under the CHEEF project. Given the industry’s profit-driven nature and
the highly competitive local market for works, goods, consulting and non-consulting
services, the procurement methods used in the commercial sector are efficient, fit for the
purpose and achieve Value for Money.

Secondly, the institutional arrangement, staffing, the operational manual to make better
governance and procurement risk control system has been well established in Huaxia bank
and is accepted by the Bank.



                                             7
Finally, the weakness are identified and relevant mitigation has been agreed by Huaxia
Bank. Based on above addressed, the procurement risk rates Moderate.


FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT ASSESSMENT


Lessons learned from CHEEF Project: The main FM issues identified by the China
National Auditing Office (CANO) under the on-going CHEEF project especially during
the first two implementing years were (i) the sub-loans approval, releasing and payments
progress lagged behind the construction progress; ii) the branches of HXB and sub-
borrowers were not familiar with and not strictly following the Bank’s procedures as well
as domestic regulations on lending management of fixed assets investment. To mitigate
the fiduciary risks, HXB not only took strict remedial actions to call back all the
ineligible expenditures identified by CNAO, but has been working closely with the Bank
and the corporate’s relevant internal departments as well to centralize prior review of
sub-project applications at headquarter level, to speed up the internal approval
procedures, to strengthen training to branches and end borrowers, to intensify supervision
to the sub-projects implemented by branches, to incorporate retroactive financing
arrangements in the sub-loan agreement, and to hire third party engineering supervisor to
verify the construction progress of the sub-projects. All the measures were agreed with
the Bank and regularized and documented in OM as a mechanism to complement existing
credit control procedures in HXB. The CNAO’s audit reports of 2012 to 2014 for CHEEF
project are all with unqualified opinions.

FM risk and mitigating measure The FM performance of HXB has been making
tremendous improvement over the past few years and satisfactory to the Bank for now.
HXB currently has adequate systems in place for oversight, appraisal and supervision of
sub-projects as well as financial management and procurement capacity to avoid misuse
of the loan and to reduce the risk of non-performing loans. With the exception of the
requirements for accounting, financial reporting and introduction of disbursement linked
indicators and the associated protocols for verification under PforR policy, the Program
fiduciary systems for HXB will largely be the same as the existing systems in place
within HXB. As such, the integrated FM and procurement risk is considered to be
Moderate.

However, there are still main FM related fiduciary risks under the PforR program which
are identified as i) branches of HXB and sub-borrowers are not familiar with the Bank’s
requirements and procedures; ii) HXB’s lack of experience with the PforR arrangements,
especially to the program scoping and innovative result based disbursement arrangements
may result into improper accounting and financial reporting and inefficient disbursement
processing. Mitigation measures to address the above risk have been agreed: i) the
Program Operational Manual (OM) prepared by HXB, reviewed and agreed by the Bank
have addressed the program scope, eligibility criteria, procedures and mechanisms for

                                            8
credit control, oversight and capacity buildings subject to sub-loans, procurement,
financial management and disbursement related arrangements and requirements; and (ii)
the Bank will follow up on HXB’s enforcement of the OM on regular basis during the
implementation.


On-lending Arrangements and Budgeting

The Bank loan will be signed between the Bank and the People’s Republic of China
(PRC) through its Ministry of Finance (MoF). On-lending arrangements for the Bank
loan will be signed between PRC through its MoF and Hua Xia Bank who will be final
debtor.

The proposed Program will be $1 billion, of which $500 million IBRD loan, $500 million
from Hua Xia Bank. The Program expenditure occurs when Hua Xia releases the sub-
loans to the sub-borrowers. All the Program funds will be included in Hua Xia’s existing
budgeting system. Hua Xia’s scale of loan delivery should first follow the Bank Loan
Ratio required by the Central Bank for risk control purpose. Meanwhile, Hua Xia’s
management decides the annual credit guidance and business priority based on the GoC
development strategy and target. Therefore, to ensure the investments made under the
operation support government priority areas and contribute to achieving the results in the
government program on air pollution control in Jing-Jin-Hebei (JJJ) region, Hua Xia put
JJJ air pollution control as one of its business priority in next a few years. This Program
therefore is included in Hua Xia’s prioritized business plan. To ensure the availability of
the Program funds, besides the IBRD loan, Hua Xia Bank plans to year mark the Program
Funds in its annual lending envelop to be approved by Hua Xia’s Planning and
Accounting Department. In addition, Hua Xia’s Blue Sky and Clear Water Fund in JJJ
and JJJ Integrated Development Fund also support but not limited to the Program
activities. Based on Hua Xia’s current business plan for JJJ air pollution control, it is
capable to have sufficient funds to support this program and to ensure the amount of the
PforR financing to be equal to or less than the total Program expenditures.

Accounting and Financial Reporting

Hua Xia will maintain all copies of the Program accounting records. Program financial
reporting is required to meet the Program oversight needs. As such, the financial report
including the Program expenditures and source of funds should be furnished to the Bank
by Hua Xia as part of the Program Report no later than XX days after the end of each
calendar year or the period required by the Bank.


HXB is a listed company in Chinese domestic stock market. As such, its quarterly, semi-
annual and annual reports are available to public. The financial statements are prepared


                                            9
according to Chinese Enterprise Accounting Standard. HXB developed the computerized
integrated credit control and accounting system, which is a system to connect HXB’s
headquarter and branches. The system covers the credit application, review, approval,
release and disbursement procedures and process record. In addition, the sub-loan is
automatically recorded in the accounting system upon releasing from the credit control
system. The system can provide reasonable assurance on the appropriate use of HXB’s
credit funds and safeguarding of its assets. However, the Program funds and expenditures
cannot be easily tracked and separately reported in HXB’s existing corporate accounting
system because a separate accounting profile cannot be specifically set up for the
Program.

To meet the reporting requirements for the Program, the following mitigating measures
are agreed with Hua Xia: (i) the Corporate Business Division of HXB sets up the
memorandum records for the Program to record each sub-loan released and related
reference information for ease of tracking the record in the corporate accounting system
and the original supporting documents; (ii) reconciliation being made between the
Corporate Business Division and the accounting division on quarterly basis; (iii) the
Corporate Business Division prepares the Program specific financial report according to
the format specifically tailored by HXB, agreed with the Bank and addressed in the OM
on semester basis and submits to the Bank as required by legal agreement.
Adequate accounting staff with educational background and work experience
commensurate with the work they are expected to perform is one of the factors critical to
successful implementation of program financial management. The four main staffs
responsible for the program, one division chief, three staffs in Corporate Business
Division have accumulated extensive experience with the on-going Bank financed
CHEEF Project. Based on discussions, observation and review of educational background
and work experience of the staff identified for financial and accounting positions in
implementing entities, the task team note that the financial staff are qualified and
appropriate to the work they are expected to assume.

To further strengthen financial management capacity and achieve consistent quality of
accounting work, the task team has suggested that the program financial requirements be
incorporated in the OM to provide detailed guidelines on the Program financial
management work including credit application and control procedure, accounting and
reporting arrangements, auditing and disbursement. The OM will be finalized before
negotiation and distributed to all the relevant financial staff before loan effectiveness.


Internal Control

The Bank has conducted a financial sector due diligence to HXB including corporate
governance, internal control and credit management etc. and concluded that HXB’s
existing internal control system is acceptable to meet the Bank’s fiduciary requirements.
The areas to be further improved are also addressed by the Bank. See section of financial
sector due diligence for detail information.

                                            10
External Auditing

HXB accepts annual financial audit conducted by Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu, one of the
Big Four accounting firms. Based on the background, experience of the auditor and the
Bank’s due diligence conducted to the auditor, the Bank deemed Deloitte Touche
Tohmatsu as acceptable auditor. As HXB is the listed company in domestic stock market,
the unaudited quarterly and semi-annual financial statements and annual audit report need
to be made publicly available. The Program expenditures and source of funds have been
included in the annual financial audit scope but not specifically specified in current
financial audit report. HXB and the Bank agrees that a Program specific paragraph will
be added in note of audited financial statement to address the Program implementation
status, total Program expenditures incurred, , whether the Program funds are used for the
intended purposes as well as issues noted under the Program or in audit opinion if
needed. The agreement in this regards need to be reached between HXB and the auditor
and addressed in the auditor’s engagement letter if it’s needed. The annual financial audit
report shall be furnished to the Bank by June 30 of next calendar year.

Disbursement and Funds flow

The Program expenditure occurs when the participating banks release the sub-loans to
sub-borrowers. The Bank loan will be disbursed directly into accounts of upon realizing
the disbursement linked indicators and will be pooled with HXB’s own contributions to
become program funds. The program funds will be on-lent to sub-borrowers based on the
HXB’s commercial practices and eligibility models addressed in OM agreed with the
Bank.

Advance The Borrower informed the Bank that advances will be needed. Advances up to
25 percent of total Program financing (“advance”), or $125 million, could be made by the
Bank to HXB. When the DLI(s) against which an advance has been disbursed are
achieved, the amount of the advance will be deducted (recovered) from the total amount
due to be disbursed under such DLI(s). The advance amount recovered by the Bank is
then available for additional advances (“revolving advance”). The Bank requires that the
borrower refund any advances (or portion of advances) if the DLIs have not been met (or
have been only partially met) by the Closing Date, promptly upon notice thereof by the
Bank.


If the Bank establishes after the Closing Date that the Withdrawn Financing Balance
exceeds the total amount paid for Program Expenditures, exclusive of any such amounts
financed by any other financier or by the Bank under any other loan, credit or grant, the
Borrower shall, promptly upon notice from the Bank, refund to the Bank such excess
amount of the Withdrawn Financing Balance. The Bank shall then cancel the refunded
amount of the Withdrawn Financing Balance.




                                            11
Prior Results The Bank will disburse up to US$50 million and US$10.75 million for
prior results achieved under DLI-1 and DLI-4 respectively, triggered upon the HXB
disbursing eligible subloans (result under DLI-1), and establishing a Green Finance
Center and adopting internal procedures for the identification, risk assessment, appraisal,
and approval of green financing projects (results under DLI-4) respectively, between
January 21, 2016 and the date of signing legal agreements.

Disbursement Arrangement: Hua Xia Bank is responsible for verification of the
achievements of the DLIs, through independent verification agencies, based on the
agreed verification protocol described below. Disbursements will be made upon
verification of the results of the DLIs. Since the DLIs, with the exception of DLI-4, are
scalable, the actual disbursement will depend on the verified results.


     Huaxia                   World
      Bank                    Bank


Verification Protocol The verification protocol of DLIs builds on existing national
verification system wherever possible. The verification will be conducted annually. See
the section of DLI for details.

Key FM Risk Assessment and Mitigation Measures

The following risks with corresponding mitigating measures have been identified during
the assessment:

      Risk             Risk rating               Key Risk                      Incorporated Risk
                                                                          Mitigating Measures/Actions
    Budgeting     Low
    Accounting    Moderate             i) Program transactions         (i) the Corporate Business Division
     and                                cannot be separately tracked    of HXB sets up the memorandum
     reporting                          in HXB’s existing               records for the Program to record
                                        accounting system.              each sub-loan released and related
                                        ii) Delay in recording          reference information for ease of
                                        transactions in the Program     tracking the record in the corporate
                                        accounting system.              accounting system and the original
                                        iii) Inconsistence in the       supporting documents; (ii)
                                        Program accounting records      reconciliation being made between
                                        maintained by Corporate         the Corporate Business Division
                                        Business Division and           and the accounting division on
                                        HXB’s accounting division.      quarterly basis; (iii) the Corporate
                                        iv) Inability of the            Business Division prepares the
                                        accounting system to prepare    Program specific financial report
                                        timely and reliable financial   according to the format specifically
                                        reports                         tailored and agreed with the Bank
                                                                        and addressed in OM; iv) specify


                                            12
                                                          the Bank’s reporting requirements
                                                          in legal agreement.

   Internal     Moderate   Internal control system is    The Program related eligibility
    Control                 unable to prevent or detect   model and practice procedures have
                            serious irregularities,       been addressed in OM and agreed
                            misuse, and inefficient use   with the Bank.
                            of program funds.             The.
                                                          Reliable verification agency will be
                                                          appointed by HXB and agreed by
                                                          the Bank for results verification
                                                          which serves as basis for
                                                          disbursement.

   Funds Flow   Moderate   Unfamiliarity of the          The DLI and related verification
                            disbursement arrangement      procedures agreed with HXB are
                            under P4R caused delay of     specified in legal agreement, PAD
                            withdrawal from the Bank.     and OM.
                                                          Training provided to HXB to
                                                          deepen understanding to P4R
                                                          arrangements.
                                                          The Bank loan will be disbursed
                                                          directly from World Bank to HXB
                                                          Bank.
   Auditing     Moderate   The Program information       i) Agreed with HXB that a
                            cannot be well disclosed in   Program specific paragraph will
                            the audit report under        be added in note of audited
                            existing auditing system.     financial statement to address
                                                          total expenditures and source of
                                                          funds for the Program, the
                                                          Program implementation status
                                                          as well as issues noted under the
                                                          Program in the notes or in audit
                                                          opinion if needed.
                                                          ii) HXB needs to seek the
                                                          auditor’s advice beforehand and
                                                          addresses the requirements in the
                                                          auditor’s engagement letter if it’s
                                                          needed.
    Overall      Moderate




                                13
