     Report No:

 .




     Thailand
     Qualitative Assessment of Health Equity among the
     Elderly People in Thailand: Utilization and Financial
     Protection


 .
     May 20, 2015



 .
     GHNDR

     EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC

 .




Document of the World Bank
    Standard Disclaimer:

.

    Thi s volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank. The findings, interpretations,
    a nd conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the vi ews of the Executive Directors of The World Bank or the governments they
    represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data i ncluded i n this work. The boundaries, colors, denomina tions, and other
    i nformation shown on a ny ma p in this work do not i mply a ny judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the l egal status of any territory
    or the endors ement or a ccepta nce of s uch bounda ri es .

.

    Copyright Statement:


.

    The ma terial i n this publication is copyrighted. Copying a nd/or tra nsmitting portions or a ll of this work wi thout permission ma y be a vi olation of
    a pplicable l aw. The International Ba nk for Reconstruction a nd Development/ The World Bank encourages dissemination of i ts wor k and will
    norma l l y gra nt permi s s i on to reproduce porti ons of the work promptl y.



    For permission to photocopy or reprint a ny part of this work, please s end a request with complete i nformation to the Copyri ght Cleara nce Center,
    Inc., 222 Ros ewood Dri ve, Da nvers , MA 01923, USA, tel ephone 978-750-8400, fa x 978-750-4470, http://www.copyri ght.com/.



    Al l other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary ri ghts, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, Th e World Bank, 1818 H
    Street NW, Wa s hi ngton, DC 20433, USA, fa x 202-522-2422, e-ma i l pubri ghts @worl dba nk.org.
Qualitative Assessment of Health Equity among the Elderly People in Thailand: Utilization
and Financial Protection1


Background and rationale

Thailand has succeeded in expanding coverage of publicly-funded and publicly-managed health insurance
schemes, following the introduction of universal health coverage policy in 2001. Today, 100% of Thai
citizens are statistically covered by one of the publicly-managed health insurance schemes, mainly the
Universal Health Coverage scheme (UC), Social Security Scheme (SSS), Civil Servant Medical Benefits
Scheme (CSMBS), and medical benefits for state enterprise employees. These arrangements have
broadened access to health services, contributed to higher and more equitable patterns of utilization, and
helped reduce the financial burden and risk of impoverishment associated with health care expenses.

While Thailand’s achievement of universal health coverage is well noted, recent researches and studies
have indicated that there are still gaps in health utilization and financial protection. A recent study by
Thailand’s Health Insurance System Research Office (HISRO) shows that utilization of health services by
patients of three main health insurance schemes combined increased markedly after age 45 for both out-
patient care and in-patient care but later dropped during an advanced age. 2 Utilization of out-patient care
services decreases among patients who are over 75 years of age while that of in-patient care services
decreases after 85 years of age, as per the graphs below.
Figure 1: Utilization of out-patient and in-patient care data of UC, S S S, and CS MBS by Age




Source: Utilization of out-patient and in-patient care data of UC, SSS, and CSM BS (provided by HISRO)




1 This study was prepared and led by Sutayut Osornprasop. Research assistance was provided by Noppakwan
Inthapan, Sakulrat Sirikul, Theepakorn Jitthitikulchai, Sukanya Kulkaew, Jarmmaree Sornboot, Nateerai Jandprook,
Thitinan Tanyuwattana, Apisi t Kullanit. The team appreciated Emily Sinnott, Toomas Palu, Lars Sondergaard, Philip
O’Keefe, Aparnaa Somanathan, and Yang Huang for reviewing and providing valuable contribution that helped
improve the quality of this study. The team appreciated valuable inputs from Dr. Thaworn Sakulphanit and Orawan
Prasitsiriphon of the Health Insurance System Research Office and Dr. Chanvit Tharathep of Ministry of Public
Health. Most importantly, the team are grateful to all elderly participants, Ministry of Public Health officials,
dedicated health providers at university, regional, provincial, community, and health promotion hospitals, as well
as village health volunteers who participated and provided much valuable inputs during the qualitative study.
2 Performance of Health Care for Elderly and Impact on Public Health Care Financing during 2011-2022, HISRO,

2011, p.33.

                                                              3
Breakdowns of utilization by schemes indicate major disparity in utilization of in-patient care by
schemes. While utilization of in-patient care services by CSMBS patients rises with age, utilization by
UC patients starts to decrease after the age of 82. As for out-patient care, utilization by both UC and
CSMBS patients rises sharply after the age of 50. However, the decline of utilization by UC patients
started from around the age of 75 and the rates went down very sharply. The decline in utilization by
CSMBS patients started at around the age of 80, but the rates did not go down as sharply as UC patients.


Figure 2: Utilization of out-patient and in-patient care data of UC by gender




Source: Utilization of out-patient care data of UC by gender (provided by HISRO)

Figure 3: Utilization of out-patient and in-patient care data of CS MBS by gender




Source: Utilization of in-patient care data of CSM BS by gender (provided by HISRO)



These findings raise several important questions: Why did the utilization of out-patient care by UC
members drop after the age of 75, while the elderly people are more likely to have higher health care
needs when they are older? Why did utilization of in-patient care services by UC patients drop after the
age of 82 while that of CSMBS patients continue to rise? Were there problems with access to health care
among the eldest old group? Given that the UC members generally comprise population with lower socio-
economic status (compared with CSMBS and SSS), it is important to raise a question whether there were
problems with financial protection in utilizing health services among the elderly members of the UC
scheme, particularly among the elderly poor?


Objective

The objective of the study is to identify the gaps of accessing universal health coverage scheme’s care
system by the elderly population, focusing on utilization and financial protection aspects.


Methodology

                                                              4
The team conducted small-scale area-based qualitative case studies, focusing on elderly UC members
who live in selected urban and rural areas in four different geographical regions of Thailand – Central,
North, Northeastern, and South. The case studies are not designed to generate quantitative results and are
not nationally representative, but served the purpose of this small study in providing preliminary
information on key utilization and financial protection issues that elderly UC members could have
encountered in accessing health care services.
Key research questions are:

    1. Why does out-patient utilization drop after the age of 75 for all health care schemes in Thailand?
    2. Why does in-patient utilization of patients on the Universal Healthcare Coverage drop after age of
       82 while it continues to rise for patients with the Civil Servant's Scheme?
    3. What are the causes of high out-of-pocket among the poor elderly?
    4. What is the level of transportation cost paid by poor elderly to access health services?
    5. To what extent have the transportation costs posed burdens to poor elderly to access health
       services? Is transportation a barrier to access health services by elderly patients?
    6. What are key diseases that are not adequately covered by the current UC coverage, that require
       out-of-pocket expenditures?

The study followed standard qualitative research methods, including focus-group discussions (FGDs) and
in-depth interviews (IDIs) with elderly people who are members of the universal health coverage scheme.
Families of the elderly were also interviewed when the elderly people had difficulties in communication.
Relevant health providers and local government units were also interviewed. Below were the study sites:-
    1. An urban and a rural district in Nontaburi province (Central Thailand)
    2. An urban and a rural district in Lopburi province (Central Thailand)
    3. An urban and a rural district in Nakorn Sawan province (Northern Thailand)
    4. An urban and a rural district in Chiang Mai province (Northern Thailand)
    5. An urban and a rural district in Kalasin province (Northeastern Thailand - poorest province in
       Thailand), with referral hospitals in Khon Kaen province
    6. An urban and a rural district in Songkhla province (Southern Thailand)
    7. An urban and a rural district in Surat Thani province (Southern Thailand)
    8. Chulalongkorn University Hospital in Bangkok


In each district, separate FGDs focusing on two different issues were conducted. One FGD focused on
utilization and access to health care services, in which general elderly people aged 75 and above were
participants (to understand why utilization drops after age 75). The other FGD focused on financial
protection, in which the elderly (60 years and over) who were admitted (being in-patient) in a hospital
during the past one year were invited as participants. The number of participants in each FGD is between
20 and 30. Following each FGD, around 5-10 elderly individuals were selected to participate in IDIs. In
each district, the team also conducted IDIs with approximately 5 bed-ridden patients at their respective
homes to understand utilization and access to health care issues. Additional IDIs were also conducted
with health facility staff, village health volunteers, and representatives of local administrative
organizations. Summary of research instruments and number of elderly participants (with overlaps in
participants between FGDs and IDIs of the same issue) is outlined in the table below.


Table 1: Summary of research instruments (FGDs and IDIs) and number of elderly participants

                                                          5
     Research instruments               Central             North          Northeast     South            Total
    FGD utilization and access                 76                   86            54            56             272
    FGD financial protection                   62                  105            42            66             275
    IDI utilization and access                 33                   33              7           19              92
    IDI financial protection                   30                   20            27            17              94
    IDI bed-ridden                             19                   19              9           17              64
    Total                                    220                   263           139           175             797




Key Findings on utilization of health services
      1. To provide a big picture on utilization of health care services at the national level, the team
         analyzed Socio-Economic Survey (SES) 2011, which is the national household survey in
         Thailand that collected information on household income as well as health expenditures.
         However, it must be cautioned that there is no direct health care utilization information available
         at the individual level in SES, and hence the analysis indicates the health utilization based on the
         health expenditures on in-patient or out-patient services of households with elderly members
         (aged 60 years and over), and not exactly health utilization of elderly individuals. In other words,
         the information presented here is the share of the elderly who are living in a household with any
         health service utilization.

          According to SES 2011, there are gaps in utilization of out-patient and in-patient care services
          among households with elderly members from the poorer and richer quintiles in both urban and
          rural areas. The gap is largest in utilization of out-patient care services, with the utilization rates
          of the richest households doubled that of the poorest households in both urban and rural areas, as
          indicated in Figure 4.

Figure 4: Household Out-patient and in-patient utilization rates for elderly3




3This figure was prepared by Yang Huang. For SES, there is no health care utilization information at individual level,
which means the team could not disaggregate the figures by gender. The team plotted household inpatient
admission rates and household outpatient visit rates against household expenditure per capita quintiles for people
aged 60 and above. In other words, the team shows here the share of the elderly who are living in a househol d
with any health service utilization. The team ranked expenditure per capita at household level to define quintiles.

                                                               6
           SES 2011 also indicates that co-residence with adult children played a significant factor in the
           level of utilization of out-patient and in-patient care services among poorer households with
           elderly members (two bottom poorest quintiles) in both urban and rural areas. This could partly
           be attributed to the lack of caretakers to help bring poor elderly that do not live with adult
           children to receive health services when needed. Co-residence with adult children does not appear
           to influence significantly the utilization of health care services among the elderly with higher
           incomes (top two quintiles), as illustrated in Figure 5. This might partly be attributed to the ability
           of the richer elderly who do not live with adult children being able to hire caretakers to bring
           them to receive health care services when needed. In summary, this indicates that the poor elderly
           who do not live with adult children are most vulnerable and have more probability to not being
           able to access health care services when needed.

Figure 5: Household out-patient and in-patient utilization rates among households with elderly members, disaggregated by
co-residence and non co-residence with adult children 4




      2. According to the qualitative assessment, 43% of elderly interviewees are fully satisfied with the
         services provided by health facilities under the universal health coverage scheme, and do not
         encounter any key barriers to utilizing health care services. Of those who have identified barriers

4   This figure was prepared by Yang Huang.

                                                            7
    to utilizing health care services, “long waiting time” is the top barrier among elderly interviewees
    in urban areas, while “long distance to a health facility” is the top barrier to accessing services in
    rural areas.

3. Among frail and bed-ridden elderly interviewees, the key barrier to accessing health services is
   the unavailability of caretakers/relatives and transportation to bring them to health facilities, and
   that this barrier tends to have greater effects on elderly interviewees who do not live with adult
   children, who live in rural areas, and who are females, particularly widows.

4. There is a trend that utilization of out-patient services increases as people grow older, particularly
   after age 55-60, but then utilization frequency decreases after age 75-80. A key reason that
   contributes to the drop in utilization of out-patient care services after the age of 75 appears to be
   the dependence on availability of caretakers and relatives to bring the elderly patients to a health
   facility. At age 55-65, most of the elderly interviewees were able to travel independently to utilize
   out-patient care services at different level of health facilities. However, as they grow older, they
   become frail and start to have health conditions that prevent them from travelling to health
   facilities independently. Once the elderly people become dependent and need others to bring them
   to health facilities, frequency of their utilizing services at health facilities generally drops. This
   tends to affect more elderly people who live in rural areas, particularly those that need to visit
   higher-level health facilities which are located in bigger cities further away from their homes.

    Cataracts appears to be the most common disease that affects mobility of the elderly people and
    make them dependent of relatives and caretakers to bring them to health facilities. As cataracts
    progress with age, it disproportionately affects the eldest old group.

    Several elderly interviewees also shared that they started to be diagnosed with non-communicable
    diseases (NCDs) in their mid-50s and 60s, that they were worried at the time, and that this led to
    frequent visits to health facilities to treat these emerging NCDs. But after they have lived with the
    diseases and received treatments for 10-15 years, they feel that this has become part of their
    normal lives and are not enthusiastic to visit health facilities as often as before.

5. The main factors that most likely contribute to the differing trends in in-patient utilization rates of
   UC and CSMBS scheme members are the differences in living location and wealth of the UC and
   CSMBS scheme members. On average, CSMBS members and their families tend to have higher
   incomes than UC members, and tend to live in cities and urban areas. Having higher incomes
   allow CSMBS members more opportunities to own private cars and hire caretakers, making it
   easier to bring elderly patients to health facilities when it is needed. This is further complemented
   by the fact that most CSMBS members live in cities and urban areas, giving them easy access to
   higher-level hospitals where in-patient services are needed.

    Another reason which contributes to the continuing rise in utilization of in-patient services among
    CSMBS members is that due to the relatively more generous CSMBS benefits package and fee-
    for-service provider payment method, it is practically possible for CSMBS members to utilize in-
    patient services for long-term care purposes. This is not possible for UC members.

6. Lack of public and affordable transportation is the most important barrier to accessing health
   services among the elderly interviewees who live in rural areas and far from major highways and

                                                  8
    roads where public buses and taxis operate. This is a major problem even in such area that is as
    adjacent to Bangkok as Sai Noi district in Nontaburi province. Elderly farmers working in
    orchards in Sai Noi district who do not have private cars have experienced enormous difficulties
    in getting taxis to pick elderly passengers up from their homes during health emergencies,
    particularly during night times.

    Elderly people without private cars who reside outside of Greater Bangkok and major cities most
    likely do not have access to taxis and need to rely on public buses or renting private cars. Use of
    public buses is a cheap and affordable option for many elderly interviewees who live next to
    major roads and highways. However, the routes and frequency of public bus services are limited,
    and hence it may serve those who need out-patient services, but not in health emergency
    circumstances.

    It is also important to note that public buses mainly benefit the elderly who live near the major
    highways and roads where public buses are operated. A large number of elderly interviewees who
    do not have access to public buses identify that the cost of renting private vehicles is a major
    impediment for their accessing health services, and this point will be discussed in more details in
    the financial protection section below.

7. Village Health Volunteers (VHVs) have played a crucial role in supporting the health and
   utilization of health services by the elderly, particularly in rural communities. They serve as a
   strong linkage between the elderly in communities and health care professionals at health
   promotion hospitals and high-level health facilities, particularly through home visits, organizing
   health education sessions as well as physical exercise sessions for the elderly in the communities.

    There are good practices in several communities whereby health promotion hospitals and elderly
    members prioritize elderly population for their services, including conducting mapping of elderly
    in the communities into three groups: (i) Tid Sangkom, which refers to the elderly who are
    physically fit enough to go out and socialize regularly with friends; (ii) Tid Ban , which refers to
    the elderly who are frail and that their physical conditions do not allow them to go out of their
    homes to socialize with friends regularly; (iii) Tid Tieng , which refers to bed-ridden elderly who
    are very frail and spend most of their times on the bed. VHVs then prioritizes their services to
    these different groups accordingly. For Tid Sangkom group, the elderly are usually invited to
    participate in physical exercise and health education sessions. For Tid Ban group, the VHVs make
    plan for home visits occasionally to check on their health and other needs. For Tid Tieng group,
    the VHVs make plan for home visits regularly, provide physical therapy sessions, as well as
    perform health check-ups along with staff from health promotion hospitals.

    In Kalasin province, the Provincial Health Office (PHO) has provided unique and extra support
    for the elderly in the community. First, they set up Suksala , which is a small health center (a unit
    under the health promotion hospital) manned by VHVs in every village in the province. Each
    Suksala is equipped with basic medical supplies, and VHVs are trained to dispense them at no
    cost to the villagers. There are approximately 8-10 VHVs in each village, and they take turn to
    man the center. Each Suksala usually operates early in the morning and later in the evening,
    outside the operating hours of health promotion hospitals, providing the elderly and village
    residents more options to utilize health services. Second, VHVs are given the opportunity to
    receive specialized training on geriatric care (among other few areas of specialized training). This

                                                 9
         not only help create community health cadres with relevant knowledge on how to support health
         care for the elderly, but it also empowers the cadres to be confident and proud in what they do.

         Overall, the performance of VHVs in Thailand varies from communities to communities, but the
         key success factors are regular supervision by health promotion hospitals as well as collaboration
         with local administration organizations, which can provide additional resources for the activities
         conducted by VHVs to support the elderly population in local communities.

Key findings on financial protection
    1. The UC scheme has provided a high level of financial protection against catastrophic health care
       costs for its members, which account for over 75% of Thai population; specifically the UC
       scheme covers all Thai citizens who are not covered by SSS (formal sector workers), CSMBS
       (civil servants and their immediate family members), and other medical benefits provided by state
       enterprises for their employees and immediate family members. This level of financial protection
       is rarely achieved by other countries with similar development and income level as Thailand.
       With only very limited exceptions, all out-patient care and in-patient care services provided by
       lower-level health facilities, including health promotion hospitals (formerly health centers) and
       district hospitals, are free for elderly UC members.5 Out-of-pocket medical expenses for UC
       members do sometimes take place at higher-level health facilities such as provincial, regional,
       and university hospitals, and yet a large number of UC patients do not experience catastrophic
       health expenditures nor do they become impoverished due to health expenditures.

         Nevertheless, the UC system is not without any gaps on financial protection, and catastrophic
         health expenditures do incur among the small minority of elderly UC members. To provide a big
         picture on financial protection at the national level, the team analyzed SES 2011. As per Figure 6
         below, the incidence of catastrophic health expenditures among the two poorest quintiles of
         elderly people is about 1% and 2% respectively. 6 Among these bottom 40%, it is important to
         note that there is a higher incidence of catastrophic health expenditure among the elderly people
         who live in rural areas compared with those who live in urban areas.

         We have also noticed a relationship between co-residence with adult children and catastrophic
         health expenditures. Elderly individuals who live with adult children across all wealth quintiles
         have lower catastrophic health expenditures compared with their peers who do not live with adult
         children. It is important to note that the incidence of catastrophic health expenditures of elderly
         individuals living in rural areas without co-residence with adult children doubled that of the
         elderly individuals in rural areas who live with adult children. This problem is likely to grow in
         the future, as the proportion of Thai elderly living with adult children is on the decline, from
         nearly 80% in 1990 to less than 60% in 2011 (shown in Figure 7), while more and more Thai
         elderly do not live with their adult children.




5 Non-elderly UC members are expected to contribute THB 30 per each visit to a health facility, but they have an
option to sign a declaration that they are not willing/able to contribute THB 30 per each visit at the health facility.
6 Catastrophic health expenditures in the study are defined as having health expenditures higher than 10% of total

expenditures.

                                                          10
Figure 6: Incidence of catastrophic health expenditure among elderly people7




7   This figure was prepared by Yang Huang.

                                                            11
Figure 7: Share of elderly in Thailand with co-residence with adult children (SES 1990, 1996, 2006 and 2011)8




Note: Adult child here is defined as child aged 24+

Sources: Thailand Socio-economic Survey (SES) 1990, 1996, 2006 and 2011


    2. While the low incidence of catastrophic health expenditures among the elderly people in poorest
       income quintiles can partly be attributed to the effectiveness of the UC scheme in providing
       financial protection to the poor, it may also be attributed to “foregone” care – that some poor
       elderly individuals may not access health care services when needed, contributing to low
       catastrophic health expenditures. The factor “foregone” care is partly supported by SES 2011
       analysis (more information is provided in the utilization section above), which indicates that there
       are gaps in utilization of out-patient and in-patient care services among households with elderly
       members from the poorer and richer quintiles in both urban and rural areas, and that the gap is
       largest in out-patient care services utilization, with the utilization rates of the poorest households
       (bottom two income quintiles) lower than half of that of the richest households (top two income
       quintiles) in both urban and rural areas. SES 2011 also indicates that co-residence with adult
       children played a significant factor in the level of utilization of out-patient and in-patient care
       services among poorer households with elderly members (two bottom poorest quintiles) in both
       urban and rural areas. 9 This could partly be attributed to the lack of caretakers to help bring poor
       elderly to receive health services when needed.




8 This figure was prepared by Yang Huang.
9 The team analyzed Socio-Economic Survey (SES) 2011, which is the only national household survey in Thailand
that collected information on household income as well as health expenditures. However, it must be cautioned
that there is no direct health care utilization information available at the individual level in SES, and hence the
analysis indicates the health utilization based on the health expenditures on in -patient or out-patient services of
households with elderly members (aged 60 years and over), and not exactly health utilization of the elderly
individuals. In other words, the information presented here is the share of the elderly who are living in a household
with any health service utilization. Hence, the information on health utilization of elderly individuals will be
provided in the qualitative assessment results presented below.

                                                            12
    3. It is important to note that less than half of those surveyed under SES 2011 paid out-of-pocket
       health expenditures. Hence, the team has analyzed average out-of-pocket health expenditures, as
       shown in Table 2. The analysis confirms that there are poor elderly people who still need to pay
       for the costs of out-patient and in-patient care services at publicly run health facilities. It is to note
       that SES does not provide information on transportation costs to health facilities, so this
       information is not part of the table.


Table 2: Average of health and medical expenditures among those elderly who paid out-of-pocket health expenditures per
year

         Average of health and medical expenditure: SES 2011
         Medical and supplies
                                                                                                   First-aid
                            Modern      Traditional/herb Contraceptives                          kits/medical
                           medicine       al medicine      and condom           Vitamins         equipments                        TOTAL
           Poorest 1               49.4              59.2            51.7              317.6                18.3                       62.6
                   2               73.4              99.7            72.7              336.4                21.1                       96.6
                   3               99.6            183.4             88.8              635.5                35.2                      146.6
                   4              170.8            210.5            110.3              762.6               105.4                      212.3
           Richest 5              294.9            302.0            147.5            1,566.9             1,121.0                      637.5
                  All             111.3            151.0             82.4            1,005.1               175.9                      172.8
         Medical services (outpatients)
                                                            Traditional                          Optometry
                        Public health    Private clinic/ healer/ medical      Private dental     services &        Other health
                       centre/hospital      hospital         services              clinic        equipment           services      TOTAL
           Poorest 1              375.1            381.6            396.2                356.8                                         380.6
                   2              465.7            477.6            293.4                210.9            353.9            760.5       493.3
                   3              887.0            614.3            378.1                462.2          1,943.0            404.5       703.2
                   4            2,621.9          1,052.6            730.7                910.9          1,433.7          3,373.6     1,465.0
           Richest 5            4,586.0          2,751.5            544.7              4,056.3          3,544.0         10,000.0     3,961.5
                  All           1,655.6          1,021.9            434.3              1,953.6          2,197.0          4,461.4     1,402.6
         Medical services (inpatients)

                         Public health     Private clinic/
                        centre/hospital       hospital       Other expense                                                         TOTAL
            Poorest 1              213.2             185.6            155.5                                                            188.7
                    2              162.7             381.4            335.4                                                            351.0
                    3              468.1             603.4            200.1                                                            424.9
                    4              825.0           1,129.7            246.2                                                            845.9
            Richest 5            1,346.6           3,245.3            519.9                                                          2,183.1
                  All              555.2           1,295.7            260.2                                                            643.4


    4. Through interviews with elderly patients and health facilities, while the UC’s coverage of drugs
       and treatment is relatively comprehensive, there are key cost items that are not covered by the UC
       scheme which are likely to be paid for by elderly patients such as drugs that are not on the
       essential drug list, selected medical equipment for knee/hip replacement, hemodialysis for severe
       chronic renal disease patients (except for those who cannot receive peritoneal dialysis), cost of
       setting up home-based non-medical accessories for peritoneal dialysis patients, and all cancer
       therapies that are outside of UC scheme’s cancer treatment protocol, e.g. targeted therapy and
       selected drugs for chemotherapy. It is important to note that key drugs that are not covered by the
       UC scheme include all drugs that treat (or slow down the progress of) dementia group of diseases
       that include Alzheimer. Dementia is the group of diseases that affect a significant number of




                                                                     13
         elderly in Thailand – from about 7.1% of elderly in the 60-69 age group to one-third of the
         elderly in the 80 and over age group.10

         In summary, while treatment of most diseases are fully covered by the UC scheme, there are
         specific diseases that are not adequately covered by the current UC coverage and patients of these
         diseases are required to pay out-of-pocket expenditures. These include severe chronic renal
         disease, certain types of cancer that require treatment and drugs that are outside of the UC
         scheme’s cancer treatment protocol (though it is to be noted that the UC scheme covers the cost
         of radiotherapy, surgery, and several types of chemotherapy for cancer patients), and dementia.
         A recent quantitative study led by Dr. Vich Kasemsap also shows that UC patients with chronic
         renal diseases still need to pay out-of-pocket, even for peritoneal dialysis which is covered by the
         UC scheme.11 This amount can impoverish poor elderly who need such treatment, as illustrated in
         Table 3, 4, and 5.12
Table 3: Out-of-pocket payment per each visit to a health facility paid by patients who need dialysis services

 Cost                 Transportation Fees paid                  Food/Accommodation Total (per                    Total (per
                                     to hospital                                   time)                         year)

 Hemodialysis         226                    223                99                              548              56,992-
 (335)                                                                                                           85,488

 Peritoneal           327                    140                124                             591              7,092
 dialysis
 (1125)

 Kidney               674                    3056               174                             3904             23,424
 transplant (16)



Table 4: Patients’ opinion whether the related healthcare cost affect their families economically

 Assessment                                  Have economic impact on                    Have no economic impacts on
                                             families (%)                               families (%)

 Hemodialysis (335)                          53.7                                       46.3

 Peritoneal dialysis (1125)                  44.9                                       54.9

 Kidney transplant (16)                      31.5                                       68.8



10 It should also be noted that dementia affects more female elderly than male elderly. Among the elderly that are
in the 80 and over age group, the dementia prevalence in males is 22%, while that of female is 40%. Suwit
Wibulpolprasert et al, Thailand Health Profile 2008-2010, Ministry of Public Health, April 2011, p. 234.
11 Vich Kasemsap et al, Assessment of Access and Service Delivery of Renal Replacement Therapy under the

Universal Health Coverage Scheme, HISRO, 30 September 2013.
12 Ibid.


                                                               14
Table 5: Patients’ opinion whether the related healthcare cost affect their families economically, by health insurance schemes

 Assessment                                Have economic impact on                    Have no economic impacts on
                                           families (%)                               families (%)

 UC (1275)                                 47.5                                       52.4

 CSMBS (68)                                26.5                                       73.5

 SSO (35)                                  45.7                                       54.3



    5. Transportation is a major cost for elderly rural residents to utilize health services. From the
       qualitative study sample (which is not nationally representative), the average transportation cost
       incurred by elderly rural residents is more than 10 times that of elderly urban residents, as per
       Table 3. The UC scheme does not provide support for transportation costs, making it the major
       gap.

         Transportation costs were identified as the most important impediment to accessing health
         services by elderly rural residents. These affect particularly the elderly poor, and the elderly who
         do not live nearby major highways and roads on which public buses operate. The cost of renting
         private cars to take them to hospitals is simply not affordable by many elderly households, even
         those who live above the poverty line. The elderly poor who live on allowances from universal
         pension alone is the most vulnerable, as they need to use all of the monthly allowance to pay for
         room rent and food, and these people do not have extra resources to travel to health facilities in
         time of sickness.

         The qualitative study identified several elderly poor patients from remote districts who undergo
         cancer radiotherapy and chemotherapy at regional and university hospitals, far away from their
         hometowns. Depending on the course of the therapy, they need to travel from remote districts to a
         regional or a university hospital in another province every other day or every week for a period of
         up to several months. Even though the cost of these cancer treatments are covered by the UC
         scheme, the cost of transportation was not, and there are several elderly interviewees that suffered
         catastrophic health care expenditures as a result of related transportation costs, and needed to
         borrow money from neighbors to pay for such high transportation costs.

         Food is also a significant cost item for elderly patients who need to travel from rural areas to
         receive care at higher-level health facilities in large towns and cities. Also, elderly patients from
         rural areas generally need to bring caretaker(s) along to support them, and this also adds up the
         total cost of accessing care, as the caretaker(s) also need to spend on transportation, food, and
         residence if overnight stay is required.
    Table 6: Average health-related expenditures per year by urban and rural residents (from qualitative study)

           Expenditure type Transportation Food                                Medicines     Carer’s expenses
           Urban                       474                              343            1,331               256
           Rural                     6,004                            1,891            1,393               393

                                                              15
6. Affordable accommodation options for elderly patients and their caretakers at referral hospitals
   are too limited. Regional and university hospitals in Bangkok and major regional cities like
   Chiang Mai, Khon Kaen, Surat Thani, and Songkhla are tertiary hospitals that are responsible for
   treating patients from several provinces in its network. Oftentimes, elderly patients and their
   caretakers need to travel for 6-7 hours from their respective home districts to reach the regional
   referral hospital. In these cases, even an out-patient care visit requires overnight stay. Elderly
   patients from remote districts who require continuous out-patient care visits for such treatments
   as hemodialysis, radiotherapy, or chemotherapy (these specialist services are not available at
   lower-level hospitals) also need overnight stays. Unfortunately, most of the tertiary referral
   hospitals are located in big cities in which accommodation tends to be much more expensive than
   in rural areas. Hence, accommodation in referral hospitals has been cited by elderly rural
   residents as one of the major factors for their decisions whether or not to access out-patient
   specialist care services at higher-level hospitals.

7. Poor elderly respondents indicated they do not have the means to travel to health facilities, as
   their only income is universal social pension, and that the current level of monthly allowance
   from the universal social pension is not sufficient to sustain their minimum living expenses – they
   do not have any money left after spending on food and accommodation, and do not have any
   savings (the level of universal social pension is illustrated in Table 7). Out of 547 elderly
   participants of FGDs, 38% indicated that their monthly incomes are insufficient to sustain their
   living standard. This group of elderly people tend to be those that depend on universal social
   pension as the main source of their incomes, and that they do not have other financial support
   from relatives, from work, and do not have savings. The situation is worse among the oldest old:
   of the 272 elderly participants aged 75 and over, as many as 101 or 37% indicated that the
   universal social pension is their only income source. It is important to note geographical disparity
   in terms of elderly incomes, as the elderly in the North and the Northeast tend to be poorer and
   dependent on universal social pension and support from relatives, while the elderly from the
   South and central Thailand on average tend to have higher incomes from continued employment
   or work in the agriculture sector in addition to the allowances from the universal social pension.
Table 7: Universal Social Pension by Age

       Age range        Amount (THB) per month
       60-69            600
       70-79            700
       80-89            800
       90 and older     1,000


8. Some of the local administrative organizations (LAOs) visited during the qualitative study have
   played an instrumental role in promoting access to health services for the elderly in rural
   communities. Several LAOs make available health emergency vans for people in the community
   free of charge. There are best practices from smaller LAOs (e.g. Tambon administrative
   organizations) with small amount of budget that do not have sufficient resources to purchase a
   proper health emergency van, but were able to turn an old pick-up truck into a well-equipped
   health emergency van at small costs, and using the fees that they receive from Emergency
   Medical Institute of Thailand (with each valid health emergency delivery to a health facility) to
   finance the operating costs of health emergency vans for both emergency and non-emergency

                                                 16
       cases (i.e. to bring poor elderly to hospitals in non-emergency cases). Several LAOs also arrange
       annual health check-up (in coordination with health promotion hospitals) for the elderly in the
       community so that the elderly residents do not need to travel to health facilities for annual health
       check-ups.

       Nevertheless, the health-related support for the elderly vary significantly from one LAO to
       another, depending on the interests and priorities set by LAOs’ chief executives and mayors.
       Some LAOs do not provide any health-related support for the elderly and focus more on building
       infrastructures for the communities, while some LAOs focus very much on health to the point of
       establishing health clinics and hiring medical doctors with LAO resources to serve the local
       population.

       All the elderly participants in this qualitative study were asked what they would like LAOs to
       support them, and three most popular answers by far are (i) for the health emergency van
       initiative to be expanded into more LAOs, (ii) for LAOs to provide free transportation for the
       poor to travel to health facilities when sick, and (ii) for LAOs to consider providing vehicles to
       bring elderly people from rural areas to receive out-patient care services at hospitals once a week
       on a regular basis, as this will help boost health utilization.

   9. It should be noted that several large public hospitals set up social welfare schemes, drawing
      resources from donation and hospital’s own funds. These social welfare schemes are expected to
      provide financial support to the poor who do not have the means to pay for extra healthcare costs
      that are not covered by the UC scheme, and also support transportation costs for the poor to return
      home. The implementation of these social welfare schemes varies, but many large hospitals that
      have such schemes do not promote them actively on the ground that the resources are limited, and
      leave it to relevant medical doctors and nurses to inform the patients about the schemes. Several
      elderly poor patients whom the team interviewed at these large hospitals were not aware that such
      social welfare schemes exist.

       The fact that several hospitals have social welfare schemes but do not promote them actively lead
       to inequity in access to information. As medical doctors and nurses in large public hospitals need
       to attend to so many patients each day, it is very possible that they may not be able to detect all
       poor patients and inform them about the social welfare schemes. This is particularly true for
       patients whose treatment was fully covered by the UC scheme but needed to pay large amount of
       money for transportation, as these health professionals do not have information about the
       transportation costs that the patients needed to pay.

       Another gap in these social welfare schemes is that they support transportation costs for the poor
       once the patients already arrive at the hospital, and hence there is a challenge of how the poor
       elderly can finance transportation costs to get to such hospitals in the first place.


Recommendations


   1. Poor elderly individuals who do not live with adult children are more likely to have lower
      utilization of health services but incur higher catastrophic health expenditures, compared with

                                                    17
         their peers who live with adult children. Poor elderly individuals in rural areas who do not live
         with adult children (particularly females and widows) are the most vulnerable and are exposed to
         the highest risks of inadequate health utilization and deepening impoverishment due to healthcare
         costs. Special attention to help improve health utilization and reduce catastrophic health
         expenditures needs to be provided to this group of vulnerable population.

     2. Transportation costs to health facilities is the most important obstacle that prevents elderly poor
        in rural areas to access health care services. It is interesting to note that health protection
        programs in countries that are much less developed than Thailand, e.g. Health Equity Funds in
        Lao PDR and Cambodia, often include support for both health care costs and transportation costs
        as part of the benefit package for the poor. While Thailand is able to support free health care costs
        for all of its citizens, there is no national program that supports transportation costs for the Thai
        poor to travel to health facilities. It is important for the government to consider options to support
        transportation costs to health facilities for the elderly poor living in rural areas.

     3. The health care coverage supported by the UC scheme is relatively comprehensive. While there
        are still some diseases that may lead to high out-of-pocket and catastrophic expenditures (e.g.
        some types of cancer, chronic renal diseases), extending the coverage universally to cover the
        costs of these high-cost treatments, hi-tech medical equipment, and brand name drugs that are
        outside the essential drug list may add up too much cost pressure to the already steadily rising
        cost of the UC scheme. For treatments and medical equipment that are not covered by the UC
        scheme, it is fair for the hospitals to ask for financial contribution from patients who are able to
        afford to pay. Nevertheless, the government should consider arrangements for these excess health
        care costs to be covered for the poor, and hence identification of the poor to receive these benefits
        are worth considering.

     4. The issue of identification and targeting of the poor for benefits that address unmet health-related
        needs should be revisited, given the gaps in transportation costs and other health care costs that
        are not covered by the UC scheme. Since Thailand has successfully launched the universal health
        coverage in 2001, the formal system of targeting the poor has been dismissed from the policy
        agenda of successive governments. Nevertheless, the health-related support from the universal
        health coverage does not cover such key item as transportation to health facilities, and this lack of
        support has negatively affected the access to utilization of health services by poor elderly
        Thailand, which account for around 10% of total elderly population. 13 Once the identification and
        targeting of the poor has been conducted, the list of the poor could be used by the National Health
        Security Office (that manages the UC scheme) and a number of social welfares schemes operated
        by large hospitals to provide needed health-related benefits for the poor in their coverage areas.

     5. To supplement the benefits provided by the universal health coverage, social welfare schemes
        currently operated by large hospitals with the aim to provide necessary support on health care and
        transportation costs for the poor need to be expanded to all tertiary hospitals. Furthermore, these
        social welfares schemes run by hospitals need to be promoted actively, and the hospitals should
        ensure that the information about their support for the poor is accessible to all poor patients.
        Several university hospitals, including the Prince of Songkhla University Hospital, managed the

13Reducing Elder ly Poverty in Thailand: The Role of Thailand’s Pension and Social Assistance Programs, World
Bank, 2012.

                                                       18
    social welfare scheme to support health care costs for the poor in a transparent and equitable way,
    with clear guidelines and criteria. This kind of good practices and lessons should be promoted and
    shared with other hospitals.

6. Special attention and support should be given to bed-ridden elderly who are poor. These elderly
   poor tend to suffer from chronic diseases that need intensive care and support but often they are
   not able to travel to health facilities frequently due to difficulties to move, dependence on
   availability of caretakers to take them to health facilities, and transportation costs. Hence, regular
   home visits by health promotion hospital staff and village health volunteers targeting these bed-
   ridden and poor elderly should be promoted, and support for transportation from health centers or
   from LAOs should be provided to this group of the elderly as needed.

7. LAOs can play an instrumental role in promoting access to health services for the elderly in rural
   communities. Several best practices from selected LAOs under the qualitative study include
   making available health emergency vans for the community and arranging annual health check-up
   (in coordination with health promotion hospitals) for the elderly in the community so that the
   elderly residents do not need to travel to health facilities for annual health check-ups. These
   practices by LAOs should be promoted.

8. The VHVs are instrumental to the provision of health-related support to the elderly in
   communities, particularly through home visits as well as organizing physical exercise and health
   education sessions. The experience from Ka lasin’s Provincial Health Office, which established
   Suksala in every village, as well as providing options to VHVs to receive specialized training on
   geriatric care are good lessons and are worth exploring if it is worthwhile to expand such
   initiatives beyond the province. In any case, the performance of VHVs in Thailand varies from
   communities to communities, but the key success factors are regular supervision by health
   promotion hospitals as well as collaboration with local administration organizations, which can
   provide additional resources for the activities conducted by VHVs to support the elderly
   population in local communities.




                                                 19
