The Platform for
Collaboration on Tax
Concept Note


19 April 2016

International Monetary Fund (IMF)
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)
United Nations (UN)
World Bank (WB)
A. Context and Background

A core agenda...

        Strengthening tax systems – policy and administration – has emerged as a key
development priority, being a core part of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) framework
and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda. The international organizations (IOs) 1 already provide
extensive support to countries’ tax efforts in capacity building, policy reform, standard setting
and implementation, policy dialogue and knowledge sharing. Yet significant additional tax
revenues, raised in fair and efficient ways, are required to meet the global development
challenges. The IOs welcome the increased emphasis on taxation, recognize their responsibility
to further support countries’ efforts, and see deepening their collaboration and cooperation as an
essential component of strengthening tax systems.

        At the same time, the increased linkages between economies and progress in reform that
has already been made are making ever clearer the commonality of many of the challenges that
advanced, emerging and developing countries face. This makes it ever more urgent to fully
exploit the potential synergies from bringing more closely together the experiences and expertise
that the IOs, with their different priorities and roles, have built up.

       The IOs propose to create a new Platform as a central vehicle for their enhanced
cooperation, enabling them to develop a common approach, deliver joint outputs, and respond to
requests for a global dialogue on tax matters. This note describes the Platform, and how it will
support the IO’s work in all their member countries.

…In a new environment

        An era of unprecedented international cooperation on tax matters is now underway,
boosted by progress on exchange of information since 2009 led by the OECD and Global Forum
on Transparency and Exchange of Information for Tax Purposes and, more recently the
G20/OECD BEPS Project, with more inclusion of developing countries in making significant
changes to the international rules. This evolving environment is underpinned by a series of
converging initiatives and actions, including the recent decision to enhance the resources of the
UN Committee of Experts in order to strengthen its effectiveness. Other developments include a
new joint IMF/WBG initiative on strengthening tax systems in developing countries and
fostering inclusive policy discussions, a partnership between the OECD and UNDP on Tax
Inspectors Without Borders plus the Addis Tax Initiative designed to dramatically increase donor
support for building tax capacity in poorer countries.




1   For the purposes of this note, this refers to the IMF, OECD, UN and WBG.

                                                              3
…With new expectations for International Organisations

These converging developments are raising expectations, not least for coherent action among the
IOs. G20 Leaders have called for the OECD to develop an Inclusive Framework for the
implementation of the BEPS project globally, and welcomed support from the IMF, OECD, UN
and WBG to help developing countries to voice their own perspectives and implement this
agenda.


                       BOX 1: The Platform and the Inclusive Framework—Links and Synergies

    In response to the November 2015 call by G20 Leaders, the OECD is developing an Inclusive Framework for BEPS
    implementation. The Framework will monitor and support BEPS implementation, review progress made in the
    implementation of the BEPS measures and in particular of the minimum standards included in the BEPS package,
    and will complete some limited remaining technical work related to the BEPS Actions, (e.g. finalizing transfer
    pricing guidance on the application of transactional profit split methods on financial transactions).         The
    Framework will include a mix of government tax officials from G20, OECD, and developing countries. The IMF, UN
    and WBG will be observers to the Framework, as is already the case in the OECD’s Committee on Fiscal Affairs.

    The Platform will produce, as a major collective output of the IOs, the eight toolkits and reports that the G20 has
    requested the IMF, OECD, UN and WBG to develop. Most of these aim to translate the complexity of BEPS outcomes
    (in relation, for instance, to transfer pricing), into user friendly guidance for low capacity countries. Others address
    international tax issues not included in the BEPS project (such as indirect transfers of assets). The development of
    the toolkits will be informed by discussions in the Inclusive Framework. Beyond this, the Platform is also expected
    to identify and analyze emerging international tax issues, especially those of interest to developing countries-
    including with a view to possibly bringing them to the attention of the Inclusive Framework.



       The IOs of course have their own mandates for action in the tax area. They have already
received requests from the G20, notably on toolkits. A further G20 request for a report from the
IOs on more general capacity issues on DRM and tax systems development has been received.
These will require more joint efforts and more requests for collaborative work are anticipated.
Developing countries themselves, particularly low income countries, are seeking both more
capacity support and greater influence on designing international rules.

The interface between the Platform and the Inclusive Framework that the OECD has been
requested to develop is described in Box 1 overleaf.

A positive starting point from which to deepen collaboration.

        There is already a strong basis on which to deepen collaboration among the IOs in pursuit
of these increased expectations. Examples include the IOs’ effective collaboration on a recent
report on tax incentives in low income countries 2 and, earlier, on a flagship report for the G20 to



2 www.oecd.org/tax/tax-global/options-for-low-income-countries-effective-and-efficient-use-of-tax-incentives-for-
investment.pdf


                                                                4
identify the key tax challenges facing developing countries. 3 Another instance is the joint work
of the IMF and OECD on taxation and debt bias, part of a report on non-financial corporate
leverage coordinated by the FSB for the G20. 4


B. Objectives

       The overarching aim for cooperation among the IOs is to better support governments in
addressing the tax challenges they face. The Platform will provide a means to help achieve this,
by providing a structured and transparent framework for:

         1. Producing concrete joint outputs and deliverables under an agreed work plan,
            implemented in collaboration by all or selected IOs, and leveraging each institution’s
            own work program and comparative advantage. The outputs may cover a variety of
            domestic and international tax matters.

         2. Strengthening dynamic interactions between standard setting, capacity building and
            technical assistance (experience and knowledge from capacity building work feeding
            into standard setting and vice-versa, including timing of implementation).

         3. Sharing information on activities more systematically, including on country level
            activities.

C. Principles to Guide Cooperation

         The following key principles will guide cooperation among the IOs within the Platform:

         1. The IOs will continue to act to fulfill their own mandates and within their own rules
            of procedure.

         2. The substantive analysis, research, drafting of technical papers and the other activities
            undertaken within the Platform will be carried out by the staff of the IOs, based on
            their comparative advantages and capabilities. All of the Platform’s products will
            therefore be the responsibility of the IO staff involved, and not that of the Platform
            itself.

         3. The cooperation will seek consensus, but differences in views may be reflected in the
            outputs where consensus cannot be found.

3IMF, OECD, UN and World Bank (2011), Supporting the Development of More Effective Tax Systems – A Report to the G-20
Development Working Group, www.imf.org/external/np/g20/pdf/110311.pdf.
4 The FSB, together with the BIS, IMF, IOSCO, OECD, and WBG, prepared a report on the factors that shape the liability
structure of corporates focusing on the implications for financial stability, with the IMF and OECD collaborating on the
section dealing with debt bias. (2015) Corporate Funding Structures and Incentives, www.fsb.org/2015/09/corporate-
funding-structures-and-incentives/


                                                             5
D. Governance Arrangements

       IOs will establish an effective institutional setting to meet the objectives above, and to
produce concrete outputs, such as those suggested under (E) below, as follows:

       1. Membership
          • The IMF, OECD, UN and WBG are the members of the Platform. Each member
            will designate an appropriate senior official as the main contact point and
            representative to the Platform, as described in Para 3 below.
          • The members will continue to involve regional organizations (e.g. regional
            development banks), regional tax organizations (e.g. ATAF, CIAT, CREDAF),
            and donors in their activities on a regular basis—including through the Platform.
          • Discussions will be conducted with government officials, and with other major
            stakeholders, such as civil society, academics and business.

       2. Administrative Support
          • Administrative support will include coordinating the organisation of meetings,
            both of Platform members, and, as appropriate, occasional conferences or
            workshops with country officials, preparing agendas and summary records, and
            monitoring agreed tasks and deadlines in relation to the joint outputs.

       3. Meetings
          • Physical meetings of members will be held three times a year, preferably back-
             to-back with other international events. Each Member will be represented by its
             main contact point for the Platform, namely: the Director of, or B-level staff in,
             the Fiscal Affairs Department of the IMF; Director/Deputy Director CTPA
             OECD or CTPA Division Heads; Senior Director Government Global Practice
             (GGP) and Director Public Service & Employment (PSP) WBG; Director of the
             Financing for Development Office, UN DESA.
          • Technical level meetings will be held as needed either physically, or by video conferencing.
             Meetings with regional organizations/regional tax organizations/donors will take
             place at least once a year.
          • Conferences and other events for interaction with government officials will also
             be organized as agreed by the Platform members. A major conference will take
             place once every two years (continuing the valued tradition established by the
             International Tax Dialogue (ITD)), preferably beginning in late 2017.




                                                  6
       4. Transparency
          • The Platform will be operated transparently, making its work plan and outputs
             available:
             o to the general public (through, for example, a website)
             o to government stakeholders, including the G20 and other fora (written and
                oral reports)
             o to donors providing financial support.

E. Activities

The Platform will focus on the development of joint outputs and on information sharing and
coordination.

Joint Outputs

The Platform will jointly produce the following outputs, to be published under the Platform
brand:

       E1.   Develop appropriate tools for developing countries in the taxation of
       Multinational Enterprises (MNEs), including in relation to the new measures from
       the BEPS reports.

       Context       The taxation of MNEs covers a broad range of issues, including not only
                     those dealt with under the BEPS package, but also, for instance, tax
                     incentives, comparability issues and the indirect transfer of assets. These
                     issues affect all countries. More specifically, the G20 DWG has
                     requested the IOs to develop toolkits to assist developing countries to
                     address a set of these issues, some of which feature in the BEPS
                     outcomes while others are outside the scope of the BEPS work.

       Collective IO The work on toolkits is already underway with different IOs leading the
       action        work according to the particular expertise needed for each toolkit.

       Outputs        The first of these, the report on tax incentives, has been delivered. The
                      IOs will continue to work together on the 7 remaining toolkits requested
                      by the G20, which will be delivered between now and March 2018. The
                      Platform members have responsibility for the production of the toolkits
                      and the Inclusive Framework will contribute to their development.
                      Several of the toolkits fall clearly under the BEPS project umbrella (on
                      transfer pricing, for instance). The 6th toolkit on comparability can
                      benefit heavily from the Transfer Pricing BEPS outputs and can provide
                      important input for potential future work in the standard setting area on
                      simplification measures that are also effective in protecting the tax base.

                                              7
                The work on the indirect transfer of assets could lead to important input
                and policy questions in relation to the existing international standards.
                The preparation of the toolkits will require substantial work from all the
                IOs, and will be a major activity of the Platform through to March 2018.


E2.    Support interested developing countries to participate in the implementation
of the BEPS package and input into future global standard setting on international
taxation.

Context         As described above, an Inclusive Framework for monitoring in the post-
                BEPS environment is under construction. Work will be needed by the
                IOs to support interested countries in implementing and adapting the
                rules and applying them in a consistent manner.

Collective IO   As requested by the G20 the OECD will lead the work on building and
action          implementing the Inclusive Framework referred to above, involving all
                interested countries on an equal footing. The other IOs will contribute to
                that work and to the wider international tax agenda, by a) using their
                expertise to advise on a mode of implementation of the BEPS outcomes
                that is fit for purpose for developing countries that may be interested in
                joining the Inclusive Framework; b) using their expertise to support
                developing countries’ wishing to participate actively in the Inclusive
                Framework and c) identifying gaps, loopholes or problems for
                developing countries and feed this into the discussions of the Inclusive
                Framework. The IMF, UN and WBG will be observers to the main
                body and the subsidiary bodies that are part of the Inclusive Framework.

Outputs         Joint analyses of, for example:
                • gaps, loopholes or problems for developing countries;
                • timing or other issues regarding implementation of international
                    standards in developing countries.


E3.    Capacity Development Issues.

Context         Building effective tax systems in developing countries will require an
                intensification of developing countries’ reform efforts, assisted by
                coordinated support, advice, training and technical assistance offered by
                the IOs and others.




                                        8
Collective IO   There are several areas in which joining forces will have clear benefits
action          to the IO’s members: ensuring synergies and an effective division of
                labor among the major providers based on transparent information about
                who is doing what and a recognition of the IO’s distinct comparative
                advantages; the development of common training materials, jointly
                owned by the IOs, and other resources to exploit synergies and reduce
                duplication or inconsistencies in advice.

Outputs         Outputs are expected to include:
                • Common and jointly owned training materials, including matter
                   linked to the standard setting process, and the development of
                   ‘training of trainers’ programs, to maximize impact at minimum
                   cost.
                • Reports on the impact of effective IO assistance on tax reforms in
                   developing countries.


E4.   Improving awareness to build comprehensive and effective exchange of
information mechanisms.

Context         Effective exchange of information (EOI) is fundamental to addressing
                profit shifting and illicit financial flows. The Multilateral Convention on
                Mutual Administrative Assistance in Tax Matters (Multilateral
                Convention) is the most comprehensive multilateral instrument
                available for all forms of tax cooperation to tackle tax evasion and
                avoidance. As the most inclusive global tax body, the Global Forum on
                Transparency has made rapid progress in monitoring the standards for
                EoI and ending bank secrecy. Extending this work further to ensure
                more countries join the Global Forum and sign the Multilateral
                Convention are the next steps.

Collective IO   To sustain the Global Forum’s momentum, the IOs could combine their
action          efforts to further raise awareness in developing countries of the impact
                of following the agreed international standards.

Output          Analysis of and statement on the benefits/cost for developing countries
                engaging in international exchange of information provisions.




                                        9
E5.    Taxation and the ‘Informal’ Economy

Context         The term ‘informality’ embraces, in the tax context, a wide range of
                concerns: the incentives and disincentives for micro/small businesses to
                enter the tax system; the design of that system in light of the significant
                costs of collection for tax administrations; the wide varieties of forms
                of non-compliance; and understanding the trade-offs between revenue
                objectives, tax base broadening and state legitimacy objectives.

Collective IO   ‘Informality’ is a tax concern for all countries, though the extent and
action          nature of the issues differ, There is little authoritative advice on how to
                frame the tax and informality issues facing developing countries in
                particular, and little guidance for policy makers and administrators. The
                IOs have an opportunity to fill this gap.

Outputs         Joint policy papers, analysis and guidance.


E6.    Information Sharing and Coordination among the Members

       In addition to the specific outputs proposed above, the Platform provides a venue
for coordination and information sharing on a set of high priority tax issues. A non-
exhaustive set of topics is listed below for illustrative purposes. Every two years the
Platform will also organize Global Conferences, which are expected to engage the
leadership of the IOs, and can discuss key current issues in a broader context.

       1.      Revenue Statistics
       Reliable, comparable revenue data is critical to tax analysis, and for the SDG
       monitoring process. This requires the IOs to share information and coordinate
       their efforts and exploit their differing comparative advantages in developing data
       on revenue collection and ensuring that data available is used effectively.

       2.     Tax Administration Diagnostics
       There are opportunities for cross learning between the partner organizations on
       tax administration diagnostic work (TADAT, RA-FIT and FTA).

       3.      Natural Resource Taxation, including in fragile states.
       There is a need for significant efforts to address the tax challenges in the
       extractives industries, made more acute by recent falls in the prices of many
       commodities.




                                        10
                  4.      Tax treatment of aid-funded goods and services.
                  The ITD work, 5 including draft guidelines that were discussed by the UN
                  Committee of Experts on International Cooperation on Tax Matters, 6 has had
                  some impact with four donors stopping the practice of claiming exemptions. The
                  ITD analysis is out of date and there is a need to share updated information on
                  the costs to developing countries.




5 International Tax Dialogue (2006), Tax treatment of donor-financed projects: A discussion paper prepared by the
International Tax Dialogue.

6   E/C.18/2007/CRP.12


                                                           11
