                     Document of

                   The World Bank




MOROCCO INTEGRATED DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT AND
              RESILIENCE PROGRAM




             Fiduciary Systems Assessment




                   March 17, 2016
Acronyms and Abbreviations

BGE        Budget General de l’Etat (State General Budget)
CAS        Compte d’Affectation Special (Earmarked Budget Line)
CDC        Cours des Comptes (Court of Accounts)
CDM        Commission des marchés (Procurement commission)
CNCP       Commission Nationale de la Commande Publique (National Commission of Public
           Procurement)
DAA        Directorate of Administrative Affairs
DAPS       Direction des Assurances et de la Prévoyance Sociale (Department of Insurance and
           Social Welfare)
DEPP       Direction des Entreprises Publiques et de la Privatisation (Department of State-owned
DLI        enterprises and Privatisation)
           Disbursement-Linked Indicators
FLCN       Fonds de Lutte contre les Catastrophes Naturelles (Fund for the Fight against Natural
           Disasters)
FSEC       Fonds de Solidarité Contre les Évènements Catastrophiques (Catastrophic Events
           Solidarity Fund)
FSA        Fiduciary Systems Assessment
GCC        General Contract Conditions
GDP        Gross Domestic Product
GFMIS      Government Fiscal Management Information System
GOM        Government of Morocco
IGAT       Inspection Générale de l’Administration Territoriale (General Inspectorate of
           Territorial Administration)
IGF        Inspection Générale des Finances (General Inspectorate of Finance)
ICPC       Instance Centrale de Prevention de la Corruption (The Central Authority for
           Corruption Prevention)
IMF        International Monetary Fund
INDH       National Human Development Initiative Project
KFPI       Key Fiduciary Performance Indicators
LG         Local Governments
MEF        Ministry of Finance
MoI        Ministry of Interior
PAP        Program Action Plan
PCU        Program Coordinating Unit
PEFA       Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability
PforR      Program-for-Results
POM        Program Operations Manual
PPD        Public Procurement Decree
SBD        Standard Bidding Documents
SG         Secretariat General (Secretariat General)
SGG        General Secretariat of the Government
SOE        State-Owned Enterprise
TGR        Trésorerie Générale du Royaume (General Treasury of the Kingdom)
                                                         Table of Contents




EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ........................................................................................................... i
I.      Introduction ........................................................................................................................ 1
II.     Program Description and Expenditure Framework ...................................................... 1
III.    Program Institutional Arrangements .............................................................................. 2
IV.     Financial Management Systems ....................................................................................... 2
V.      Procurement Systems ........................................................................................................ 6
VI.     Fraud and Corruption and Debarment of Contractors ............................................... 10
VII. Fiduciary Risk Assessment.............................................................................................. 12
VIII. Remedial actions to be included in the PAP .................................................................. 12
IX.     Monitoring of fiduciary performances........................................................................... 12
1. Purpose of the FSA. The main principles that guided the preparation of the FSA are to ensure that: the
   fiduciary systems for the program are reliable and offer reasonable assurance for transparency,
   accountability with clear decision making and performance, that the capacities in place are adequate for
   proper implementation of program activities and appropriate use of the funds; and that the risks identified
   are properly mitigated. The FSA comprises separate assessments of the risks relating to the Program’s
   procurement, financial management, and fraud and corruption aspects. It provides an assessment of the
   fiduciary systems applicable to the Program, the institutional arrangements defined for the Program and
   the fiduciary risks associated to the Program. It also measures recommended as part of the Program
   Action Plan (PAP) to mitigate the key risks identified so as to be able to track and improve the fiduciary
   performance. On fraud and corruption aspects, the FSA assessed the availability of fiduciary information,
   the oversight of Program activities, the management of complaints, the grievance redress mechanism and
   the fight against fraud and corruption.

2. The nature of the Program makes it difficult to predict the individual entities likely to access the
   funds. Indeed, the activities to be principally financed under the Program will be selected following calls
   for proposals, launched periodically (on a yearly basis). In general, the categories of entities that will
   access FLCN funding are potentially central or deconcentrated government entities such as ministries,
   governorates, autonomous government agencies (i.e. établissements publics, agences de bassin), or SOEs
   on one hand and local government entities such as Municipalities, Associations of Municipalities,
   Municipality-owned enterprises (i.e., Sociétés de Patrimoine, Sociétés de Développement Local), or local
   government agencies on the other hand.1 In this context, the FSA places particular emphasis on
   evaluating the Program systems at the level of the MoI as one of the key Program implementation
   agencies, especially for sub-programs One and Two.2

    Procurement and financial management

3. The FSA builds on the experience and knowledge of Moroccan Public Procurement and Financial
   Management systems (ongoing dialogue on procurement reforms, specific studies such as the
   “Enabling procurement reforms in Middle East and North Africa, case of Morocco?, 2009 PEFA
   (national), 2007 CFAA, etc.), previous diagnostics, past experience with communes, SOEs and
   ministries and reports including audits. A main feature of this Program is its cross cutting and cross-
   sectoral nature, with involvement of several entities as described in the paragraph above (i.e., ranging
   from ministries to SOEs and communes, including remote, small and medium). The fiduciary rules and
   procedures applicable to the Program refer all to the country systems and are described in this FSA.

4. The Program’s flow of funds was discussed and agreed with the Budget Directorate of the MEF.
   Bank proceeds will be reflected in the BGE, under the CAS-FLCN. They will be transferred to the single
   treasury account of the State at the TGR. Beneficiaries (project proponents) will also use accounts that are
   part of this network of accounts (ministries, municipalities, government agencies, other public sector
   entities). Following calls for proposal and project selection of projects to be co-financed through the
   CAS-FLCN, the beneficiaries (projects proponents) will sign an FA with MoI to detail the specific
   arrangements for the financing of risk management and resilience investments. The calendar, conditions,
   amounts, and procedures for the transfer of funds between MoI and the project proponents will be



    1
        For the typology of projects see PAD Annex 1.
    2
        Will be implemented by MEF.

                                                         i
    specified in the FA. Disbursement of Bank proceeds will be made at the request of the Borrower upon
    achievement of disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs). The disbursement arrangements for the Program
    may allow for advances once the Program becomes effective.

5. Accounting and financial reporting are primarily handled by the TGR in relationship with the line
   ministries and communes. Monthly budget execution reports are published with less than 3-month delay
   in its Monthly Statistical Bulletin for Public Finance (Bulletin Mensuel des Statistiques des Finances
   Publiques), published on TGR website. These monthly statements on budget execution will provide line
   ministries, communes with access to detailed data on the execution of their budgets and help them prepare
   a quarterly update of budget execution. With the Government Fiscal Management Information System
   (GFMIS) in place, line ministries and local governments have access to most data on their budget
   execution on a real time-basis. However, SOEs do not have access to that system (GFMIS) and therefore,
   will have to generate financial information on their budget and particularly those related to the Program,
   using specific systems.

6. Procurement will be conducted in accordance with the public procurement decree (State, local
   governments and administrative SOEs) or specific procurement rules compliant to a large extent
   with the public procurement decree (non-administrative SOEs, autonomous government agencies).
   A new public procurement decree (PPD) was adopted in December 2012 and came into effect on January
   1, 2014. It addresses some of the main weaknesses and gaps that characterized Moroccan public
   procurement system, with regard to transparency, accountability, efficiency, risks of corruption, and
   mechanisms to manage complaint and to redress grievance. The key features of the decree are the
   following: (i) it constitutes a unified regulatory framework for procurement applicable to public sector
   (state, local governments and administrative state-owned enterprises) and (ii) it brings the selection of
   architect in line with the principles of competition and equal treatment of bidders. Following this reform,
   all non-administrative SOEs and autonomous government agencies have been requested to revise their
   procurement rules to comply with the new decree (which is done in most of the cases).

7. Apart from the PPD and the specific procurement rules, standard bidding documents (SBD)
   including General Conditions of Contracts (GCC) exist. Together with the decree, they provide to the
   procuring entities the tools they need to conduct their procurement activities. The GCC include provisions
   for management of contractual relations between the contractor and the employer. They will be used for
   all the Program.

8. The use of electronic procurement portal (ref. art 147 of PPD) has increased the availability of
   procurement related information such as bid opportunities, calls for proposals, cost estimates, contract-
   related documentation and results of tendering publicly available. Moreover, the electronic procurement
   system includes additional features like the electronic submission of bids, a suppliers ‘database, electronic
   reverse auctions, and grouped purchases. Their use is limited only to entities subject to the public
   procurement decree (State, local governments and administrative SOEs). So far, the experience on the use
   of electronic procurement is very limited and its impact not yet assessed.

9. Procurement Planning and the publication of the plans are made mandatory by the public
   procurement decree (PPD). Each public procuring entity is required according to the PPD, to publish its
   procurement plan which shall include all contracts planned for the fiscal year, under its budget. The
   publication should be done at least two national newspapers (one in Arabic and one in foreign language)
   and on the procurement electronic portal, no later than the end of the first quarter of each fiscal year. This
   requirement fosters the access to information on procurement opportunities for all potential bidders.




                                                         ii
10. Setting of non-monetary criteria for the evaluation of bids is a challenge. In most of the cases, bid
    evaluation criteria are solely based on prices, whereas other criteria than price expressed in monetary term
    could improve the cost effectiveness in procurement.

11. The PPD fosters open competitive bidding as the default procurement method. It requires that
    bidding opportunities be advertised in at least two newspapers (one in Arabic and the other in a foreign
    language) and on the public procurement portal. For each bidding process, a procurement committee is set
    up, comprising representatives of the procuring entity and the Controller of the Ministry of Finance (TGR
    or DEPP). The controller’s main role is to ensure that the rules and procedures are followed accordingly.
    In particular cases where the estimated contract amount does not exceed MAD 200,000 the shopping
    method could be used. This threshold could be raised exceptionally for LG up to MAD 500,000 by
    decision of the Minister of Interior, on a case-by-case basis.

12. Controls oversight of procurement and audits. There are many controls and oversight over the
    procurement and contract award process, all laid out in the PPD. They are performed by the controller of
    the MEF (TGR for ministries and LG and DEPP for SOEs). The controls look at the compliance with the
    provisions of the PPD in terms of quality of bidding documents, respect of bidding procedures including
    advertisement and opening and they also review for approval approval/formal clearance (“Visa
    préalable?) the evaluation report and the draft contract. For LG, other controls (review and approval) on
    procurement by the MoI (Governor of the province) may apply.

13. All the implementing entities are subject to external audits. These audits are conducted respectively
    by the General Inspectorate of Finance (IGF) for ministries, the administration and SOEs and by the
    General Inspectorate for Territorial Administration (IGAT) for local governments and non-administrative
    SOEs. Furthermore, the Supreme Audit Institution (Cour des Comptes) could audit all public entities,
    irrespective of their nature.

14. The complaints management in procurement has been identified as one of the main weaknesses of
    the Moroccan procurement systems3 as it was viewed as not independent enough and did not offer
    sufficient guarantee for an effective and fair treatment for bidders. The treatment of procurement
    complaints (non- judicial) was part of the responsibilities of the “Commission des marches? (CDM),
    composed only of representatives of public entities (no private sector or civil society). The CDM has no
    power to suspend ongoing procurement processes and its decisions are not binding. When courts are
    involved, the judicial decision takes too long and happens usually after contract execution. To modernize
    and improve the efficiency of the current system, the government has embarked in an ambitious reform
    process to transform the CDM into a “Commission Nationale de la Commande Publique? (CNCP) that is
    more independent, and has the authority to make binding decisions and to suspend ongoing procurement
    processes. It comprises representatives from private sector and civil society, in addition to public entities.
    The decree creating the CNCP has been approved by the council of government in September 2015.
    CNCP has the mandate to handle and manage complaints in procurement and contract execution. Other
    responsibilities of the CNCP include (i) regulation of policies, documents and standards for public
    procurement and (ii) coordination and oversight of training in procurement.

15. Fraud, corruption, and debarment of Contractors. Morocco's new constitution, enacted on July 1,
    2011, explicitly mentions the need to fight corruption and to ensure good governance and transparency as
    fundamental tools of public sector management. It also recognizes the right to citizen participation in



    3
        ref. UCS assessment in 2011

                                                          iii
    government decision-making and public engagement, as well as the right to access public information.
    The new Constitution sets the ground for more transparency and efficient use of public resources, through
    Title II on conflict of interest, misconduct in public procurement, misuse of public funds, greater
    transparency, accountability, and fight against fraud and corruption and through Title XII for good
    governance.

16. The National Human Rights Council (Conseil national des Droits de l’Homme - CNDH) was established
    by the 2011 Constitution4 as a successor of the former Advisory Human Rights Council ( Conseil
    consultatif des Droits de l’Homme - CCDH) to consolidate the country’s rule of law. The Council is a
    constitutional body equipped with legal and financial autonomy and independence vis-à-vis the
    legislature, executive and judiciary branches. It is mandated to hear a broad range of complaints any claim
    for violation of human rights (including social and economic rights as well as fraud in public
    administration matters). The Council and its thirteen regional commissions received 41,704 complaints
    and grievances from its establishment in 2011 to 2013. A significant part of complaints brought to the
    Council related to allegations of violations of the rights of users of public administration services. In
    addition, the Council is empowered to initiate and conduct necessary investigations and inquiries in case
    of violations (autosaisine) and recommends sanctions.

17. The Institution of the Ombudsman (L’Institution du Médiateur) is a constitutional body that was
    established by the new Constitution5 to replace the former Grievances Office (Diwan Al Madalim). The
    Ombudsman’s mandate covers handling complaints and grievances of citizens, domestic or foreign
    individuals or legal entities against the administration (including regional and local governments) and
    organizations that benefit from financial support of the State. The Government is obliged by law to
    respond within a time limit to any Ombudsman request. The Ombudsman has been granted legal and
    financial autonomy as well as independence towards the legislature, executive and judiciary branches.
    The Ombudsman is, in addition, empowered with capacity of investigation on its own initiative
    (autosaisine). It is free and easily accessible as grievances, complaints and claims can be introduced
    through regular or registered mail, fax or internet. Four regional offices have been created and are
    operational to represent the institution at the local and regional level and facilitate access for citizens.
    According to its latest annual report, the total number of complaints and grievances treated by the
    institution reached 1,919 in 2013, a majority of which involved the MoI, the MEF, the Ministry of
    Education, the Ministry of Employment and Social Affairs, and regional and local governments.
    Complaints brought to the Ombudsman mostly related to administrative, real estate and financial and
    legal cases.

18. The Government will use its own systems to take all appropriate measures to prevent fraud and corruption
    in connection with the Program. The Bank’s Guidelines on Preventing and Combating Fraud and
    Corruption in Program-for-Results Financing, dated February 1, 2012 and revised July 10, 2015 (the
    Anti-Corruption Guidelines) will apply. The Bank’s debarment list, which is easily accessible, will be
    checked by all procuring entities before awarding contracts. The Government has developed experience
    on this with the EU Anti-Fraud Office. The MoI will handle and report to the Bank allegations occurring
    under the Program via the annual reports during Program implementation. Discussions have been held
    with the Government on the World Bank’s prerogative of administrative inquir y for allegations of fraud
    and corruption. The Government’s collaboration with the Bank on the administrative inquiries into
    allegations which the Bank intends to pursue has been confirmed during appraisal. In accordance with the
    Bank’s Anti-Corruption guidelines for PforR operations, the Program will take steps to ensure that “any



    4
        Article 161 of the 2011 Constitution.
    5
        Article 162 of the 2011 Constitution and Royal Decree n° 1-11-25 of March, 17th 2011.

                                                              iv
    person or entity debarred or suspended by the Bank is not awarded a contract under or otherwise allowed
    to participate in the Program during the period of such debarment or suspension?. The MoI will verify the
    names of the contractor against the Bank’s database6 of debarred or suspended contractors to ensure that
    no such contractor is awarded any contract under the Program.

19. The Borrower will: (a) take all appropriate measures to ensure that the Program is carried out in
    accordance with the Bank’s Anti-Corruption Guidelines; (b) take all appropriate measures to prevent
    fraud and corruption in connection with the Program, including (but not limited to) adopting and
    implementing appropriate fiduciary and administrative practices and institutional arrangements to ensure
    that the proceeds of the Loan are used only for the purposes for which the Loan was granted; (c) promptly
    inform the Bank of all credible and material allegations or other indications of fraud and corruption in
    connection with the Program that come to its attention, together with the investigative and other actions
    that the Borrower proposes to take with respect thereto; (d) unless otherwise agreed with the Bank with
    respect to a particular case, take timely and appropriate action to investigate such allegations and
    indications; report to the Bank on the actions taken in any such investigation, at such intervals as may be
    agreed between the Borrower and the Bank; and, promptly upon the completion of any such investigation,
    report to the Bank the findings thereof; (e) if the Borrower or the Bank determines that any person or
    entity has engaged in fraud and corruption in connection with the Program, take timely and appropriate
    action, satisfactory to the Bank, to remedy or otherwise address the situation and prevent its recurrence;
    and (f) ensure that any person or entity debarred or suspended by the Bank is not awarded contract under
    or otherwise allowed to participate in the Program during the period of such debarment or suspension.

20. In addition to the MoI (which is in charge of the management of the Program, specifically Sub-
    programs One and Two), several other entities such as ministries, local governments and SOEs and
    public agencies will be in charge of the implementation of Program activities. As part of the
    arrangement for the management of the Program, the Direction of Administrative Affairs (DAA) of the
    MoI, will provide support to the Program coordination unit (the Secretariat) on all fiduciary aspects. It has
    dedicated services and experienced staff working on fiduciary matters, according to the Moroccan rules:
    planning, budgeting, procurement, accounting, reporting, etc. The DAA is already involved in other
    operations financed by the Bank in Morocco (ex. INDH2, Local government support project) and is well
    familiar with Bank procedures. Within the DAA, the division of Budget and Accounting on the one hand
    and the division of Procurement on the other, will be the main divisions involved in the Program. The
    division of Budget and Accounting will responsible for programming the annual budget of the Program,
    the management of the budget including release of funds to selected projects proponents according to
    financing agreements (MOU) signed by MoI and the MEF and the project proponents (cf. Article 22
    Organic Law on Finance, 1998), processing of payment request on contracts and transmission to
    Treasurers, etc.. The division of Procurement will be responsible for procurement and approval of
    payments for all activities directly managed by the MoI within the program (Secretariat General). Also as
    part of its fiduciary role, the DAA will be responsible for producing the financial statements for purposes
    of the financial audit of the Program. For all projects selected following the call for proposals, the project
    proponents (ministries, local governments and SOEs) will have the responsibility to handle procurement
    and financial management. Among the local governments (municipalities, provinces, prefecture and
    region), there is a need to distinguish provinces, prefectures and large urban communes, which are usually
    well structured and have dedicated staff for management of fiduciary, from rural communes and small
    and medium size urban communes that have generally weak capacities and insufficient staff, and lack
    training. As for the ministries and SOEs, they have in general, dedicated and well organized services for
    management of fiduciary, with experienced staff. However, there are a few common issues which relate



    6
        https:// www.worldbank.org/debarr

                                                          v
   to staff workload that have negative impact on performance and the lack of training on fiduciary topics
   such as budget management, procurement, internal audit, financial management, etc. It is key to the
   Program’s risk mitigation that fiduciary aspects of project proposals and the fiduciary capacity of project
   managing entities will be part of the criteria for the selection of projects. Project proponents will prepare
   and submit periodical reports including fiduciary aspects and performance, to the MoI, according to an
   agreed format. Furthermore, an information management system will be developed to help monitor and
   evaluate the implementation of projects and activities funded. All information collected from regional
   level will be aggregated at central level and help make decisions when needed, to improve the program
   and individual projects and activities’ performances.

21. The overall risk for the Program has been rated SUBSTANTIAL.

22. Considering the systemic constraint on the budgetary system in Morocco and the potential weakness of
    some project proponents, mitigation measures are proposed in the Program Action Plan. A few indicators
    are also proposed to monitor fiduciary performance over the implementation.

23. The main risks identified in the Program are the following:
      - Lack of independent appeal system and efficient process for handling complaints;
      - Quality and timeliness of annual audited and financial statements;
      - Low fiduciary capacity among a few category of project proponents, namely rural communes;
      - Delay in the transfer of financial resources for the Program (from General Budget to CAS-FLCN
         and from CAS-FLCN to project proponents’ account);
      - Delays in bidding process and contracts award and payment;
      - Issue associated with the quality of design and specifications;
      - Lack of technical skills for preparation of quality bidding documents and accurate cost estimates;
      - Issue of capacity for contract management;
      - Non-compliance with procurement procedures;
      - Issues of weak contract supervision and lack of training.

24. To mitigate the risk identified, the following set of actions are proposed as part of the Program Action
    Plan:
      - In addition to the newly created CNCP (decree approved by the council of government on
          September 2015) that has the responsibility to manage complaints arising in procurement and
          contract management, set up a grievance redress mechanism for the program. Such a system could
          also feed the procurement complaints system managed by the CNCP;
      - Support for the design and supervision of works. In the case of sub-projects, including works for
          construction or retrofitting of infrastructures, it will be required to the sponsor to use the services
          of qualified firms or their own departments with the relevant expertise in case the sponsor is a
          public entity, to assist in the technical design of these works and in the supervision of the works;
      - Profile of project proponents and capacity building program. Following the selection of sub
          projects, MoI will assess the project proponents to establish the profile of each of them and
          therefore to identify the capacities in place and the needs for capacity building. Such an
          assessment will lead to the establishment of fiduciary training needs for each sponsor and the
          establishment of an annual training plan for the program. The training plan will be implemented as
          part of the program of action.

   Measurement of fiduciary performance of the Program

25. The following fiduciary indicators are proposed. They will be monitored and the recommendations and
    correctives measures proposed will complement the actions proposed above, to mitigate the risks
    identified and improve Program execution.

                                                         vi
a. Procurement:
    - Bidding processes conducted according to plan;
    - Time period for payment of invoice;
b. Financial management
    - Timeliness of annual financial statements of the program;
    - Timeliness of program annual audit report.




                                                 vii
1.       This document is the Fiduciary Systems Assessment (FSA) of the World Bank-financed Morocco
Integrated Disaster Risk and Resilience Management Program-for-Results (“the Program?). The
assessment was carried out by the Bank fiduciary team through the preparation phase, in accordance with
the Policy and Directives on PforR Financing. It was conducted, in close collaboration with the Bank
technical team, through analysis of available documents and working sessions with the main stakeholders.
The FSA comprised an integrated assessments of the fiduciary risks relating to the Program’s
procurement, financial management, and fraud and corruption. It provides a picture of the current
situation of the fiduciary systems applicable to the Program, the institutional arrangements defined for the
Program and the fiduciary risks associated to the Program. It includes also the measures recommended as
part of the PAP, to mitigate the risks and actions to track and improve the fiduciary performance.

2.      The FSA considers whether the Program’s fiduciary systems provide reasonable assurance that
the financing proceeds will be used for intended purposes, with due attention to the principles of
economy, efficiency, effectiveness, transparency, and accountability. It covers the Program’s institutional
arrangements, financial management and procurement systems, and governance systems.

3.      The FSA was conducted based on current knowledge of Moroccan public procurement and
financial management systems, previous diagnostics, past experience with communes, SOEs and
ministries, reports and audits, as well as an assessment of the Program institutional management
arrangements, in particular in terms of Ministry of Interior (MoI) and Ministry of Finance (MEF) capacity
to manage the fiduciary aspects of the Program, as well a sample of potential implementation agencies.
The FSA also reflects the assessment of various types of potential beneficiaries on a sample basis,
including various municipalities (like Agadir, Marrakesh or Casablanca) and a governorate (Rabat) The
Bank fiduciary team was involved from the preparation stage and met with the country’s control bodies 7,
as well as the General Treasury of the Kingdom (Trésorerie Générale du Royaume - TGR) and the
Directorate of Budget and Accounting of the Ministry of Interior (MoI).

4.       Findings from the assessment, as well as a review of existing analytical and diagnostic work,
conclude that the Program’s fiduciary systems provide reasonable assurance that the financing proceeds
will be used for intended purposes.

II.     Program Description and Expenditure Framework

5.      The proposed Program will support a subset of the Moroccan Government’s program in the area
of risk management and resilience to natural hazards. In particular it will strengthen aspects of all three
sub-programs of the Government program. Specifically, the Program will support the i) institutional and
capacity building; ii) risk reduction investment and ii) disaster risk financing and insurance sub-programs
of the Government Program. The Program will be included in the government annual budget, in particular
in a special purpose account (compte d’affectation special, CAS) i.e., the Fonds de Lutte contre les Effets
des Catastrophes Naturelles (FLCN).8



7
  The General Inspectorate of Territorial Administration ( Inspection Générale de l’Administration Territoriale -
IGAT), the Central Body for Corruption Prevention ( Instance Centrale de Prévention de la Corruption - ICPC), the
Court of Accounts (Cour des Comptes - CDC), and the MEF’s General Inspectorate of Finance (Inspection Générale
des Finances - IGF).
8
  Expenditures under Sub-program 3 are not as explicitly covered in this FSA as the precise source and allocation of
future required expenditures to capitalize the FSEC will be developed as part of the Program.

                                                         1
6.      Morocco has launched an ambitious public financial management reform leading to improved
alignment of the Moroccan public procurement and financial management systems with international
practices. Overall, these systems have experienced a very positive development over the past decade.
Budget execution is generally predictable and does not deviate substantially from planned and voted
budget.

III.       Program Institutional Arrangements

7.      At the overall Program management level, the FLCN Secretariat, housed in the Secretariat
General’s office (SG) of the MoI will play the role of the Program Coordinating Unit (PCU) and will
serve as Bank interface for the Program (specifically for sub-program one and two), together with the
Direction de Budget and the DAPS in the MEF (for sub-program three). The PCU will be responsible for
coordination, facilitation, and monitoring of day-to-day implementation of the Program. It will also
support the work of the Steering Committee and the National Selection Committee. The PCU will
additionally be in charge of preparing the Program Midyear Report, the Program Progress Report and the
Program Financial Statements--and be responsible to the implementation of the Program according to the
Program Operations Manual (POM) which will be prepared prior to Program effectiveness. The DAA
(Direction des Affaires Administratives) of the MoI will provide support fiduciary support to the PCU. It
will be in charge of procurement and financial management at central level. For subprogram three, the
Direction de Budget and the DAPS in the MEF will be the lead implementation agency. Detailed
reporting guidelines will be included in the program operations manual (POM). It has to be noted that this
reporting covers the entire Program, irrespective of the funding source (Bank or other).

IV.        Financial Management Systems

8.       The Program proceeds will follow the national budget formulation process, structure, and
classification. This system has been formally assessed in the 2009 PEFA9 assessment. Each government
adopts and presents to Parliament its five-year development plan. The current government program covers
the period 2012-2016. It outlines the main policy priorities and objectives, including in terms of macro-
economic policy and public finances, such as bringing down the budget deficit to 3% of GDP by 2016.
This program is complemented by sector-specific strategies covering different time horizons and budget
resources. While these policy priorities and strategies inform the budget preparation, there is no formal or
systematic link.

9.       The current budget reform aims at strengthening this link and the transparency of budget
allocation, through the adoption of a programmatic budget structure and performance objectives and
indicators. The organic law introducing these changes was submitted to the Parliament. The swift
implementation of this reform would increase the consistency between the budget and the government’s
priorities. For the 2015 budget, four pilot ministries will test this new budget structure and present to
Parliament a programmatic budget and performance objectives, with the support of the Bank. The
government program includes a fiscal target (a deficit of 3% of GDP by 2016 compared to 7.4% in 2012)
and the Precautionary and Liquidity Line agreed in 2012 with the IMF includes fiscal forecast. However,
Morocco does not yet publish a multiannual budget framework. Multiannual budget programming is
foreseen in the organic budget law.




9
    Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability Program.

                                                         2
10.      The budget classification is consistent with GFSM 200110 and the government subscribed to the
IMF’s SDDS11 on the norms and codes for fiscal information. Morocco regularly reports (to the IMF) and
publishes its fiscal data. The budget classification uses a combination of an administrative and functional
classification aligned with COFOG12. The budget is comprehensive, covering the general budget of the
State (Budget Général de l’Etat - BGE), the annex budgets (Budget Annexe), the special treasury accounts
(Comptes Spéciaux du Trésor - CST), the special purpose accounts (Compte d’Affectation Spéciale -
CAS) as well as the autonomously-managed government services (Services de l'Etat Gérés de Manière
Autonome - SEGMA). Transfers to agencies and local governments are recorded, not their own revenues
in the absence of consolidated accounts. The current rollout of the same financial management
information system to local governments should facilitate such consolidation in the near future.

11.      Program’s proceeds will be entirely reflected in the BGE. As part of th e Budget, special accounts
are used to reflect the earmarking of public resources to specific purposes. In particular, the Program will
be financed, principally, through the existing “Fonds de Lutte Contre les Effets des Catastrophes
Naturelles? (FLCN) set up through Law 40-08 (2009 Budget Law) as a “Compte d’Allocation Spéciale?
(CAS) and the Ordinateur of the FLCN is the MoI. The FLCN will receive standard contributions
through the general budget and leverage additional financing resources through co-financing of individual
sub-projects. It will be used to channel Bank proceeds under the Program (specifically sub-program one
and two). The CAS-FLCN’s expenditures and resources are annually planned as part of the general
Budget process, through a dialogue between the MoI and the MEF to come up with estimates which are
presented to, modified and voted by Parliament. This process has been regularly applied to the FLCN
since it was established. It has to be noted that reporting of Program proceeds covers the entire Program,
irrespective of funding source (Bank or other) and thus also includes co-financing mobilized for FLCN
funded projects.

12.      By its nature, a CAS is a mechanism to dedicate funding to specific activities and is allowed a
number of expenditure categories. If resources exceed expenditures for a given fiscal year, this excess is
reported to the following fiscal year. These CAS are created by law (mostly the annual budget law), are
voted by Parliament as part of BGE, and follow the normal budget process in terms of budgeting process,
budget classification, accounting, reporting and control. The GoM has set up a “Fonds de Lutte Contre
les Effets des Catastrophes Naturelles? (FLCN) as a dedicated disaster-related financing vehicle created
by Law 40-08 of the 2009 Budget Law as a “Compte d’Affection Spéciale? (CAS). The objective of the
FLCN has been to better enable the Government to strategically finance risk management activities. The
FLCN has implemented a total of 1961 million MDH (US$ 220 million) in investments since its inception
in 2009.

13.      The Program’s flow of funds was discussed with the Budget Directorate of the MEF. Bank
proceeds will be reflected in the BGE, under the CAS-FLCN (for sub-programs one and two). They will
be transferred to the single treasury account of the State at the TGR. Beneficiaries will also use accounts
that are part of this network of accounts (municipalities, government agencies like établissements publics,
other public sector entities). Beneficiaries will sign MoUs with the MoI and MEF to detail specific
arrangements for the financing of risk management and resilience investments. The calendar, conditions,




10
   Government Finance Statistics Manual 2001 prepared by the IMF
11
   Special Data Dissemination Standard
12
   Classification of the Functions of Government developed by the OECD

                                                      3
amounts, and procedures for the transfer of funds between the MoI, MEF and the sub-project proponents
will be specified in the FA.13

14.     Disbursement of Bank proceeds will be made at the request of the Borrower upon achievement of
disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs). An advance may be disbursed once the Program becomes
effective to facilitate the achievement of DLIs results. This potential advance would be available
throughout the Program implementation on a revolving basis.

15.      The Program’s funding predictability is hampered by a weak multi -year budget framework.
Nevertheless, overall, budget execution is fairly centralized and the performance of budget execution is
fairly satisfactory, even if end-year budget execution reports are produced with delay, 2012 being the last
fiscal year when this report was published. Reporting would have to cover all funding sources of projects,
including transfers from the CAS-FLCN and potential co-financing sources. Therefore, Program’s
financial sustainability and funding predictability do not pose a specific risk.

16.      Accounting and reporting are primarily handled by the TGR in relationship with the line
ministries. Monthly budget execution reports are published with less than 3-month delay in its Monthly
Statistical Bulletin for Public Finance (Bulletin Mensuel des Statistiques des Finances Publiques),
published on its website. Through this TGR’s statement, line ministries have access to detailed data on
the execution of their budgets and main ministries use this information to prepare a quarterly update of
budget execution. Since the Government Fiscal Management Information System (GFMIS) has been
rolled out, line ministries and local governments have access to most data on their budget execution on a
real time-basis. The TGR sends a monthly report to the MEF presenting a statement of budget
transactions, special account transactions, and cash flow transactions for the month, accompanied by
statements for previous periods.

17.       There are few processes to measure the efficiency of the Program’s expenditures. Generally,
there is a weakness in the evaluation of the efficiency of public expenditure in Morocco, which led to an
ambitious budget reform leading to program-based budgeting with a performance approach, an annual
evaluation of performance, and the use of performance indicators. The CDC regularly includes in its work
plan evaluation of programs, which involves at the same time regularity audits and performance audits.
The CDC routinely publishes reports on local governments, as well as other decentralized and
deconcentrated public sector entities. In particular, the CDC regularly makes observations on the
compliance with the public procurement procedures, delays in contracts in works exe cution, non-
application of penalties for late execution, lack of internal control, and excessive use of purchase orders
instead of open competition that are recorded in its annual public report. There is little evidence in a
number of cases that observations from the CDC are acted upon according to a firmly established and
implemented action plan. This being said, it has been agreed with the MoI that the budget process related
to the CAS-FLCN could progressively adopt a multi-year programmatic approach as per the draft organic
Budget law submitted to Parliament.

18.     The Program will finance disaster risks prevention projects and activities selected annually
following a call for proposals launched by the MoI. The type of projects are mostly infrastructures for
prevention from floods, earthquake or other natural disasters (i.e., structural activities), but could be also
studies, research, development or acquisition of knowledge tools related to various disaster types,
outreach, etc. (i.e., non-structural activities). The project proponents eligible to submit their proposals



13
 The flow of funds for sub-program three will be determined based on the final adoption of a funding strategy for
Morocco’s Solidary Fund FSEC to be established under Morocco’s disaster risk insurance law, once approved.

                                                        4
could be ministerial departments, local governments or state owned entities or several of those entities in
association. Categories of entities to access FLCN funding will potentially be the following14:

     -   Central or deconcentrated government entities: Ministries, governorates, autonomous government
         agencies (i.e.etablissements publics, agences de bassin), or SOEs.
     -   Local government entities: Municipalities, Associations of Municipalities, Municipality-owned
         enterprises (Sociétés de Patrimoine, Societes de Développement Local), or local government
         agencies.

19.      The capacity of municipalities and local agencies or enterprises to implement investment
operations funded through transfers from the central government has been evaluated based notably on the
knowledge of a sample of 5 municipalities (Agadir, Marrakesh, Casablanca, Rabat and Tangiers) that
have been assessed under the Urban transport Program for Results (P4R), and also based on previous
diagnostics, past experience with MoI (INDH and PACT), the communes, SOEs and ministries, reports
and audits. It appears that the financial management framework of the five municipalities is generally
solid in terms of internal control mechanisms. The budget process and financial reporting frameworks are
also clear and stable, even though there is ample room for improvement. The accountability framework is
broadly in place.

20.      The main risks are as follows: the institutional setup for investment management in municipalities
is not firmly established and is evolving quite rapidly but at an unpredictable pace with central
government promoting a model whereby municipal investment would be mostly undertaken through
municipality-owned enterprises. Nevertheless, in most municipalities, these entities still do not exist,
which means that most of the activities will be designed and implemented directly by municipalities.
Given the relatively low performance of these municipalities in executing their investment budgets in
recent years, this might constitute a bottleneck for the Program. It might therefore be useful to consider
specific support for municipalities to design and implement risk management and resilience-related
investments. As part of the overall management arrangement for the Program, the Directorate of
Administrative Affairs (DAA) of the MoI, will provide support to the PCU on all fiduciary aspects. It has
dedicated services and experienced staff working on fiduciary matters, according to the Moroccan rules:
planning, budgeting, procurement, accounting, reporting, etc. For all sub-projects selected following the
calls for proposal for FLCN co-financed investments, the project proponents (ministries, local
governments, public agencies and SOEs) will have the ultimate responsibility to handle procurement and
financial management. Among the local governments (municipalities, provinces, prefecture and region),
there is a need to distinguish the provinces, prefectures and large urban communes, which are usually well
structured and have dedicated staff for management of fiduciary, from rural communes and small and
medium size urban communes that have generally weak capacities and insufficient staff, which lack



14
   Following the first call for projects, ninety one (91) applications for a total cost of 3.250,93 million MAD (out of
which 1.009,19 million MAD requested for financing from CAS-FLCN) have been received. Among the
applications received, 81 (89%) are from local governments (communes, provinces, etc.), 4 (4.4%) from SOEs and
public agencies and 6 (6.6%) from ministries. For the first batch, a total of twenty three (23) projects were selected:
seventeen (17) projects from local governments (total cost of 488 million MAD and 145 million MAD financing
requested from CAS-FLCN), three (3) projects from SOEs and public agencies (total cost of 244 million MAD and
43 million MAD financing requested from CAS-FLCN) and three (3) from ministries (total cost of 305 million
MAD and 63 million MAD financing requested from CAS-FLCN). Most of the projects related to the construction
of infrastructures to Most of the projects related to the construction of infrastructures to prevent risk of flood,
earthquakes and landslide. In this first batch of approved operations, the individual cost of projects ranges from 2.7
million MAD (0.3 million US$) to 200 million MAD (21 million US$). These project costs are below the OPRC
threshold.

                                                          5
training. As for the ministries and SOEs, they have in general, dedicated and well organized services for
management of fiduciary, with experienced staff. However, there are a few common issues which relate
to staff workload that have negative impact on performance and the lack of training on fiduciary topics
such as budget management, procurement, internal audit, financial management, etc. As part of the
capacity building, some public entities that are providing support to projects proponents in the technical
design of their proposals, such as ABHs are expected to provide support also in contract management and
even in the procurement process, when required. Such arrangement will be clarified in the financing
agreement, as needed.

21.     It will be important that fiduciary concerns be addressed in the selection mechanisms for projects
to be funded by the FLCN and that any entity willing to access FLCN financing be subject to a fiduciary
assessment which modalities will be detailed in the OM. In particular, the selection process would have to
evaluate whether the project’s implementing agency has sufficient capacity to perform procurement
operation and provide the necessary financial reports in a timely fashion. It has been established during
Program preparation that the PCU has the capacity to mitigate fiduciary risks at the projects level by
relying on strong country systems, including in terms of intergovernmental fiscal relationships, oversight
and supervision by ministries of public entities and SOEs within their remit, general financial reporting
mechanisms. As an additional and exploratory measure, it would be useful also to develop a
comprehensive reporting framework for the FLCN that would be supported through a pilot integrated
reporting IR approach. The IR approach would help link FLCN’s strategy, governance, performance and
prospects in the context of its external environment. Also, additional dedicated capacity building
measures can be undertaken.

V.      Procurement Systems

22.      This section evaluates, from a procurement perspective, the degree to which there are reasonable:
(i) arrangements for planning and budgeting; (ii) procurement rules, including their accessibility to the
public; (iii) capacity for contract management and administration; (iv) complaint mechanism, including
clarity on how they are used; (v) systems for program oversight and control. This section also identifies
actions to enhance the procurement systems during program preparation and implementation (the latter
are included in the Program Action Plan - PAP).

23.     A new public procurement decree (PPD) was adopted in December 2012 and came into
effect on January 1, 2014. It seeks to address some of the main weaknesses and gaps that have continued
to characterize Morocco’s procurement system, in particular in terms of transparency, accountability,
efficiency, risks of corruption, and mechanisms of complaint and redress. Key features of the new decree
include the unification of the regulatory framework for procurement to include the entire public sector
(applying to local governments as well as all administrative state-owned enterprises). It also brings the
selection and award methods for architect contracts in line with the principles of competition and equal
treatment of bidders.

24.     In addition, the new PPD reinforces the legal basis for e-procurement in Morocco.
Morocco’s public procurement portal has been operational since October 2007, with responsibility for its
development and management vested in the General Treasury of the Kingdom (TGR). The e-portal has
increased the availability of information, especially in terms of making calls for proposals widely
available, making contract-related documentation available to all potential bidders, disclosing an
estimated cost for the goods or projects to be procured, and publishing the results of tendering contests.
The portal is now able to publish bids and calls for tender, and it also features database that tracks
information about procurement procedures (including multimedia guides) and contract amounts per year.
Additional features for the next phase are currently in development, with the application texts about to be


                                                    6
published. These include electronic submission of bids, a suppliers ‘database, electronic reverse auctions,
and grouped purchases.

25.      The new constitution introduced citizen’s right to access information (art icle 27), to be consulted
(article 13) and to complaints (article 15) in order to strengthen the governance of public services and to
strengthen public participation. These core governance reforms apply to public administration as well as
LG and are key levers that will contribute to improving transparency and accountability at LG’s level and
mitigate the shortcomings and issues highlighted in many reports (Supreme Audit Institution « SAI »,
economic and social council, the Central Institution for the Prevention of Corruption (ICPC).

26.     The council of Minister chaired by the King has recently approved three organic laws
respectively for Regions, Provinces and Prefectures and Communes. This is a materialization of Morocco
engagement to move for further decentralization in the management of public affairs, including disaster
risk management.

Arrangements for procurement under the program

27.     Procurement rules and procedures: Procurement under the Program in Morocco will be
executed in accordance with the GoM’s procurement procedures and regulatory framework.15 However,
as confirmed by the borrower during project preparation, the Program does not include any activities
assessed to be likely to have a significant adverse impact on the environment and/or affected people, as
defined in the Policy and Directives on PforR Financing, nor works, goods, and consultancy contracts
above the Operations Procurement Review Committee (OPRC) thresholds (high risk activities).

28.    The main procurement methods to be used under the program for Works, Goods, Services and
Consultants contracts, are Open National Competitive Bidding (ONCB), and Shopping (purchase orders).
The use of this later method is limited to a list of works, goods and services which amount for individual
PO could not excess 250,000.00 MAD (ref. list in annex 4 of the PPD No.2-12-349 dated 8 “Joumada?
1434 (March 20, 2013). This threshold could vary for some SOEs.

29.     Procurement under the Program will be carried out using Morocco’s existing systems and
processes for Public Procurement Management. The Program will be housed within the country’s
budgetary framework (MoI and municipalities) and will rely on existing institutional systems for its
implementation.

30.      Procurement Planning. Funds for public procurement contracts are secured from the state
budget, including from the FLCN which is a dedicated disaster-related financing vehicle created by Law
40-08 of the 2009 Budget Law (as a “Compte d’Allocation Spéciale? (CAS) as well as co-financing
mobilized from other public sources. All implementing entities receiving funding from the FLCN will
reflect in their respective procurement plans the activities funded under the Program, as required by the
PPD.

31.      Record Keeping and Document Management Systems. In general, procurement documentation
is kept in all public entities including rural municipalities. Usually, procurement documents are managed




15
  State-owned enterprises (SOE) are not automatically subject to the PPD and may establish and apply their own procurement
rules once the rules are adopted by their respective Boards and approved by the Ministry of Finance.



                                                            7
by three different services: (i) "service des marchés" (procurement phase), (ii) the accounting service (for
payment purpose), and (iii) the technical department (contract supervision and management). Although
the documentation is not located at a single place, it is exhaustive.

Program procurement activities

32.      The Program procurement activities include predominantly capital expenditures that are focused
on two broad categories: (a) Structural: these are physical on-the-ground activities that directly reduce
disaster risk and are typically the most capital intensive. They include works and goods for flood
protection investments in both rural and urban areas. For example and without limitation, those works and
goods concern constructions such as river levees, flood walls, diversion channels and holding basins;
seismic retrofitting of public buildings such as schools, hospitals, fire and police stations and key
government offices, warning systems (flood, landslide, early earthquake warning, tsunami) and small
scale community-based risk-resilient infrastructure such as earth retaining walls and debris flow dams. (b)
Non-structural: these relate to consultant services for planning and improvement of knowledge, and
include planning, management, ICT, capacity and institutional activities that are directly focused on
disaster risk management. Examples include development of natural hazard elements to be incorporated
in Agence Urbaine plans; hazard mapping to more accurately define zones of high flood, seismic,
tsunami, landslide and other risk; activities contributing to improved risk governance, such as technical
assistance supporting the national risk management strategy, improvements in disaster risk assessment
tools, training in these tools and more generally in risk reduction technology, and a national ICT system
for risk assessment and monitoring.

Procurement Oversight, Governance

33.     Controls and oversight of procurement. The PPD lays out various control and oversight over the
procurement and contract award process. The first control is an ex-ante and is performed by the controller
who represents the MEF (respectively “Contrôleur des Engagements? from TGR for ministries and LG
and the “Contrôleur d’Etat? from DEPP for SOEs). It mainly consist in checking compliance with the
provisions of the PPD (in terms of quality of bidding documents, respect of bidding procedures including
advertisement and opening, …). The second control, which consist in the review and approval/formal
clearance (“Visa préalable?) of the evaluation report and the draft contract by the controller is ex ante.
For local governments (LG), other controls (review and approval) on procurement by the MI (Governor
of the province) may apply. The General Inspectorate of Finance (Inspection Générale des Finances -
IGF) of the MEF will conduct annual audit of the Program Financial Statements (including procurement
aspects), together with the General Inspectorate of Territorial Administration (Inspection Générale de
l’Administration Territoriale - IGAT). It was agreed that IGAT will be the Independent Verification
Agent (IVA) for the DLIs of the Program. Below is a presentation of each entity.

34.      The Treasury of the Kingdom (TGR): The TGR, part of the Ministry of Finance, plays an essential
role in the monitoring of budget execution, as directed by Art. 124 of the General Accounting Regulation
(Order No. 330-66 of April 21, 1967), which stipulates that TGR must “send a monthly report to the
Finance Ministry presenting a statement of budget transactions, special account transactions, and
cashflow transactions for the month,? accompanied by statements for previous periods. TGR summa rizes
this data in its “Monthly Statistical Bulletin for Public Finance,? published on its website. Through TGR’s
data sheets, the central offices of the technical ministries have access to detailed data on the execution of
their budgets; the main ministries use this information to prepare a quarterly update of budget execution.
The Budget Directorate prepares a budget execution report for each ministry at the end of the year, and
the main ministries’ own financial staff prepares the administrative accounts (compte administratif) by
budget chapter, article, paragraph and line. These documents are sent to the Court of Accounts for their
report on the budget review act. Besides, the TGR is also in charge since 2006 of commitment controls. A

                                                     8
series of rationalization reforms have provided line ministries with more autonomy in managing their
budgets (partial fungibility) and have implemented a system of ex ante financial controls more risk-based,
less systematic and focused on high-value/high-risk operations. It has still to be seen whether this
protracted reform agenda has had sustainable behavioral impact.

35.      The IGF (Inspection Générale des Finances - General Inspectorate of Finance) was established in
1960 as control department for public finances in the MEF. Its mandate includes: (i) the inspection and
monitoring of the financial and administrative aspects of government services, including regional and
local governments and state-owned enterprises, and (ii) the financial and budgetary evaluation of public
policies, programs, and expenditures. Despite being linked to MEF, the IGF has clearly proven its
credibility and independence. As a result, it has been accepted by the World Bank and other IFIs and
donors. The IGF is staffed with more than 60 auditors (inspecteurs) with adequate capacity and has been
using, in recent years, audit methods and processes that are comparable to international standards as
confirmed by the 2009 PEFA.

36.      The IGAT (Inspection Générale de l’Administration Territoriale) is the MoI’s internal body that
is in charge of inspecting and auditing this ministry’s activities16. In addition, it is responsible for
inspecting and auditing municipalities which are under the guardianship (tutelle) of the MoI. Furthermore,
this institution accompanies the important reforms engaged by the MoI such as the on-going
decentralization and the improvement of fiduciary management by local authorities. The IGAT has
conducted audits for the INDH 1 IPF and is doing so in INDH 2 PforR, jointly with the IGF, based on a
charter that defined the objectives and methods of the joint audit. Missions conducted by the IGAT
usually cover a review of municipal procedures as part of technical, operational and accounting audits.
Overall, the IGAT is not fully independent from the executive but have proven its credibility and, as a
result, has been have been accepted by the Bank.

37.      The MoI will also be responsible for preparing the Program financial statements. The protocols
for the receipt and compilation of annual Program financial statements will be agreed with counterparts
by appraisal. The annual audit of the Program financial statements will be carried out by the IGF. The
audit report will be sent to the Bank not later than six (6) months after the end of the year under review.
The terms of reference for the audit will be discussed and agreed with the IGF by appraisal. The capacity
of the MoI for preparation of Program financial statements has been assessed and found satisfactory.

38.     External audits. All the implementing entities are subject to the external audits. These audits are
conducted respectively by the General Inspectorate of Finance (IGF) for ministries and SOEs, General
Inspectorate for Territorial Administration (IGAT) for LG and private audit firms for SOEs. Furthermore,
the Supreme Audit Institution (Cour des Comptes) has the ability to audit all these implementing entities,
no matter their nature. The various audits listed above (ex post reviews of procurement aspects), focus
mainly on regularity, economy, and efficiency.

Arbitration and complaint management

39.     Arbitration: the country arbitration system is required by law. As part of the 2007 reforms, a law
for arbitration and mediation procedures was introduced but many of its provisions have remained
unsatisfactory (not reflected in the existing General Contract Conditions (GCCs)).




16
     Decree n°2-94-100 of June 16th, 1994 and Local Finance Law 45.08 of February 18th, 2009

                                                         9
40.      Complaint management: The “Commission Nationale de la Commande Publique? (CNCP), a
newly created entity which decree has been approved by the council of government in September 2015,
has the mandate to handle and manage complaints in procurement and contract execution. Other
responsibilities of the CNCP include (i) regulation of policies, documents and standards for public
procurement and (ii) coordination and oversight of training in procurement. The number of complaints or
anonymous whistle blowing cases declared by ICPC is usually small: about 100 allegations at national
level after the first year the launch of ICPC secured electronic site. This is a sign of lack of bidders’
confidence in the systems with regard to appeal mechanisms or judicial process, and of their fear to be
penalized. More generally, the fear of retaliation is so deeply entrenched in Moroccan contractors’ minds
that very few cases of corruption are signaled, flagged or raised to attention. This is most probably
because the current complaints management system does not appear to be independent enough and to
offer sufficient guarantee for an effective and fair treatment (no involvement of the contracting entity in
the treatment of the complaint, power to suspend ongoing procurement procedure, etc). The judicial
decision, when courts are involved, take too long and happen usually after contract execution.
Procurement complaint treatment (non- judicial) is part of the responsibilities of the complaint handling
body (CNCP, currently “Commission des marches?- CDM). Inadequate human and financial resources
allocated to the CDM prevented it from fulfilling the complete set of responsibilities entrusted to it, which
contributed to a lack of efficient complaint management mechanism. Its role in handling complaints was
minimized by a lack of binding decision power, and the inability for complainants to directly address
complaints to the CDM. To address these deficiencies, the Moroccan Government launched an ambitious
reform to considerably extend the institutional structure resources, and authority of the existing CDM. A
draft decree to establish a National Commission of Public Procurement (“Commission Nationale de la
Commande Publique – CNCP) to replace the CDM is already prepared by the SGG with the participation
of key stakeholders (Ministry of Economy and Finance, TGR, representatives of private sector,…) and is
in its final stage of approval by the council of government. With the decree on CNCP effective, the
Commission will gain more autonomy and independence.

VI.      Fraud and Corruption and Debarment of Contractors

41.      Morocco's new constitution, enacted on July 1, 2011, explicitly mentions the need to fight
corruption and to ensure good governance and transparency as fundamental tools of public sector
management. It also recognizes the right to citizen participation in government decision making and
public engagement, as well as the right to access public information. The new constitution sets the ground
for more transparency and efficient use of public resources, through Title II on conflict of interest,
misconduct in public procurement, misuse of public funds, greater transparency, accountability, and fight
against fraud and corruption and through Title XII for good governance.

42.      The National Human Rights Council (Conseil national des Droits de l’Homme - CNDH) was
established by the 2011 Constitution17 as a successor of the former Advisory Human Rights Council
(Conseil consultatif des Droits de l’Homme - CCDH) to consolidate the country’s rule of law. The
Council is a constitutional body equipped with legal and financial autonomy and independence vis-à-vis
the legislature, executive and judiciary branches. It is mandated to hear a broad range of complaints any
claim for violation of human rights (including social and economic rights as well as fraud in public
administration matters). The Council and its thirteen regional commissions received 41,704 complaints
and grievances from its establishment in 2011 to 2013. A significant part of complaints brought to the
Council related to allegations of violations of the rights of users of public administration services. In




17
  Article 161 of the 2011 Constitution.

                                                     10
addition, the Council is empowered to initiate and conduct necessary investigations and inquiries in case
of violations (autosaisine) and recommends sanctions.

43.      The Institution of the Ombudsman (L’Institution du Médiateur) is a constitutional body that was
established by the new Constitution18 to replace the former Grievances Office (Diwan Al Madalim). The
Ombudsman’s mandate covers handling complaints and grievances of citizens, domestic or foreign
individuals or legal entities against the administration (including regional and local governments) and
organizations which benefit from financial support of the State. The Government is obliged by law to
respond within a time limit to any Ombudsman request. The Ombudsman has been granted legal and
financial autonomy as well as independence towards the legislature, executive and judiciary branches.
The Ombudsman is, in addition, empowered with capacity of investigation on its own initiative
(autosaisine). It is free and easily accessible as grievances, complaints and claims can be introduced
through regular or registered mail, fax or internet. Four regional offices have been created and are
operational to represent the institution at the local and regional level and facilitate access for citizens.
According to its latest annual report, the total number of complaints and grievances treated by the
institution reached 1,919 in 2013, a majority of which involved the MoI, the MEF, the Ministry of
Education, the Ministry of Employment and Social Affairs, and regional and local governments.
Complaints brought to the Ombudsman mostly related to administrative, real estate and financial and
legal cases.

44.      The Government will use its own systems to take all appropriate measures to prevent fraud and
corruption in connection with the Program. The Bank’s Guidelines on Preventing and Combating Fraud
and Corruption in Program-for-Results Financing, dated February 1, 2012 and revised July 10, 2015 (the
Anti-Corruption Guidelines) will apply. The Bank’s debarment list, which is easily accessible, will be
checked by all procuring entities before awarding contracts. The Government has developed experience
on this with the EU Anti-Fraud Office. The MoI will handle and report to the Bank allegations occurring
under the Program via the annual reports during Program implementation. Discussions have been held
with the Government on the World Bank’s prerogative of administrative inquiry for allegations of fr aud
and corruption. The Government’s collaboration with the Bank on the administrative inquiries into
allegations which the Bank intends to pursue has been confirmed during appraisal. In accordance with the
Bank’s Anti-Corruption guidelines for PforR operations, the Program will take steps to ensure that “any
person or entity debarred or suspended by the Bank is not awarded a contract under or otherwise allowed
to participate in the Program during the period of such debarment or suspension?. The MoI will ve rify the
names of the contractor against the Bank’s database19 of debarred or suspended contractors to ensure that
no such contractor is awarded any contract under the Program.

45.      The Borrower will: (a) take all appropriate measures to ensure that the Program is carried out in
accordance with the Bank’s Anti-Corruption Guidelines; (b) take all appropriate measures to prevent
fraud and corruption in connection with the Program, including (but not limited to) adopting and
implementing appropriate fiduciary and administrative practices and institutional arrangements to ensure
that the proceeds of the Loan are used only for the purposes for which the Loan was granted; (c) promptly
inform the Bank of all credible and material allegations or other indications of fraud and corruption in
connection with the Program that come to its attention, together with the investigative and other actions
that the Borrower proposes to take with respect thereto; (d) unless otherwise agreed with the Bank with
respect to a particular case, take timely and appropriate action to investigate such allegations and
indications; report to the Bank on the actions taken in any such investigation, at such intervals as may be



18
     Article 162 of the 2011 Constitution and Royal Decree n° 1-11-25 of March, 17th 2011.
19
     https:// www.worldbank.org/debarr

                                                          11
agreed between the Borrower and the Bank; and, promptly upon the completion of any such investigation,
report to the Bank the findings thereof; (e) if the Borrower or the Bank determines that any person or
entity has engaged in fraud and corruption in connection with the Program, take timely and appropriate
action, satisfactory to the Bank, to remedy or otherwise address the situation and prevent its recurrence;
and (f) ensure that any person or entity debarred or suspended by the Bank is not awarded contract under
or otherwise allowed to participate in the Program during the period of such debarment or suspension.

VII.     Fiduciary Risk Assessment

46.      The assessment shows that the Program fiduciary systems are generally in line with international
standards and normally provide reasonable assurance that the financing under the program may be used
for the intended purposes, subject to the correction of the deficiencies and weaknesses of the
implementing entities, mainly the municipalities, provinces, regions, SOEs, ministries and consortium.
The deficiencies and weaknesses highlighted include: (i) at the country level, a weak complaints handling
mechanism and mechanism for efficient management of fraud and corruption in contract execution and
(ii) at implementation level, a weak capacity of a few category of projects proponents to design,
implement and manage their projects, and to conduct procurement and handle properly financial
management, the lack of tools to measure fiduciary performance etc. These gaps and weaknesses have the
potential to make the fiduciary risk of the Program high thereby impacting the ability of the Program to
achieve its intended results. Therefore, a Program Action Plan is prepared based on the findings and
conclusions of the Fiduciary Risk Assessment that will mitigate to a large extent the fiduciary risks and
weaknesses identified. Considering the existing weaknesses in Program fiduciary systems and the time
and effort required to implement the Program Action Plan and the capacity building initiatives, the
residual fiduciary risk rating for the Program is rated as substantial.

VIII.    Remedial actions to be included in the PAP

47.    The following activities are included in the Program Action Plan (PAP) for improving the
performance of fiduciary systems supporting the Program implementation:

48.      The table below summarizes the PAP’ actions.

Action                                                          Responsibility   Timeline

Adopt programmatic multi-year budget classification for the     MoI/MEF          Programmatic and
CAS-FLCN, in line with the draft organic budget law tabled to                    performance-based
Parliament.                                                                      presentation of CAS-FLCN
                                                                                 for the 2018 Budget
Include in financing agreement between the MoI and project      MoI              Annually
proponents: (i) provisions for availability of technical
competence for design and preparation of technical
specifications, and for contract management and supervision
of works and (ii) timeline for project implementation,
including for bidding process.
Action plan for audit recommendations made by auditors is       MoI              Updated annually
prepared and implemented


IX.      Monitoring of fiduciary performances

A. Key fiduciary performance indicators (KFPI)


                                                       12
 49.     Key fiduciary performance indicators (KFPI) have been defined to monitor program performance.
 These indicators relate to bidding process, contract execution and timeliness of reporting.

 50.        The following indicators have been defined to measure fiduciary performance in the program:

 a. Procurement
     - Bidding processes conducted according to plan20
     - Time period for payment of invoice

 b. Financial management
     - Timeliness of annual financial statements of the program
     - Timeliness of program annual audit report

 B. Details of the KFPI*


                                                         Procurement

Procurement Stage                                                                                   Responsible for data
                            Indicators                       Definitions                            collection

                            Bidding processes conducted      The financing agreement for each       Implementing Agencies
                            according to plan                project        includes           an
                                                             implementation      plan,      with
                                                             timeline for procurement process.
Bidding                                                      Percentage of bidding process
                                                             completed as planned
Payment                     Time period for payment of       How long it takes for invoices         Implementing Agencies
                            invoice                          approved by the project sponsor
                                                             the effectively paid to the
                                                             contractors/consultants/suppliers
                                                   Financial management

                                                                                                    Responsible for data
Stage                      Indicators                       Definitions
                                                                                                    collection
                           Timeliness of annual
                           financial statements of the      Deadline: April 30 of each year
                                                                                                    MI:FLCN
                           program
Reporting                                                                                           DB:MEF
                           Timeliness of program            Deadline: June 30 of each year          Implementing Agencies
                           annual audit report

 (*) The verification of the KFPI will be included in the TOR of the auditors (IGF)




 20
      Refer to project implementation plan in the financing agreement, which include timeline for bidding process

                                                            13
