                    Document of

                  The World Bank




MOROCCO INTEGRATED DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT AND
              RESILIENCE PROGRAM



             Technical Assessment Report




                   March 17, 2016




                         1
Acronyms and Abbreviations

AAL          Average Annual Loss
ACAPS        Insurance and Social Welfare Supervisory Authority (Autorité de Contrôle des
             Assurances et de la Prévoyance Sociale)
ABH          Agence du Bassin Hydraulique (Water Basin Agency)
BCR          Benefit Cost Ratio
CAS          Compte d’Affection Spéciale (Dedicated Budget Instrument)
CfP          Call for Proposals
DAPS         Direction des Assurances et de la Prévoyance Sociale (Department of Insurance and
             Social Welfare)
DLI          Disbursement Linked Indicator
FLCN         Fonds de Lutte contre les Catastrophes Naturelles (Fund for the Fight against Natural
             Disasters)
FSEC         Fonds de Solidarité Contre les Evenements Catastrophiques (Catastrophic Events
             Solidarity Fund)
GDP          Gross Domestic Product
GFDRR        Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery
GOM          Government of Morocco
IGAT         Inspection Générale de l’Administration Territoriale (General Inspectorate of
             Territorial Administration)
IRR          Internal Rate of Return
MAGG         Ministère des Affaires Générales et de la Gouvernance (Ministry of General Affairs and
             Governance)
MnhPRA       Morocco Natural Hazards Probabilistic Risk Assessment
M&E          Monitoring and Evaluation
MEF          Ministry of Finance
MoI          MoI
MoU          Memorandum of Understanding
Mw           Magnitude of an earthquake (technically, moment magnitude)
PAP          Program Action Plan
PDO          Program Development Objective
POM          Program Operations Manual
SCR          Société Centrale de Reassurance (Central Reinsurance Company)




                                                 2
                                                      TABLE OF CONTENTS

A.     Introduction ........................................................................................................................... 4
B.     Program Description ............................................................................................................ 4
C.     Program Strategic Relevance............................................................................................. 11
  Morocco’s emerging approach to managing risks and resilience............................................ 11
  Human and physical exposure to natural disasters .................................................................. 12
  Poverty reduction and shared prosperity relevance ................................................................. 14
D. Technical Soundness ........................................................................................................... 15
  Program ownership, focus and design...................................................................................... 15
  Program Institutional Framework and Sustainability .............................................................. 16
E. Program Expenditure Framework and Financial Sustainability ................................... 19
F.     Program Results Framework and Disbursement Linked Indicators............................. 22
G. Program’s Economic Impact ............................................................................................. 25
H. Technical Risk Rating and Mitigation Measures ............................................................. 30
I.     Input into the Program Action Plan.................................................................................. 31
J.     Input into the Implementation Support Plan ................................................................... 32
Annex 1: Results Framework Matrix ....................................................................................... 34
Annex 2: Disbursement Linked Indicators, Disbursement Arrangements and Verification
Protocols....................................................................................................................................... 34
                                                                                                             ................................... 63




                                                                        3
1.       Morocco has suffered significantly from a variety of shocks, including due to natural
hazards, and in response has started to develop risk management programs and initiatives,
supported by the World Bank. Since 2009 the World Bank has worked with the Government of
Morocco (GoM) to enhance risk management activities, including in the areas of natural disaster risk,
commodity (energy) price volatility risk and risk in the agricultural sector, through a program of
Technical Assistance. Particular focus has been put on investing in disaster risk analytical capacity by
developing the Morocco Natural Hazards Probabilistic Risk Assessment tool (MnhPRA) and on disaster
risk financing and insurance. The World Bank also supported the Government in starting to develop a
more comprehensive approach to managing risks in a more integrated manner which culminated in a
report in 2013 on “Building Morocco’s Resilience: Inputs into an Integrated Risk Management
Strategy? 1 . In 2012, the Government requested the World Bank to support the implementation and
operationalization of a more integrated risk and resilience management approach through a new lending
operation in the form of a “Program for Results? (PforR) loan, with a focus on initial subset of risk,
starting with natural hazards first. This document provides the Technical Assessment of the proposed
operation along all its dimensions, including i) Program Description; ii) Program Strategic Relevance; iii)
Technical Soundness; iv) Program Expenditure Framework and Financial Sustainability; v) Program
Results Framework and Disbursement Linked Indicators; vi) Program Economic Impact; vii) Input into
the Program Action Plan; viii) Technical Risks and Mitigation Measures; and ix) Input into the
Implementation Support Plan.




2.       Morocco has begun developing an integrated DRM reform program which combines elements of
institutional reform with risk reduction investments and risk insurance to ensure that residual risks that
cannot be cost-effectively mitigated are efficiently financed. The Government program consists of the
consolidation and further development of Morocco’s risk management activities and specifically aims to:
(i) improve Morocco’s institutional DRM framework and capacity; (ii) scale up disaster risk reduction
investments in both structural and non-structural measures2 and assure such investments are transparently
selected, strategic, and cost effective; and (iii) protect vulnerable populations and economic assets
through creation of catastrophic risk insurance and a financial safety net for the most vulnerable who are
often not insured.3

Subprogram One: Promoting Institutional Reform and Capacity Building

3.       The objective of the first Subprogram is to further develop Morocco’s existing institutional DRM
structure. As an initial step, the Government has begun improving its approach to managing disaster risks
with a focus on promoting ex-ante mitigation and preparedness, to complement its post-event recovery
activities. To this end, the Government has begun to fundamentally reform its FLCN so that it can
1
    World Bank Group (2013): Building Morocco's Resilience: Inputs for an Integrated Risk Management Strategy.
2
  DRM distinguishes between structural measures – those that directly reduce damage – and non-structural measures
that indirectly will lead to damage reduction. Structural measures are typically engineering projects such as flood
protection walls or seismically retrofitting buildings. Non-structural measures are often broader in their nature, such
as building codes, hazard mapping and warning systems, and also include activities such as risk awareness
campaigns and risk analysis. For further information, see http://www.unisdr.org/we/inform/terminology#letter-s.
3
  Morocco’s need for a more proactive approach to risk management, the reduction of institutional fragmentation,
and development of a risk insurance framework was a key conclusion of the multi-year partnership between the
Government of Morocco and the World Bank (see also Box 1).

                                                               4
develop into a “national resilience fund?. The reform seeks to establish a more systematic process within
the Government of Morocco, addressing DRM in an integrated manner covering DRM activities
implemented by central government line ministries and other national entities (horizontal integration) and
also by provincial and local governments (vertical integration). It thereby aims to improve Morocco’s
strategic orientation and governance arrangements for DRM around the improved operation of the FLCN,
with a focus on ex-ante mitigation and preparedness.


      Box 1. Operating Experience of the Fonds de Lutte Contre les Effets des Catastrophes Naturelles
      (FLCN) to date
    The FLCN was established by the 2009 Budget Law as a budget instrument ( Compte d’Affectation Spéciale, CAS)4 within
    MoI, in response to a series of natural catastrophes in Morocco, specifically the floods in Gharb province in 2008. The total
    budget of the CAS-FLCN for the period 2009–2012 was MAD 1,960 million, composed of an initial MAD 861 million
    donation from Saudi Arabia in the immediate aftermath of the 2008 floods, MAD 300 million from the Hassan II Fund for
    Economic and Social Development, and MAD 800 million from the national budget over this four year period (MAD 200
    million per year). A total of MAD 830 million or 43 percent of the funds went to reconstruction and repair of areas affected by
    the floods (e.g., damaged roads, irrigation infrastructure, emergency program for housing flood victims and housing
    reconstruction, and support for post-disaster business re-startup). In addition, funds were allocated to pre-disaster risk
    reduction measures and preparedness, including flood protection works and construction or improvement of weather stations
    for improved quality and accuracy of weather forecasts. This preventative investment portion represented MAD 800 million or
    40 percent of the FLCN’s 2009–2012 budget resources. The remaining MAD 310 million (17 percent), was spent for
    emergency response preparedness, including equipment for the Civil Protection Agency.


4.       During this initial period (2009–2104), the FLCN mainly played the role of a budgetary
intermediary, redistributing funds from donations and governmental budget allocations to central
government line Ministries. Moreover, there were no clear selection criteria regarding the type of projects
to be financed and most of the selection was done on an ad hoc basis, with no analytical basis for
allocating fund proceeds and no systematic evaluation and ongoing monitoring during implementation
(beyond the MoI’s management of the approval of FLCN allocations). The FLCN was essentially
designed as a temporary response to a specific disaster, but continued to receive a MAD 200 million
annual allocation from the national budget in 2013, 2014, and 2015. The Government has recognized the
need and opportunity to transform the FLCN to improve ex ante risk reduction efforts in high risk areas
rather than using it mainly as a vehicle for reactive disaster response. This requires fundamentally
restructuring FLCN’s goals and mode of operation, as well as increasing it s transparency, including
through specifying clear eligibility and selection criteria for rule-based selection of projects.5

5.       In this context, the Government has decided that the newly re-designed FLCN will provide co-
financing of, and technical capacity building support to, a number of risk reduction projects each year. It
will specifically focus on eligible risk reduction activities that measurably reduce disaster losses and
protect life and property. It will also provide operational tools, training and capacity building to those who
implement programs to make their community safer. As such the emerging “national resilience fund? will
complement ongoing risk management activities undertaken by the line Ministries and local governments
with a more targeted approach, incentivizing additional risk management activities, focusing on a set of
specific projects selected for their quality and impact and supported by a multi-stakeholder approach. It
will in particular establish a more effective “bottom-up? process of preparing risk reduction projects—and
help to put local governments in charge of risk management.

4
  A CAS in Morocco is a dedicated national budget instrument which allows for the allocation of resources
earmarked for specific expenditures under the supervision of an “ordonnateur?.
5
  These goals and some initial reform measures to be undertaken by the Government were identified as part of
continued Technical Assistance provided by the World Bank in 2014 and early 2015; see: CAS-FLCN. Eléments
d’information pour la définition des axes prioritaires et des critères de sélection des projets soumis à financement,
et mise en place opérationnelle.

                                                                  5
6.       The Government seeks to institutionalize the improved governance of the redesigned FLCN by
establishing a dedicated inter-ministerial Steering Committee comprised of key stakeholders across the
Moroccan Government. The Steering Committee has de facto already been set up and met throughout
2015 but the GoM will in addition formalize the FLCN’s new governance structure - as well as its revised
strategic mandate – through a corresponding specification in the Budget Law and associated circulars.
This will specify the membership of the Steering Committee to include—at the General Secretary
levels—MoI (chair), MEF, Ministry of General Affairs and Governance (Ministère des Affaires Générale
et de la Gouvernance, MAGG), the Ministry of Urban Planning and Territorial Development, etc. The
Steering Committee will be supported by a Secretariat housed in the General Secretary’s office of the
MoI, in charge of managing the selection and M&E process as specified in paragraph 49 and detailed in
the Program Operations Manual (POM) throughout implementation. The selection of disaster risk
reduction projects will be conducted by a larger National Selection Commission composed of
representatives from different line Ministries supported by technical experts, as needed.6 The institutional
reform agenda for the FLCN is explicitly designed to incorporate lessons of experience into the evolving
risk management architecture of Morocco, including in terms of feeding into the development of a
national disaster risk and resilience management strategy.

Subprogram Two: Scaling-up Disaster Risk Reduction Activities

7.      The objective of the second Subprogram is to expand the number and range of risk reduction
projects through incentive financing provided by the reformed FLCN for eligible structural and non-
structural risk reduction projects. This financing would be provided as co-financing, solicited through
annual “Call for Proposals? (CfP), to eligible subprojects proposed and implemented by line ministries,
provincial and local governments, public agencies and/or State-owned Enterprises (SOEs). The Steering
Committee can also directly provide co-financing under conditions specified in the POM outside of the
CfP provided that it does not exceed 20 percent of the total amount of FLCN funds allocated to eligible
sub-projects.

8.       The Government launched its first CfP in February 2015 for the allocation of available FLCN
funds at the time, based on initial eligibility and selection criteria, developed with World Bank support.7
The objective was to establish a “proof of concept?, including in terms of demonstrating demand for
FLCN funding, with lessons to be incorporated and institutionalized in subsequent CfPs from 2016
onward. The first CfP generated 91 proposals (with a total investment volume in excess of MAD 3
billion) of which 23 were selected with a total co-financing by the FLCN of MAD 251 million and over
MAD 1 billion in total investment. An encouraging element lies in the balanced portfolio of selected
projects, with 17 from regional and local governments and some non-structural activities. There is also
good geographical representation across the country, corresponding to the higher hazard locations as
identified through MnhPRA. Finally, the CfP encouragement of local governments with more limited
financial resurces to apply for funding by providing them a higher level of co-financing led to nine out of
the 17 proposals from regional and local governments selected coming from such local governments. (see
Annex 1).

9.        Future CfPs will be governed by details specified in the POM, which includes templates for the
application form (Cahier des charges) with updated eligibility and selection criterial. The eligibility
criteria, which build on those used in the first CfP, are provided for illustrative purposes only and will be
further specified in the POM. They would include the following: first, the proposal has to demonstrate the
local exposure to a specific risk of natural disaster and to focus on one or both of the two priorities of the
FLCN (i.e. the protection and security of the people and/or the protection of physical assets to reduce

6
    The National Selection Commission and Secretariat will be established by circulars issued by MoI.
7
    The CfP 2015 was for an existing FLCN allocation from Morocco’s own financial resources.

                                                           6
economic losses). Second, the proposal can be for non-structural activities (e.g., risk assessment, risk
awareness campaigns, and risk planning) or small structural investments, but cannot be for large structural
investments that could have a negative impact on the population and the environment (see paragraphs 63
and 64 in section 4.C on social and environmental aspects of the PAD). Third, the proposal can only be
submitted by a line ministry, provincial and local government and its affiliated bodies, public agency and/
or SOE. 8 Fourth, the proposal needs to demonstrate that the project will reduce exposure to natural
disaster risk. The Steering Committee aims to particularly support sub-projects of local governments with
more limited financial resources.9

10.     The eligible applications will be ranked by the National Selection Commission according to
specific selection criteria. Key indicative selection criteria (see Box 2) will be specified in detail in the
POM and will include technical and financial feasibility, effectiveness, , and implementation capacity
along all key dimensions, including environmental, social and fiduciary issues as well as the follow-up
and treatment of beneficiaries’ perspectives and grievances.


      Box 2. Indicative Set of Selection Criteria for Co-Financing by the FLCN
    For indicative purposes, selection criteria are shown below which build on the experience of the first CfP. The
             POM will specify measurable indicators which will be used as a filter for selecting projects:

    Criterion 1: Disaster risk reduction objective and expected results are clearly defined (Relevance
            criterion). Indicators for this criterion verify that the main components of the project are fully focused
            on risk reduction and that results to be achieved by each activity are clearly defined.
    Criterion 2: A relevant and up-to-date technical study is available (Feasibility criterion). This criteria
            focuses on a detailed review of the technical documentation of the application (is the documentation up
            to date, or older, is it focused on the proposed project or is it a broader study without direct link with the
            project?).
    Criterion 3: Estimated costs are adequate and appropriately justified (Economic criterion). Indicators here
            verify unit costs according to pre-established references points. Standard economic rates such as return
            on investment, can be used for this criterion.
    Criterion 4: Limited environmental and social impact, assessed according to a pre-established framework
            (Environmental and Social criterion). Assessment forms included in the Cahier des Charges and
            attached to the POM will allow to evaluate environmental and social criterion. Social indicators will also
            include aspects on citizen engagement in terms of the identification, design, and implementation of the
            project.
    Criterion 5: A technical and financial partnership covering all needs of the subproject is clearly established
            (Technical and Financial Partnership criterion). These indicators will focus on quality of the
            proposed partnership, the mobilized financial contributions, and an assessment of implementing
            agencies and their partners’ capacity to implement projects in line with the required social,
            environmental and fiduciary requirements.

11.     In addition to improving the selection process, the second Subprogram will also include explicit
emphasis on ensuring that the selected projects will be implemented so as to achieve the intended results.
To that end the MoI together with the MEF will sign a Financing Agreement (FA) ( convention de
financement) with the implementing agencies and their partners which will specify all implementation
requirements, including on social, environmental and fiduciary aspects. The FA will also specify the

8
  It cannot be led by individuals, NGOs or firms in the private sector. This eligibility criterion was included in the
2015 CfP under the Government program. In future CfPs, the Government may decide to open applications also to
non-state actors (NGOs etc.).
9
  Details to be provided in the POM. For the 2015 CfP, smaller municipalities were defined as 35,000 inhabitants or
less. This can be revisited during implementation in order to develop a better pro-poor measure (going beyond the
size of the municipality which is a proxy).

                                                              7
reporting requirements to the Steering Committee which will form part of the M&E system to be
introduced for the reformed FLCN. Implementation progress as well as results achieved by FLCN funded
projects will be published on a dedicated page of the interactive website to ensure transparency and
increase accountability.

12.      Overall, Subprogram Two is expected to significantly increase the number and quality of
Morocco’s disaster risk reduction projects ranging from non -structural projects such as smaller projects
on local planning, hazard and risk mapping, public education etc. and somewhat larger efforts such as
emergency warning systems and small-scale flood protection works, to more major structural programs
such as larger flood protection works and seismic retrofitting of critical facilities (e.g., schools, hospitals
and city halls) etc.. The results from these projects will substantially contribute to the better protection of
citizens against the impacts of natural hazard events – specifically, the potentially significant saving of
lives as well a greatly reduced property and economic loss. Another important result will be increased risk
management capacity of government at all levels.

Subprogram Three: Improving Disaster Risk Financing and Insurance

13.     As part of an integrated DRM strategy, residual catastrophic risks that cannot be cost-effectively
mitigated should be efficiently financed. The objectives of the third Subprogram are therefore to: (i)
design and implement a national insurance program against natural disasters for homeowners and
businesses; and (ii) design and implement a dedicated Solidarity Fund (Fonds de solidarité contre les
événements catastrophiques, FSEC) to partially compensate uninsured households affected by
catastrophic events.

14.     The overall Moroccan insurance market is ranked the third largest within the Arab world, but
almost no insurance currently exists against catastrophic risk. Large industrial and commercial firms can
seek insurance coverage against catastrophe risks from their Moroccan insurers. Yet property catastrophic
risk insurance (for houses and cars) is under-developed since insurers consider such risks uninsurable.
This creates a situation where most people expect the government to intervene or assume they will have
to handle their loss by themselves, which can create social tension in the aftermath of a disaster. When the
government has provided post disaster compensation, it has typically been done on an ad hoc basis.

15.       The Government has contemplated the introduction of a National Catastrophic Risk Insurance
Program (Regime de couverture des consequences d’événements catastrophiques) to improve the
financial resilience of Moroccan citizens at risk. The current draft law ( Projet de loi n. 110-14),
developed including based on input provided by the World Bank, builds on and improves the initial draft
law (Projet de loi n. 34-08) first discussed in 2008. The draft law went through an extensive consultation
process with the private sector, and especially the domestic insurance industry, led by the insurance
supervisory authority (previously DAPS and now ACAPS). The draft law aims to compensate: (i) the
victims who become permanently injured or die because of a catastrophe; and (ii) the destroyed assets,
and especially private dwellings. This coverage would be provided through a dual program: (i) make
mandatory a multi-hazard catastrophe extension of guarantee in property, automobile and third-party
liability insurance policies with fixed tariffs; and (ii) establish a dedicated FSEC which would compensate
uninsured victims, including poor households who cannot afford insurance. The insurance pillar of the
program would follow international good practices.

16.     The draft law designs a dual system to provide (basic) coverage against (natural and man-made)
catastrophic events for both insured and uninsured households. In particular, the draft law entitles poor
households (who are mainly uninsured) to receive (limited) financial compensation from the FSEC for
personal injuries (including permanent disability and death), and loss of principal residence and loss of
use of principal residence caused by catastrophic events. While this compensation scheme is not designed

                                                      8
to cover all personal injuries and property losses, it offers a basic coverage which allows the affected poor
households to obtain compensation for individual permanent disability/death and loss of principal
residence (when this residence is inhabitable). This program is pro-poor as it creates a legal framework
that gives affected poor households the right to receive financial compensation in case of a catastrophe.
Most developing countries, including Turkey where catastrophic risk insurance is well developed through
the Turkish Catastrophe Risk Insurance Pool, tend to support affected poor households through ad-hoc
financial program, where the affected households do not know in advance if they will be compensated.
This uncertainly contributes to their low resilience to disasters.


    Box 3. National Catastrophic Risk Insurance Program
 The catastrophe risk insurance draft law aims to improve the financial resilience of Morocco through a
 dual scheme founded on market-based insurance and solidarity principles. The draft law aims to cover
 (i) victims with bodily injury resulting to permanent disability or death and (ii) assets affected by
 natural and man-made disasters. The draft law modifies the current Insurance Law (n.17-99) and
 makes the multi-hazard (natural and man-made) catastrophe extension of guarantee mandatory in all
 property insurance policies, motor third party liability insurance policies, and third-party liability
 insurance policies. This means that any insured property is automatically covered against natural and
 man-made catastrophes. This also means that through the mandatory extension of the catastrophic risk
 insurance guarantee under the motor third party liability insurance that covers the vehicle owner and
 his/her family, the draft law will provide compensation for permanent disability/death to more than 6
 million people or at least 18 percent of the population of Morocco. This compulsory guarantee will be
 financed through an additional insurance premium on the above-mentioned insurance policies, to be
 fixed by decree. The draft law also establishes the FSEC as a legal entity. The FSEC aims to
 compensate non-insured households against loss of principal residence that becomes inhabitable, loss
 of use of the principal residence, and personal injuries (permanent disability and death) in case of a
 disaster. The FSEC would be mainly funded through (i) initial contribution as set in the government
 budget law and (ii) additional taxes as set by decree. These taxes represent the contributions of the
 policyholders and the insurers.

17.      The draft law brings in the private insurance sector. The proposed catastrophic risk insurance
program is co-financed with the private sector through a public-private partnership to effectively share
catastrophe risks. It relies on the financial capacity of the domestic insurance industry backed by the
international reinsurance markets to finance catastrophe losses of insured assets and individuals, financed
through additional (mandatory) insurance premiums. In order to make this additional premium affordable
for the policyholders and to protect the private insurance industry against major catastrophe losses, the
draft law sets a system of maximum aggregate insurance payouts beyond which insurance payouts would
be prorated. The draft law also includes a public guarantee against default risk of international reinsurers.
It proposes an innovative combination of market-based catastrophic risk insurance (through mandatory
guarantee within property insurance, automobile liability insurance, and third party liability insurance
policies) and dedicated solidarity-based compensation system through the FSEC. The draft law aims to
increase the number of residential, commercial, and industrial properties insured against catastrophes, but
this increase would still be limited in the first years as the property insurance penetration is still relatively
low in Morocco. It is estimated that less than 5 percent of residential dwellings have property insurance.
In addition, through the mandatory extension of guarantee under motor third party liability insurance, all
vehicle owners and their family members would be automatically covered against personal injury
(resulting into permanent disability or death), which means that about 6 million people in Morocco would
be compensated for disability and death caused by disasters.




                                                       9
18.     The program development objective (PDO) is to improve the institutional framework to finance
disaster risk reduction activities and strengthen financial resilience to natural disasters for targeted
populations in the Program Area.



19.     The “PforR? Program (the “Program?) is defined by: (i) the Program duration; (ii) the Program
area; and (iii) the Program activities supported.

20.   Program duration: The Program will be implemented over five years from April 2016 to
December 2021.

21.     Program area: The Program will include the following geographic areas: the regions of Tanger-
Tétouan-Al Hoceima, l’Oriental, Fès-Meknès, Rabat-Salé-Kénitra, Béni-Mellal-Khénifra, Casablanca-
Settat, Marrakech-Safi, Draâ-Tafilalet, Souss-Massa, and the provinces of Guelmim, Tan-Tan, and Sidi-
Ifni.

22.   Program activities: The Government requested support for all three Subprograms of the
Government program. The specific Program activities will be:

            Subprogram One: Promoting Institutional Reform and Capacity Building.
             Strengthening the existing institutional DRM structure through the following:

             o    Establishment of an improved governance structure for the FLCN, including the
                  establishment of the Steering Committee, the National Selection Commission and the
                  Secretariat;

             o    Establishment of a transparent and results focused process for the allocation of FLCN
                  resources for the financing of Eligible Subprojects, as well as a M&E system for the
                  Eligible Subprojects funded by FLCN;

             o    Capacity building for improved DRM for line Ministries, local governments, public
                  agencies, and state owned enterprises in the Program Area; and

             o    Development of a national integrated disaster risk and resilience management strategy.

            Subprogram Two: Scaling up Disaster Risk Reduction Activities. Carrying out of
             Eligible Subprojects to be financed by FLCN and relevant Ministries, local governments
             and public agencies or state-owned enterprises.

            Subprogram Three: Improving Disaster Risk Financing and Insurance. Designing and
             implementing a national insurance program against catastrophic events for homeowners and
             businesses, and establishing the FSEC, a dedicated solidarity fund to compensate uninsured
             households affected by catastrophic events.

23.     Exclusions. The Program would exclude reconstruction projects after a disaster event and those
that do not meet World Bank policies for eligibility for PforR financing. Specifically, the Program will
not include any activities assessed to have significant adverse impacts on the environment and/or affected
people, as defined in the Bank Policy and Directive on PforR Financing, nor procurement of works,

                                                   10
goods, and services under high-value contracts above the Operations Procurement Review Committee
thresholds.

24.     The relationship between the Government program and the Program for the operation is shown in
Table 1 below with the grey shaded areas highlighting the Program.

                             Table 1. Government Program and the Program (in grey)
                   Subprogram One: Promoting Institutional Development and Capacity Building
Establishment of an improved governance structure for the FLCN, including the
establishment of a Steering Committee, National Selection Commission and
Secretariat;
Establishment of a transparent and results focused process for the allocation of FLCN
resources for the financing of Eligible Subprojects, as well as of a M&E system for the
Eligible Subprojects funded by FLCN;                                                                              Non-
                                                                                                 Program
Capacity building for an improved DRM for line Ministries, local governments, public                              Program
                                                                                                 Area
agencies, and state owned enterprises;                                                                            Area
Development of a national integrated disaster risk and resilience management strategy.

                            Subprogram Two: Scaling up Disaster Risk Reduction Activities
                                                                   Post disaster event reconstruction activities financed
                                                                   by the FLCN;
Eligible Subprojects to be financed by FLCN and relevant
Ministries, local governments and public agencies or               Activities that have a significant adverse impact on the
state-owned enterprises.                                           environment and/or affected people and high value
                                                                   contracts, as defined in the Bank Policy and Directives
                                                                   on PforR Financing.

                        Subprogram Three: Improving Disaster Risk Financing and Insurance


Designing and implementing a national insurance program against catastrophic events
for homeowners and businesses, and establishing the FSEC, a dedicated solidarity fund            Program
to compensate uninsured households affected by catastrophic events.                              Area             Non-
                                                                                                                  Program
                                                                                                                  Area




25.      Starting in 2008, the Government of Morocco has begun to explore options for managing a
variety of risks the country is facing in a more strategic and integrated manner . Supported by the
World Bank through a series of Technical Assistance programs, the Government has looked at multiple
risks, including i) natural disasters, ii) commodity (energy) price volatility risk, and iii) risk in the
agricultural sector. The outcome of this Technical Assistance is summarized in the 2013 World Bank
Publication “Building Morocco’s Resilience: Inputs for an Integrated Risk Management Strategy? 10
which highlighted disaster risk as a particular concern. The Government decided to focus on disaster risk
management as a priority and as the focus of the new lending operation, so as to start with a sub-set of


10
     World Bank Group (2013). Building Morocco's Resilience: Inputs for an Integrated Risk Management Strategy.

                                                              11
risks and enact concrete institutional reform changes and risk and vulnerability reduction results on the
ground. This more focused engagement aims at providing the basis for a changed operational approach in
Morocco to managing risks in a more integrated manner - but starting with a specific sub-set of risks first
- in line with the recommendations of the 2014 World Development Report on “Risk and Opportunity?.
The choice of focusing on natural disasters has also been driven by an increasing recognition of the social
tensions that have and may continue to surface in affected and non-affected areas, in addition to the fact
that natural disasters had been one risk area that has been least understood or proactively managed in
recent years, despite a series of disasters that have hit the country. The recent 2014 floods in south
Morocco that were managed not pro-actively enough and delays in the rescue and relief actions were
partly due to the high fragmentation of the governance structures and the weak inter-agency coordination.


26.     Morocco remains vulnerable to a diverse set of natural hazards which are being
exacerbated by climate change and rapid urbanization. The most frequent hazards in Morocco are
flood and drought – flooding in late 2014 in the south of the country caused over $100 million in damage,
and floods in Tangier (2008) and Al Gharb (2009) caused significant economic loss and asset
destruction11. Frequent disasters such as flood and drought are a burden to economic development and can
drive victims into poverty. Less frequent but more severe earthquakes have the potential to significantly
impact Morocco’s budget and cause widespread suffering. The potential for catastrophic earthquakes in
Morocco is significant – the 1960 Agadir earthquake, although extremely small by earthquake standards
(magnitude Mw 5.8) caused deaths of over 12,000 Moroccans and left many others homeless, as well as
causing major loss of property and livelihoods. The Al-Hoceima earthquake of 2004 killed over 600
people and injured over 1,000, left many homeless and completely destroyed many assets. Morocco lies
on the Africa-Eurasia plate boundary, so that the North and in general the region of the Atlas mountains
have high seismic risk – several of Morocco’s major cities, including Fes, Meknes and Tangier, are highly
vulnerable to earthquake.

27.      The impact of natural hazards is exacerbated by climate change and rapid urbanization.
Morocco, as other countries in the region, will be affected by climate change at both the 2°C and 4°C
warming levels, particularly due to increased projected heat extremes and reduction of water availability.
In a plus 2°C world, heat extremes will occur in about 30 percent of summer months almost everywhere
in the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) region and a 35 cm sea-level rise is projected, for example,
for Tangier on Morocco’s Atlantic coast.12 Out of a total population of 32 million, currently 18 million
live in urban areas, and it is anticipated that the urban population will increase by over 4 million by 2030.
Urbanization, a compounding factor of vulnerability, would increase the exposure of people and
economic assets to disaster events, especially in coastal areas where the largest cities and economic assets
are located. For example, Casablanca, Morocco’s largest city in the country and currently home to 3.3
million people, is expected to grow by more than 50% to reach over 5 million residents by 2030 with
some of the urban growth expected to occur in more risk-prone areas. The city is already highly
vulnerable to flooding, coastal erosion, and marine inundation and its vulnerability will only become
more pronounced in the years leading up to 2030.

28.    Morocco has quantified its exposure to its most important natural hazards. As part of the
Technical Assistance program, a probabilistic risk assessment, i.e., Morocco Natural Hazards
Probabilistic Risk Assessment (MnhPRA), was developed and employed to analyze earthquake, flood,
tsunami, drought and landslide risk. For a total exposure of MAD 2.7 trillion (or equivalently about MAD
90,000 per capita), average annual loss (AAL) due to natural hazards is estimated to be MAD 7.8 billion

11
   TARGA-AIDE, & Zurich Insurance. (2014). Risk Nexus Morocco floods of 2014 : what we can learn from Guelmim and Sidi
Ifni. Zurich.
12
   World Bank Group (2014): Turn Down the Heat: Confronting the New Climate Normal.

                                                          12
as shown in Table 2. Based on probabilistic analyses, over the next 30 years there is a 95 percent chance
of having an earthquake or flood causing losses amounting to MAD 5 billion or greater, a 90 percent
chance of having an event causing losses of MAD 10 billion or greater and a 65 percent chance of having
an event causing losses of about MAD 25 billion or greater.

     Table 2: Natural Hazards estimated losses for varying return periods (MAD millions)13
                                            Loss                       Return Period (years)
     Hazard        Exposure     AAL         Cost             Very Probable  Probable          Possible
                                                          20        50      100         500           1000
Earthquake         2,700,000     850       0.0003     4,523       9,570    15,317      35,800        47,000
      Flood        2,700,000    4,177      0.0016     22,275     26,161    27,556      29,717        34,100
     Tsunami       2,700,000     125      0.00005       2          3        404        28,013        58,852
     Drought (3 crops only)     2,696        na       15,678     16,638    17,367      18,035          na
           Sum                 7,848                              not directly additive
Sources: World Bank Group. 2013. Building Morocco's Resilience: Inputs for an Integrated Risk Management
Strategy.

29.     Table 2 also shows the estimated impacts for disaster scenario, which range from “Very
Probable? to “Probable?, “Possible? and “Rare but Possible? events. These levels represent scenarios the
government should prepare for or at least consider:
 “Very Probable? corresponds to events occurring every few decades.
 A “Probable? corresponds to a “1 in 100 years? event, which should not be misunderstood – in
    actuality, it can occur at any time, and has a probability of 0.01 (1/100) of occurring in any year.
    Despite being seemingly rare, such events seem to occur all too frequently. Buildings, bridges and
    other infrastructure are quite likely to experience Probable events during their design life and are in
    fact typically designed for these (and somewhat larger) events, although older infrastructure often has
    not been so designed and may require retrofitting. Fiscal, economic and emergency planning similarly
    has to be able to respond to Probable events.
 “Possible? corresponds to a “1 in 1000 years? probability of occurrence – infrastructure may often
    survive such events although with major damage, and fiscal, economic and emergency planning
    should at least consider such events.
 Lastly, “Rare but Possible? corresponds to a “1 in 10,000 years? (not shown in Table 2 above)
    probability of occurrence – infrastructure will be heavily damaged by such events, and fiscal,
    economic and emergency planning often overwhelmed. While difficult to fully prepare for such
    events, they should at least be considered.

30.     In the last few years, the Pakistan (2005), Wenchuan (2008) and Haiti (2010) earthquakes, the
Indian Ocean (2004) and Japan (2011) tsunamis, tropical cyclones Nargis in Myanmar (2008), Sandy in
New York (2012), and the Thai floods (2011) were all somewhere in the range of Probable to Possible. A
large earthquake in, for example, Fes has the potential for tens of thousands of fatalities and significant
economic loss.

31.    These hazards, however, vary in their impact on sectors and parts of the country. Sectoral
breakdown of losses are not uniformly distributed across Morocco:



13
  Total Exposure Value Buildings and Infrastructure (MAD millions); AAL = Average Annual Loss (MAD
millions); Loss Cost = AAL / Total Exposure.

                                                     13
      Earthquake hazard is concentrated primarily in the north of Morocco and, to a lesser extent, on a line
       running through Fez and Marrakech to Agadir. Five provinces (Nador, Al-Hoceima, Berkane, Taza,
       Tetouan) representing 8 percent of the total national building exposure have an earthquake Average
       Annual Loss (AAL)14 of 34 percent of the national building earthquake AAL. This means that on
       average, for buildings only, 8 percent of the building exposure contributes 34 percent of the
       earthquake potential loss. Clearly, if the risk of 8 percent of Morocco’s buildings can be reduced,
       Morocco’s overall earthquake risk can be significantly decreased.
      Floods are a chronic problem for Morocco and on average cause significantly more damage than
       earthquakes, with a total AAL of MAD 4.2 billion. While flood risk affects most parts of Morocco,
       MnhPRA identified that four provinces (Kenitra, Tetouan, Casablanca and Sidi Kacem) contribute 60
       percent of the total building flood risk.
      Droughts MnhPRA estimated AAL for cereal production due to drought to be approximately MAD
       2.7 Billion. Ninety percent of Moroccan agriculture is traditional and dependent on rain, and is highly
       vulnerable to not only droughts and floods but also pests and diseases. The three regions most
       exposed are Sousse-Massa-Draa, Meknes, and Marrakech-Tensift. Overall, it is estimated that the
       total exposure of the cereral portion of the agriculture sector to various risks was MAD 75 billion in
       2008, increasing to MAD 185 billion in 2020.



32.     Reducing the impact of natural hazards is of central importance for sustained
improvements in poverty reduction and shared prosperity. The Program’s focus on support for
preventative risk reduction actions will significantly benefit poor and vulnerable populations, not only
through direct loss reduction but through higher investments by firms and households given a lower
potential for disasters. Evidence suggests, that in the presence of unmanaged risk, poor and low-income
households tend to under-invest in productive assets (e.g., farmers plant low-return, low-risk crops).
Proactive disaster risk management (i.e., weather stations, early warning systems, etc.) can therefore
incentivize more productive investments. Furthermore, analyses suggest the vulnerability (defined as the
potential damage to housing stock due to flood events) of the assets of the poor (where poor is defined as
the bottom 20%) is 69% higher than the vulnerability of the assets of the non-poor. 15 Reducing the
vulnerability of the poor’s assets has therefore a much greater relative benefit and can also speed up
recovery since productive assets remain intact. Morocco’s approach to disaster risk insurance, especially
by establishing a Solidarity Fund FSEC for uninsured people is also important. Since poor and low-
income households have higher vulnerability and less ability to smooth economic shocks due to less
access to financing (including insurance), government support is necessary after a disaster event.
Evidence from flood and drought in a variety of contexts suggest that poor households reduce
consumption after a disaster, for example by reducing food in-take and taking children out of school.
These hardship measures have long-term implications for human capital, especially for children, and
worsen intergenerational poverty. Having the FSEC in place will allow poor households to receive
support sooner, easing hardship significantly. Evidence from ex-post surveys of floods and droughts also
suggest disbursing payments soon after a disaster substantially reduces overall disaster losses.




14
  Average Annual Loss (AAL), is the sum of losses anticipated over some long-term future period (e.g., the next
100 years) divided by the length of that period. More specifically, it is the frequency-weighted mean of all future
losses.
15
     World Bank (2015) (Draft): Socio-economic resilience to floods in 90 countries.

                                                                14
33.     The Program is based on strong government ownership, technically sound and fully aligned
with international best practices. The Program directly responds to the Government of Morocco’s
request to support the implementation of an improved approach to managing risks and resilience. The
Program conforms to core principles for effective disaster risk management, including: moving from a
culture of post disaster response and fragmented and sector based in inventions to a more proactive and
ex-ante focus on risk prevention; targeting local action by having local communities be increasingly
responsible for disaster risk management, including for prevention; and providing improved risk
governance structures and incentives to catalyze new and scaled-up risk reduction activities. In Morocco’s
case, specific attention has been paid to target increased disaster risk management at the local level as
well as to ensure a good balance between structural and non-structural measures, reflecting the fact that
non-structural measures are oftentimes particularly impactful and cost effective. The Program also
contains a clear emphasis on better using risk analytics by building on and mainstreaming the use of
Morocco’s disaster risk modeling capability. Risk institutional reform and reduction activities are also
complemented by a specific Sub-program dedicated to disaster risk insurance to ensure that residual risks
that cannot be cost-effectively mitigated be efficiently financed, including through the establishment of
the FSEC.

34.      For Sub-programs One and Two, the Program adopts international practices to the specific
country circumstances in Morocco, including in terms of the redesign of the FLCN. The proposed
redesign of the FLCN follows international practices in countries, including from Mexico, Indonesia,
France and the United States, which have put in place mechanisms to promote ex-ante risk reduction
investments. These good practices include the following parameters: clarify that the FLCN does not aim
at financing large-scale infrastructure projects nor should its resources be used to pay a large portion of
the losses after a disaster; the FLCN embraces co-financing instead of full financial support as its modus
operandi in order to increase overall ownership of project implementing agencies and scale up risk
reduction investments; the FLCN has a transparent organizational design combining different ministries
and levels of governments; selection of projects funded by the FLCN is based on transparent selection
criteria; no member can evaluate a project if there is a conflict of interest; both non-structural and
structural risk reduction activities are supported; support is provided for both national public entities and
local communities; there is a dedicated effort to help small/ more vulnerable communities; there is an
audit process in place, for technical and fiduciary aspects; the identity of those who receive funding, the
nature of their project and level of funding is also made public. More broadly, linking the work on
disaster risk management to a broader risk and resilience management approach, the Program also is in
line with emerging best practices on “resilience? as, for example, articulated in the 2014 World
Development Report on “Risk and Opportunity?.

35.     The establishment of the catastrophic risk insurance program under Sub-Program Three,
which relies on a public private partnership and the establishment of the FSEC is innovative. The
Program builds on previous catastrophic risk insurance programs supported by the World Bank, such as
the Turkish Catastrophe Insurance Pool, the Mongolia Index Based Livestock Insurance Project, the
Romanian Catastrophe Risk Insurance Pool, and the Southeast Europe and Caucasus Regional
Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility. These programs have demonstrated that public-private partnerships
can enable the development of sustainable, competitive domestic catastrophic risk insurance markets and
allow for cost-effective catastrophe risk transfer from homeowners and enterprises to the private
insurance and reinsurance markets. The development of such domestic markets is usually hampered by (i)
limited good-quality data, catastrophe risk models and specialized technical expertise for the development

                                                     15
of actuarially sound catastrophic risk insurance products; (ii) lack of production systems (pricing,
underwriting, claims settlement, risk management and reinsurance operations) to support catastrophic risk
insurance products, which require major investments for insurers which are often not justified given the
current low volume of catastrophe insurance business; (iii) lack of risk-based regulatory requirements,
leading insurers to engage in unsustainable price competition that is not compatible with the inherent risk
of this business; (iv) lack of consumer awareness of their own disaster risk exposures and/or insurance
products that can help them mitigate those risks; Governments often play the role of reinsurers of last
resort by providing ad hoc financial assistance to homeowners and businesses in the aftermath of natural
disasters thus creating wide-spread expectations of government assistance and weakening consumers’
interest in catastrophe insurance. All these issues are addressed in the design of the catastrophic risk
insurance program.

35. The Program can also build on strong risk analytics which have been applied during the
preparation process. A guiding principle of modern management is “what gets measured gets managed.?
An important element of the Government of Morocco’s disaster risk management program has been the
development of MnhPRA, a Geographic Information System (GIS) based software package that builds an
inventory of the country’s assets at risk and the hazards that threaten these assets, and allows analysis to
estimate the impacts of these hazards on the assets. MnhPRA thus permits measurement of disaster risk, a
key step towards managing that risk. For example, applying MnhPRA to the identified FLCN co-financed
projects during the 2015 CfP shows that approximately 73% of the project funding is allocated to flood
risk reduction activities, and 27% to geohazards (i.e., earthquake and landslide) risk reduction activities.
This distribution seems reasonable given that floods are frequent occurrences in Morocco, and have
affected more than 10 times as much of the population as geohazards, see. The geographical distribution
of projects, especially flood related projects, also seems reasonable which overlays the local government
projects on the major river systems and earthquake hazard of Morocco. While geohazards are only
addressed by two projects, one of these projects is in Agadir, where over 12,000 were killed in an
earthquake in 1960, and the other in Al Hoceima, with hundreds of deaths in the 2004 earthquake.
MnhPRA will be further developed so that it can be used to more proactive identify risk reduction options
in “disaster risk hotspots? and also in the evaluation of the FLCN co-financed projects. In terms of
disaster risk insurance, MnhPRA is being used to inform the government on the financial and fiscal
implications of the proposed catastrophe risk insurance law. In particular, it can help MEF and ACAPS
set the additional catastrophe insurance premium to finance the compulsory extension of guarantee, and
define the financial strategy of the FSEC. Preliminary actuarial analysis of the World Bank shows that the
average annual disaster loss (earthquakes and floods) is estimated at MAD 700 million for the
compulsory cat risk insurance program and at MAD 800 million for the FSEC.16

Program Institutional Framework and Sustainability

           Overall Program Management

36.      The Program builds on strong Government ownership and at its core is being managed by
two established and high capacity institutions: the MoI and the MEF . For the improved governance
of the FLCN, a Steering Committee will formally be established and will be presided over by the General
Secretary of MoI and include the MEF, MAGG, and the Ministry of Urban and Territorial Planning etc.,
with representatives at the General Secretary level, see the following table (to be extended to other
Ministries over time). The Steering Committee will set the strategic direction for Morocco’s risk
management policies as they relate to the use of the FLCN. Specifically, key functions will include: i)
setting the strategic direction for the FLCN; ii) defining and reviewing the selection eligibility criteria for
the sub-projects to be co-financed by FLCN; iii) providing a sounding board for Line Ministries’ and

16
     Those estimates are sensitive to multiple assumptions. They are being refined with MEF and ACAPS.

                                                         16
local government priorities for the eligible sub-projects; iv) monitoring and evaluating the results of
eligible sub-projects in the Program Area; and v) overseeing and providing guidance to both the National
Selection Commission and the Secretariat.

37.     A National Selection Commission will also be formally established to manage the transparent
selection of FLCN co-financed projects. The Commission will operate under the guidance of the Steering
Committee and include, among others, representatives from the relevant ministries and public agencies,
including MoI, MEF, MAGG, the Ministry of Urbanism and Territorial Planning, the Ministry of Energy,
Mining, Water and Environment, the Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry of Transport and Equipment,
as well as any other Ministry, Department, Public Agencies related to the FLCN mandate. Experts from
leading research institutions can also be appointed to this commission if they can provide specific
expertise helping with the evaluation of the applications (e.g. structural engineers, flood specialists,
economists, etc.). Technical experts can also support the National Selection Commission. The
Commission will assure that there is no conflict of interest for the members of this Commission to
evaluate a specific application

38.      A Secretariat will be created to support the work of the Steering Committee and the National
Selection Commission and will be established at the office of the General Secretary of the MoI. The
Secretariat will be responsible for day to day coordination and management of the Program in line with
the Program Operations Manual and also serve as the Bank’s interface for the Program. The Secretariat
will also be in charge of preparing the Annual Program Reports. The Secretariat will be supported by an
international expert mobilized and financed by the Swiss Development Cooperation (SDC) and additional
support may be provided, as needed, by qualified consultants to ensure that the Program will be
implemented in line with the requirements of the POM. The Secretariat, together with the Steering
Committee and National Selection Commission, will also provide oversight on the FLCN-funded
projects, in particular by assessing at the selection stage, the capacity of implementing agencies and their
partners to carry out the project so that they can achieve intended results, and by supporting, as needed,
implementing agencies and their partners during the implementation through targeted capacity building.

               Table 3: Program’s Main Stakeholders and Role in Program Implementation
                    Institution                              Role Played in Program Implementation
                                                     Responsible for the provision of strategic guidance for the
                                                     Program, Head of Steering Committee, Ordonnateur of the
                             General Secretariat
                                                                FLCN, Responsible for the Secretariat
            MoI                                    Secretariat: Day to day management of the Program; support to
                                                      Steering Committee and National Selection Commission
                                                     Responsible for (i) technical audit of participating Program
                                   IGAT
                                                       Entities, and (ii) independent verification of DLIs 1-6
                                    DAA               Support to Secretariat on fiduciary management aspects
            MEF             General Secretariat                    Member of Steering Committee
                            Budget Department                      In charge of Program budgeting
                           General Inspectorate
                                                     Responsible for audits of the Program Financial Statements
                                 of Finance
                           Internal Audi Service
                           of the Department of
                                                   Responsible for the independent verification of DLIs 7 and 8
                           Treasury and External
                                  Finances
                                 Insurance          Technical leader of the National Catastrophic Risk Insurance
                                Supervisor17                                  Program


17
     MEF/ACAPS (since effectiveness of the Law 64-12 concerning the creation of ACAPS).

                                                        17
        MAGG                    General Secretariat                     Member of Steering Committee
 Ministry of Urban and         Directorate of Urban
                                                                        Member of Steering Committee
  Territorial Planning               Planning
                                                              In charge of external audit of public entities and local
     Courts of Accounts (incl. at the regional level)
                                                                                  governments
                                                            In charge of handling the Program’s public procurement
           Procurement Control Commission
                                                                                    complaints
                                                         In charge of investigating the Program’s fraud and corruption
     Central Body for the Prevention of Corruption
                                                                                    complaints
                                                          In charge of implementing FLCN co-financed projects, incl.
      Line Ministries, Local Governments, Public
                                                               mobilizing co-financing, contract management and
        Agencies, and State-owned Enterprises
                                                        procurement, and monitoring and reporting on project progress.
                                                        In charge of technical studies related to water/ flood protection
                 Water Basin Agencies
                                                                                     projects

39.     The Borrower will have the Program Financial Statements audited. The stakeholders involved in
the Program will each prepared the required Financial Statements for the audit.

40.      The implementation of Subprogram Three (Improving Disaster Risk Financing and Insurance)
falls within this overall framework and the MEF is a core member of the Steering Committee. In addition,
the MEF is the technical leader in the development of the draft catastrophic risk insurance law and, based
on the proposal made by ACAPS, it will draft the implementation legal documents. The draft law
establishes a Committee of catastrophic events (Commission de suivi des évènements catastrophiques). Its
mandate is to collect information following the occurrence of a disaster, to propose whether this disaster
should be declared as a catastrophic event, to propose the declaration of state of calamity and to assist the
FSEC in the evaluation of the damage of non-insured victims. The draft law also establishes the FSEC as
a legal entity. The FSEC will be managed by a Board chaired by the Prime Minister (or delegated
authority) and with representatives of public agencies (including ACAPS) and insurance/ reinsurance
industry. The draft catastrophic risk insurance law, including the establishment of the FSEC, builds on
solid institutions: ACAPS, MEF and the Central Reinsurance Company (Société Centrale de
Reassurance). The Central Reinsurance Company has been the national reinsurer since 1960, benefits
from a state guarantee, has good financial strength (rated BB+ by Moody’s), and serves Morocco’s
rapidly growing private insurance market. The Government has been working towards a catastrophic risk
insurance program for the past decade with technical assistance from the World Bank. 18 The ACAPS has
the technical capacity to assist in the implementation of the catastrophic risk insurance law, especially the
insurance component. In addition, the ACAPS would continue to provide advisory services (including
actuarial support) to contribute to the preparation of the implementation legal documents of the draft law.
Grants have already been mobilized to assist ACAPS. Previous drafts of the law faced technical
challenges and legislative hurdles. The revised draft law, which has been revised by the ACAPS and
discussed with the private insurance sector in collaboration with the Word Bank, is scheduled to be
submitted to the Conseil du Gouvernement and then to the Parliament in 2017. Its implementation will
constitute a major shift toward ex ante financial management of disasters, although strong political
commitment and technical and operational support will still be required.

            Implementation Level


18
   The World Bank, with funding from FIRST Initiatives, provided the DAPS with technical assistance to assess the
financial sustainability of the proposed program, including the actuarial methodology to set the additional cat risk
insurance premium. Some of its recommendations (such as defined list of insurable perils and specific maximum
coverage for industrial assets, increased role of the private domestic insurance sector) has been adopted in the
revised draft law.

                                                            18
41.      Implementation of activities that are co-funded by the FLCN will be the responsibility of the
concerned line Ministries, provincial and local governments, public agencies and/ or State-owned
Enterprises. Implementation responsibility will cover all project management dimensions, mobilizing co-
financing, procurement, contract management, management of environmental and social aspects, and
monitoring and reporting on project progress. The Ordonnateur of the FLCN, the General Secretary of
the MoI, together with the MEF, will sign a Financing Agreement (FA) (convention de financement) with
each implementing agency and their partners to ensure that projects will be implemented so as to achieve
their intended objectives and meet the requirements specified in the Program Operations Manual. The
Secretariat, supported as needed by qualified consultants, will also ensure compliance with the provisions
of the FA.

42.      At the national level, the likely implementing agencies and their partners for structural and non-
structural investments will include the Ministry of Urban and Territorial Planning, the Ministry of
Equipment, Transport and Logistics, the Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry of Energy, Water, and
Environment, and to some extent the Ministries of Health and Education (i.e., for building retrofits). It
could also include public agencies such as the National Institute of Geophysics and National Centre for
Scientific and Technical Research (CRNST) or the High Commission for Water and Forest, and the
National Meteorological Office. All these agencies are well qualified and experienced in their respective
domains technically. The review of the proposals under the first CfP reflected the likelihood that these
ministries and agencies will bring forward the bulk of the national level projects.

43.      At the sub-national level, the likely implementation agencies will be Provincial Authorities or
Municipalities with varying degrees of technical capacities. During preparation a sample of local
governments was assessed, in particular in terms of their ability to implement the proposed sub-projects
based on the projects received under the first CfP. A large number of sub-projects was in the area of small
scale flood protection works. These have been prepared by the sampled local governments jointly with the
Moroccan Water Basin Agencies (ABH, Agence du Basin Hydraulique), which are responsible for flood
protection works in various river basins of Morocco. Morocco’s ABHs are well recognized for their
technical expertise in the area of flood control, with extensive experience in the design and construction
of flood control structures. Overall, there are nine ABHs in Morocco with detailed knowledge and
experience in their respective river basins.19

44.     Nevertheless, given the varying level of technical capacity of some of the potential implementing
agencies and their agencies, especially at the sub-national level, the Program will be designed to screen at
project selection for more complex projects and/ or weaker implementation capacities and establish a
dedicated capacity building program where needed, including through the mobilization of additional
consultants to support the implementation of sub-programs.

45.     Program is also designed to include technical audits. As part of its role as the Independent
Verification Agent, the General Inspectorate of Territorial Administration (IGAT, i.e. Inspection Générale
de l’Administration Territoriale) will conduct technical audits to ensure that projects are implemented
according to required standards. IGAT has significant experience of conducting technical audits, in
particular at the sub-national level, based on qualified staff of engineers and other professionals who
routinely provide independent quality assurance review processes for the MoI.




19
 ABH Loukkos (Tétouan), ABH Tensift (Marrakech), ABH Guir-Ghris Ziz (Errachidia), ABH Oum Er Rbia (Beni Mellal),
ABH Sakia El Hamra-Oued Eddahab (Laayoune), ABH Sébou (Fès), ABH Bouregreg (Ben Slimane), ABH Moulouya (Oujda),
ABH Souss Massa (Agadir).

                                                      19
46.      The latest comprehensive assessment of Public Financial Management (PFM) systems in
Morocco was published in 2009 (Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA)
assessment) and concluded that “the credibility of the budget is rated good overall?. Payment arrears
have ceased to be substantial. In terms of comprehensiveness and transparency, detailed fiscal and budget
information is accessible to the public, including from the websites of the MEF and Parliament. Most
funds transfers to regional and local governments are governed and effected through transparent
arrangements and following defined rules. However, certain gaps need to be closed in the provision of
information about programs financed by international donors and the consolidation of administrative
budget data, and there are lags in the financial reporting on public enterprises. The process of preparing
the annual budget is orderly and well established and gives the technical ministries adequate time to
participate in the drafting of the budget estimates within the timeframe required for Government’s
submission of the budget to Parliament. Predictability of budget execution is satisfactory and
arrangements for monitoring flow of funds are ensured. Government ministries, departments and agencies
are fully capable of planning their expenditures, even though major in-year adjustments to budget
allocations are frequently made due to changes in revenue available for supplementary appropriations
(fonds de concours). Control and audit were found to be good overall for procurement and payroll,
especially given plans to systematically increase scheduling of joint audit work by ministerial audit
departments and the MEF’s Inspector General’s team in order to better detect any flaws in control
systems. The Court of Accounts (Cour des comptes) is fully engaged in its role as external auditor of the
management and use of public funds. The frequency and scope of its audits, which are steadily increasing,
are rated average, as is follow-up of their recommendations. The review of the budget law (loi de
finances) by the two houses of Parliament is clearly defined in the Constitution and the Government
follows these procedures. Many detailed reports are annexed to the budget law and supplemented as
required, by written responses from the technical ministries to questions posed by members of Parliament
and by the parliamentary finance commissions.

47.      Morocco is also undertaking an important budget reform to improve the transparency and
effectiveness of public expenditure management at the central and local level . While budget
classification at the level of central government is aligned with international norms 20, Morocco does not
yet publish a multiannual budget framework, which is foreseen in the Organic Budget Law reform. The
current reform aims to achieve this objective through the adoption of a programmatic budget structure and
performance objectives and indicators. The swift implementation of this reform would increase the
consistency between the budget and the government’s priorities. Transfers to agencies and local
governments are currently recorded but not their own revenues in the absence of consolidated accounts.

48.      The Program’s financial sustainability and funding predictability at the central level do not
pose a risk. The analysis recently carried out by the Bank on Morocco indicates that the public debt and
external debt sustainability framework at the central level remains sustainable although it would weaken
under scenarios of medium term downside risks. Indeed, when the debt sustainability analysis is based on
alternative scenarios, the debt stock remained high over the period 2014-2020. All the six bound tests21
proved sustainable for the central government debt over the medium term, as well as the five external debt
tests. Morocco has also demonstrated its willingness and capability to adjust policies and introduce
corrective measures to overcome the adverse effects of shocks. Morocco managed to keep its investment
grade rating and its access to international financial markets with relatively favorable conditions. The


20
  COFOG (Classification of the Functions of Government) developed by the OCDE
21
  The Scenarios are as follows: B1: Real interest rate is at baseline plus one standard deviations; B2: Real GDP
growth is at baseline minus one-half standard deviation; B3: Primary balance is at baseline minus one-half standard
deviation; B4: Combination of B1-B3 using one-quarter standard deviation shocks; B5: One time 30 percent real
depreciation in 2015; and B6: 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2014.

                                                        20
successful implementation of the GoM’s revamped development strategy would ensure that the negative
effects of most of the anticipated risks discussed above are weathered successfully.

49.       Program proceeds will be mobilized and spent as a part of the Budget of the State and will
follow the same rules, processes, controls and reporting obligations. Program proceeds under Sub-
Programs One and Two will be reflected predominantly in the CAS-FLCN. As mentioned above, the
FLCN was established by the 2009 Budget Law as a dedicated budget line (CAS, i.e., Compte d’Affection
Spéciale) within the MoI. The FLCN will receive annual contributions through the general budget in line
with Morocco’s annual budgeting process. The FLCN has in the past years been receiving MAD 200
million from the government budget per year. It is envisioned that the Government will continue to
allocate annually at least this amount over the program implementation period and an annual allocation of
FCLN fund proceeds to eligible risk reduction sub-project of at least MAD 170 million is specified as a
DLI in the operation so as to ensure FLCN’s financial predictability and sustainability (eith the remainder
to be used for other purposes, such as emergency response). The CAS-FLCN is a budgetary envelope
that: i) is a specific section within the budget documents which is voted by Parliament in the same form
and at the same time than the rest of the Budget; is under the spending authority (ordonnateur) of a
Minister (Minister of Interior for the FLCN); is not submitted to cancellation of uncommitted balance at
the end of the fiscal year; except for the above, follows the same rules than the general budget. The CAS-
FLCN is presented annually to Parliament with an expenditure framework. It is also subject to interim
budget execution reports and part of the year-end budget execution report submitted to the Court of
Accounts. In addition, for Subprogram Three a Government contribution is foreseen which will be used
for the initial funding of the FSEC and will be determined by the Budget Law.

50.      Transfers from the CAS-FLCN to individual project implementing agencies will be made
according to a specific disbursement plan and according to rules and processes agreed upon in a
FA. The selection process for individual projects will include an evaluation of the financial management
and procurement capacity as well as an appreciation of the risk of corruption. Once the project is deemed
eligible for funding, a FA will be signed between the MoI and the implementing entity. The FA will cover
the disbursement modalities (based in most cases on work advancement justifications) and prospective
calendar as well as fiduciary obligations, especially in terms of reporting. The FA will provide details and
template forms to this effect. Implementing entities and their agencies will likely only be public sector
entities, with bank accounts that are part of the Treasury network and with management and reporting
rules which are clearly defined in laws and regulations. Bank proceeds will cover structural and non-
structural risk reduction expenses for eligible projects. This includes works, goods and services.
Eligibility criteria will define the nature of the works and exclude specific categories and will also define
the specific geographic areas where works might be ineligible.

51.      Program Expenditure Framework. For Subprograms One and Two, the Program Expenditure
Framework consists of funds allocated to the CAS-FLCN and the corresponding co-financing mobilized.
Specifically, it is expected that MAD 170 million will be allocated on an annual basis to finance eligible
subprojects from the FLCN focusing on risk reduction. This financing contributes initially 70 percent of
the total cost of eligible subprojects with project proponents and their partners contributing the remaining
30 percent. This co-financing will increase to 50 percent in the last year of the Program. The FLCN will
therefore significantly leverage additional financial resources. Total expenditures under Subprogram One
and Two are estimated to be MAD 1,436 million (approximately US$ 145 million) over the Program
period. For Subprogram Three, the Program Expenditure Framework consists of financial resources
mobilized to establish the FSEC. Total financial contributions for establishing FSEC are estimated to be
MAD 1.1 billion (approximately US$111 million) during the five years of the Program. These funds




                                                     21
would come from the government’s initial contribution and additional taxes. 22 The overall Program
Expenditure Framework for the years 2016 to 2020 is summarized in Table 4.3 below.

                    Table 4: Program Financing 2016-2021 (US$ million) – By Sub-Program

                      Source                      Year 1    Year 2      Year 3      Year 4   Year 5         Total
     Subprogram 1 - Institutional Reform
                                                    2             3       3           3        3             14
     and Capacity Building23
     Subprogram 2 - Risk Reduction
                                                   22            24      26          28       31            131
     Activities
     Subprogram 3 - Disaster Risk
                                                    –             –       –          55       56            111
     Financing and Insurance
                                          Total    24            27      29          86       90            256



                               Table 5: IBRD Contribution 2016-2021 (US$ million)
                                 Source                                    Amount               % of Total

     IBRD financing                                                           200                     78

     Co-financing                                                             56                      22

                                                                Total         256                     100

F. Program Results                        and Disbursement Linked Indicators

52.      Program progress will be monitored through the detailed Results Framework . The Program
supports three broad and interrelated results areas in support of the Program Development Objective
(PDO) which is to improve the institutional framework to finance disaster risk reduction activities and
strengthen financial resilience to natural disasters for targeted population in the Program area. The three
results areas as follows:

      Results Area One (Promoting Institutional Development and Capacity Building): The first
       results area focuses on improving Morocco’s institutional disaster risk management structure. This
       will be achieved through the reform of the FLCN, with the objective of transforming it into a
       “national resilience fund? characterized by improved management processes, including an increased
       focus on ex-ante disaster risk reduction, better investment decisions based on transparent selection
       processes and a clear monitoring and evaluation system. Morocco’s institutional capacity will also be
       strengthened by ensuring that national and local level institutions are better prepared for the onset of
       natural hazards. Furthermore, citizen participation and engagement in risk management will be
       enhanced. Together, this will lead to more strategic, evidence based and participatory approach of
       how disaster risks and resilience are being managed in Morocco.

      Results Area Two (Scaling up Disaster Risk Reduction Activities): The second results area aims at
       increasing actual protection of beneficiary population and asset in Morocco by scaling up structural

22
   Estimated figures for Subprogram Three are only indicative since the current draft law does not specify the
amount of financial resources of FSEC. They will be fixed by the implementation decree once the law is approved.
23
   Estimated as 10 percent of total FLCN and partner financing.

                                                           22
    and non-structural ex-ante disaster risk reduction activities. It aims at ensuring an appropriate balance
    between structural and non-structural activities, in light of potentially high benefit cost ratios of non-
    structural (i.e. such as awareness raising campaigns, early warning systems, etc.) interventions, as
    well as at increasing the role of local governments in risk prevention and mitigation. This will help
    institutionalize a risk management process in Morocco which is less fragmented and more integrated
    both horizontally (i.e. different ministries and national government agencies) and vertically (i.e.
    between national and local governments). By targeting in particular local governments significantly
    enhanced capacity for risk management at the regional and communal level will be achieved.

   Results Area Three (Improving Disaster Risk Financing and Insurance): The third results area
    complements results areas 1 and 2 by focusing on providing financial protection through disaster risk
    insurance as residual risks that cannot be cost-effectively mitigated need be efficiently financed. In
    addition, the Solidarity Fund FSEC will ensure that special attention is given to the most vulnerable
    population and communities which are often uninsured. This will help ensure that Morocco’s
    approach to risk management is comprehensive in the sense of complementing institutional reform
    and capacity building (results area 1) not only with risk reduction investments (results area 2) but also
    with a strategic approach to financial management and insurance against catastrophic events.

53.      The PDO level indicators of the Results Framework correspond to these three broad results areas.
In addition, intermediate results indicators have been developed so as to reflect key intermediate results
required to meet the PDO as well as to capture additional key, specific aspects of the Program’s,
including gender related aspects, improved risk management analytical tools and the implementation of
risk management activities at the sub-national level, which is key given that local communities are most
directly impacted by disaster events.

54.      Disbursement-linked Indicators (DLIs) have been selected to reflect critical elements of
performance required to achieve the PDO. All DLIs are indicators in the Results Framework.
Particular attention has been paid to ensuring that the DLIs are i) fully aligned with government priorities
and are implementable by the responsible implementation entities; ii) are achievable yet challenging at the
same time; iii) are clearly measurable and independently verifiable; and iv) allow for a smooth
disbursement profile over the period of Program implementation. In addition, the DLIs are designed to be
mutually supportive and reinforce the overall Program objective. For example, DLIs 1 to 4 and 6 focus on
the institutional reform aspects of the Program and ensure that the FLCN allocation process is transparent
and the FLCN financially sustainable. The improved institutional architecture on risk management in
Morocco will provide the basis for scaling up risk management activities, as captured in DLI 5. DLIs 7
and 8, capture required actions to ensure that Morocco’s population and business es are financially
protected after a disaster strikes. The results chain presented in Table 6 below highlights how DLIs
related to the key issues, activities, outputs, and outcomes under the Program.

                                  Table 6: Program’s Results Chain
        Issues             Activities/Inputs           Outputs             Outcomes           Related DLI
                  Results Area 1: Promoting Institutional Development and Capacity Building




                                                     23
                                                        Establishment of
 No DRM architecture                                    FLCN Steering           Strengthened
   in place to ensure       Actions to strengthen     Committee, National         system to
  strategic orientation        disaster risk and     Selection Commission       strategically
  of and coordination       resilience governance       and Secretariat;       manage disaster        DLI# 1
        within the               coordination           Development of            risks and
     government of                mechanisms          national disaster risk    resilience in
        Morocco                                           and resilience          Morocco
                                                     management strategy
                                                                               More transparent
  Lack of transparent       Actions to strengthen
                                                                                  and results
 management process,        management process,      Introduction of annual
                                                                                   oriented
 including in terms of      including M&E, for       CfP and M&E system                             DLI#1 & #2
                                                                                 approach to
    M&E, of FLCN             FLCN co-financed             for the FLCN
                                                                                managing the
   financed projects              projects
                                                                                    FLCN
                                                                                  Systematic
    Lack of citizen          Actions to improve a
                                                        Introduction of         integration of
    engagement in              more systematic                                                    DLI#1, #2, #4 &
                                                      beneficiary feedback         citizens’
    Morocco’s risk           approach to citizens’                                                      #5
                                                      processes and GRM        feedback in risk
     management                  engagement
                                                                                 management
                             Results Area 2: Scaling up Disaster Risk Reduction Activities

                                                                                                       DLI# 2
    Lack of strategic        Annual allocation of                                                 (financing stage)
  approach to funding         FLCN funds to co-      Disaster risk reduction    Protection of
 disaster risk reduction     finance disaster risk        investments          population and          DLI# 4
 investments for local      reduction investments    implemented at local       assets against    (selection stage)
  governments and at        for local governments     and national levels      natural hazards        DLI# 5
   the national level        at the national level                                                (implementation
                                                                                                       stage)
                                                                                Protection of
                                                                               population and
                              Minimum annual
                                                                                assets against
 Lack of focus on non-       allocation of FLCN       Non-structural risk
                                                                               natural hazards,
     structural risk         funds to co-finance      reduction activities                             DLI#3
                                                                                 specifically
 reduction investments        non-structural risk        implemented
                                                                                through non-
                             reduction activities
                                                                                  structural
                                                                                  activities
                           Results Area 3: Improving Disaster Risk Financing and Insurance
                                                          Adoption of              Insurance
                             Actions to introduce
                                                     catastrophic draft risk      coverage of
    Low insurance            Morocco’s national
                                                       insurance law and        population and
   coverage against           catastrophic risk                                                        DLI#7
                                                       implementation of         assets against
  catastrophic events       insurance program in
                                                     implementation legal         catastrophic
                                  Morocco
                                                           documents                 events
                                                                                    Financial
   Lack of financial         Actions to establish
                                                                                 protection of
     protection of          FSEC in Morocco, as
                                                     Legal establishment           uninsured
 uninsured population       required by the draft                                                      DLI#8
                                                     of FSEC in Morocco         population and
  against catastrophic        catastrophic risk
                                                                                    principal
        events                 insurance law
                                                                                   residences

55.    Reporting progress on the Results Framework will be the responsibility of Secretariat and
builds on Government systems. Specifically, the Secretariat, housed at MoI, will prepare an annual

                                                          24
Program Report (including reporting on all PDO-level and intermediate results indicators, evidence of
results related to DLIs, and evidence of compliance with requirements of the Program Action Plan). The
Program Results Report will be submitted to the Bank no later 90 days after the end of the calendar year.
The reporting arrangements for the Bank build on the efforts to improve the M&E system the MoI will
put into place to measure implementation progress achieved under FLCN funded projects, as specified in
the Financing Agreement signed between the MoI/MEF and project implementing agencies and their
partners. In this sense, the results framework builds on and uses the government’s own M&E systems that
will be established to increase the transparency of the reformed FLCN. In addition, the Secretariat will
also work jointly with the MEF to integrate all required information for results area three, on disaster risk
financing and insurance.



Program’s Economic Impact

56.     The Program’s economic impact is assessed by looking at i) the impact disasters can have on
Morocco’s GDP and fiscal balance; ii) highlighting the rationale for the use of public funds in reducing
Morocco’s risk profile; iii) estimating the direct economic impact comparing the “with Program? to the
“without Program? scenario; and iv) specifying the Bank’s value added in supporting Morocco’s reform
projects.

Fiscal and Economic Relevance

57.      Fiscal and economic impacts of natural hazards are significant in Morocco . Table 2 in
Section C above shows the estimated direct damage losses by sector for two levels of disaster – Probable
and Possible. Table 7 below shows direct damage and production losses for a Rare but Possible events,
providing a more comprehensive assessment of the fiscal and economic impacts of disasters. In Table 6
the range of production losses reflects results from two different economic models – the Input-Output
(IO) model which typically produces the higher number and is the magnitude of economic losses likely to
be estimated immediately after a disaster, and the Computable General Equilibrium (CGE) model which
typically produces the lower number and is the magnitude of economic losses likely to actually occur if
resilience-enhancing economic policies have been introduced ex ante and loss mitigating economic
policies are introduced in a timely manner ex post the disaster. Also shown are the averages of these
estimates as percentages of Morocco’s Production Base, GDP and National Budget, respectively. As can
be seen in Table 6 total estimated losses for Morocco range from MAD 50 to 160 billion (the latter
being the “Rare but Possible? earthquake). While this level of disaster is difficult to fully prepare
it at least requires consideration and perhaps some preparation, since this level of event causes losses
of more than half the Government annual budget and 20 percent of national GDP. Even a Possible flood
has the potential for losses amounting to 17 percent of the Government’s annual budget24 and 6 percent of
national GDP. Such events would cause fiscal, and probably economic, crises and Government
development strategies would be severely disrupted.




24
  In general in the risk assessment arena, the larger the event the longer is the return period (and the lower the
probability). Even though infrequent, it is a mistake to disregard large events – just in the last few years, the 2004
Indian Ocean Earthquake and Tsunami was approximately a “600 year? event, and the 2011 Japan Earthquake and
Tsunami a “1,000 year? event.

                                                         25
         Table 7: Property and Economic Production Losses in a “Possible? to “Rare but
                      Possible? Disaster25 vs. Production, GDP and Budget
                                              Earthquake                 Flood                     Tsunami
                                                              National Losses (MAD 10 billion)
Total Property Damage                          MAD 111                 MAD 34                      MAD 59
Total Production Loss                        MAD 43~52               MAD 11~14                   MAD 22~26
Total (PD + PL)                             MAD 154~163              MAD 45~48                   MAD 82~85
                  Average as Percentage of PRODUCTION BASE (base = MAD 1,009 billion)
Total Property Damage                             11%                     3%                          6%
Total Production Loss                             4%                      1%                          2%
Total (PD + PL)                                   16%                     5%                          8%
             Average as Percentage % GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT (base = MAD 800 billion)
Total Property Damage                             14%                     4%                          7%
Total Production Loss                             5%                      1%                          3%
Total (PD + PL)                                   20%                     6%                         10%
                   Average as Percentage of NATIONAL BUDGET (base = MAD 276 billion)
Total Property Damage                             40%                     12%                        21%
Total Production Loss                             16%                     4%                          8%
Total (PD + PL)                                   58%                     17%                        30%


 Rationale for the Use of Public Funds

 58.      Supporting the Program through the provision of public funds is fully appropriate. Public
 funding for disaster risk management investments is common across almost all countries due to a number
 of factors including: structural and non-structural natural disaster risk reduction often involves projects in
 which everyone benefits, the classic case for public funding. Clear examples are a flood protection
 structure or early warning systems – they protect everyone (benefits are difficult to restrict to only those
 who pay); there is also under-investment in ex ante risk reduction due to many institutional challenges
 and in-built biases to focus mainly on ex-post response which calls for additional incentives to be
 provided to promote ex ante mitigation actions. For disaster risk insurance, due to the high consequence/
 low probability nature of natural hazards, the insurance industry on its own prefers to avoid natural
 disaster insurance, and would only provide such insurance when the premium is exceedingly attractive.
 As a result, government intervention is required, including in terms of providing coverage for the
 uninsured which included the poorest and most vulnerable segments of society. Together all elements of
 the Program will significantly enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of public expenditures, both in the
 context of the reform of the CAS-FLCN and disaster risk insurance Sub-Programs.




 25
   “Rare but Possible? disaster corresponds to an earthquake with an annual probability of 1/10,000 and flood or
 tsunami with an annual probability of 1/1,000.

                                                         26
59.     The Program’s economic impact will be beneficial and significant. Analyses performed using
MnhPRA (“What-if? Scenarios, see box) indicate very positive benefit cost ratios (BCR) for typical
measures undertaken under the Program, ranging as high as 5426. Additional economic benefits accrue
from jobs created and multiplier effect of expenditures in the economy. Based on estimates of MnhPRA,
an investment of MAD 2.7 billion would save over 5,800 lives and correspondingly reduce injuries and
trauma for a much large population, while achieving benefits of MAD 26.5 billion, equivalent to a Benefit
Cost Ratio (BCR) of 9.8 and Internal Rate of Return (IRR) of 29%. These results are based on selecting
the ten most cost-beneficial mitigation actions from a set of 51 that were examined using MnhPRA. The
IRR is based on a simplified calculation assuming all capital investment being made at project initiation
(see box for more details).




26
  World Bank. (2013). "What If Scenario Analysis Report, Morocco Natural Hazards Probabilistic Risk Analysis
and National Strategy Development." for the Ministry of General Affairs and Governance, prepared by RMSI Ltd.
for the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, Washington, D.C. Contract No. 715742 with
support from GFDRR and the Swiss Development Cooperation Agency, Rabat, 463.

                                                      27
                                                       “What-if? Scenarios
     “What-if? is an analysis of the benefits and costs of a particular risk reduction action. For example “what if
     schools are strengthened for earthquake?? The “what if…?? question asks “what are the benefits if… [some
     action is taken].?
     In the context of disaster risk reduction, benefits are typically avoided future losses, which (given they haven’t
     yet occurred) are calculated based on the probability of their occurrence – that is, probabilistic risk analysis.
     While greater and greater benefits accrue with more and more mitigation, there is also increasing cost, and one
     seeks an ‘optimum’ level of mitigation, which is the point at which the decreasing loss equals the increasing cost
     of mitigation. Probably the most common method of determining the optimum level of mitigation is benefit-cost
     analysis, which seeks to determine the Benefit-Cost Ratio (BCR) of a particular mitigation action—the higher
     the BCR, the more bang (benefits, that is, avoided loss) for the buck (cost of mitigation).
     Using MnhPRA, 51 different mitigation scenarios were examined, such as seismic strengthening of buildings,
     flood warning systems, structural measures for flood protection, evacuation mapping and elevating buildings to
     protect against floods. The scenarios considered high-risk areas such as Al-Hociema and Nador province for
     earthquake, Kenitra province for floods, coastal areas of the country for tsunami, and selected key provinces
     such as Fes and Agadir.
     BCRs for the 51 scenarios ranged from 54.3 to 1.1. The total cost of mitigation for all 51 what-if scenarios was
     MAD 9.3 billion. The top ten scenarios in terms of BCR were:
       Mitigation                                                        Area              Occupancy               BCR
       1.   Flood Warning System                                         Ouregha (Sebou)   Overall                  54.3
       2.   Flood Warning System                                         Ouregha (Sebou)   Residential              45.6
       3.   Culverts on Rail Road (flood protection)                     Gharab            Rail-line                34.6
       4.   Flood Warning System                                         Ouregha (Sebou)   Essential Facilities     12.1
       5.   Tsunami Evacuation Mapping                                   Coastal Morocco   Population                    8.3
       6.   Flood Mitigation of Residential Buildings for new township   Kenitra           Residential                   8.2
       7.   Flood Mitigation of Government Buildings for new township    Kenitra           Government Buildings          7.2
       8.   Seismic Retrofitting                                         Nador             Hospitals                     5.8
       9.   Risk assessment for new township                             Kenitra           Buildings                     5.7
       10. Seismic Risk assessment for new schools                       Whole Morocco     Schools                       4.4
     The total cost for the top ten portfolio was MAD 2.7 billion, which achieved a benefit (net present value
     of future losses) of MAD 26.5 billion, or a BCR of 9.8. Using a simplified analysis assuming all capital
     investment being made at project initiation, this is equivalent to an internal rate of return (IRR) of 29 percent.
     Critically, over 5,800 lives would be saved, and injuries and trauma reduced for a correspondingly larger
     population.
     Source: World Bank 2012. What If Scenario Analysis Report, Morocco Natural Hazards Probabilistic Risk
     Analysis and National Strategy Development. The Ministry of General Affairs and Governance, prepared by
     RMSI Ltd.
60.      International experience further reinforces these findings – that if appropriately managed
disaster risk reduction projects, especially those that are community based with participatory approaches,
can achieve high IRRs and have significant economic spin-off effects. A major study of disaster
mitigation for the US Congress 27 found that, overall, mitigation produced benefit-cost ratios of four.
Evidence based on disaster risk management activities in developing countries confirms this finding28.

27
   Multihazard Mitigation Council. (2006). "Natural Hazard Mitigation Saves: An Independent Study to Assess the Future
Savings from Mitigation Activities." National Institute of Building Sciences.
28
   Understanding the Economics of Flood Risk Reduction: A Preliminary Analysis (2012) See
http://www.gfdrr.org/understandingeconomicsoffloodriskreduction

                                                               28
There is a clear rationale for public intervention as, in general, disaster risk management investments
mitigate market failures and provide public goods type infrastructure. Returns tend to be higher for
simpler activities that were not very capital-intensive – that is, local community projects, which is a key
focus of the Program.

         Table 8 Summary of possible BCR values in disaster risk reduction projects29

                     Country                     Hazards                           BCR max
                      Malawi                      Drought                             24.0
                       Sudan                      Drought                           1,800.0
                        Fiji                       Flood                               7.3
                       India                      Drought                              3.5
                       Nepal                    Earthquake                             2.0
                    World (35)                     Flood                              60.0
                    World (35)                 Wind damage                            6.07
                    World (35)                  Earthquake                             5.1
                        Fiji                       Flood                               7.3
                     Germany                       Flood                               9.0
                      Austria                      Flood                               1.7
                        Peru                       Flood                               3.8
                     Indonesia                     Flood                               2.5
                    Philippines                    Flood                              31.0
                       Nepal                       Flood                               3.5
                       Nepal                       Flood                              18.6
                        Iran                       Flood                               1.3
                      Pakistan                     Flood                              25.0
                       India                       Flood                               2.5
                      Pakistan                     Flood                              25.0
                    Bangladesh                 Cyclone; flood                          4.9
                       India                       Flood                              57.8
                    Philippines                 Flood; lahar                          30.0
                        USA                         All                      5.1; overall average 4
                       China                        All                                4.0


61.      The economic value of the disaster risk finance and insurance program is also positive. The
proposed catastrophic risk insurance program is expected to generate several social and economic
benefits. For the Government, introducing a compulsory catastrophic risk insurance guarantee (for the
insured) and a compensation system for the non-insured households through the FSEC, allows the
government to clarify its contingent liability related to catastrophic events. Too often, financing recovery
cost after natural disasters among the various stakeholders is left unspecified, which creates a de facto
implicit contingent liability for the government (as the government faces social pressure to compensate
the victims of a disaster although it has no legal obligation). In addition, the program enables Morocco to
transfer a fraction of potential disaster losses to the private insurance sector, thereby reducing the

29
  Shreve, C. M., and I.Kelman. (2014). "Does Mitigation Save? Reviewing Cost-Benefit Analyses of Disaster Risk Reduction."
International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction


                                                            29
government’s (implicit) contingent liability. For households, the catastrophic risk insurance program
provides households with more certainty about the financial support they can expect to receive after a
disaster. According to the preliminary actuarial analysis conducted by the World Bank, insured
households would receive on average MAD 700 million every year as insurance payouts from floods
and/or earthquakes, while uninsured affected households could receive MAD 800 million on average
from the FSEC every year. In addition, such a program should provide faster payouts since the payout
structure is already pre-defined. Some economic analyses show that immediate cash payment following a
disaster have significant welfare benefits, especially for the poor households; the value of US$1 paid in
the wake of a disaster is worth at least US$2.5 paid several weeks later.30 For the domestic insurance
industry, the program will expand the non-life domestic market. Preliminary actuarial analysis conducted
by the World Bank estimates that this will generate approximately MAD 840 million in additional annual
insurance premium volume, or 4.5 percent of the 2014 non-life premium volume in Morocco. In case of a
major disaster (e.g., with a 100 year return period), the preliminary actuarial analysis of the World Bank
estimates that the insurance industry would inject approx. MAD 1 billion as insurance payouts in the
economy, a large fraction of this amount coming from foreign reinsurers as the cat risk insurance business
is mainly transferred to the international reinsurance market (usually in excess of 90 percent).

World Bank Value Added

62.     The World Bank value added is significant. It is based on both a long engagement with
Morocco on various aspects of risk management as well as its significant global experience developing
operational programs in support of countries’ disaster risk management policies and programs. The Bank
has had a partnership with Morocco on risk management since 2008 (see Box 1) and has extensively
supported Morocco in developing its approach to risk management along all key dimensions, including
the development of a risk assessment (MnhPRA), the reform of the FLCN and the support to the
catastrophic risk insurance program. Based on the Bank’s in-depth engagement over the past seven years,
the Bank is uniquely positioned to support Morocco’s next phase or risk management by operationalizing
Morocco’s ambitious reform agenda, building on the work completed to date. In doing s o, it can draw on
extensive global experience developing operational programs in support of countries’ disaster risk
management policies and programs, including from FONDEN’s in Mexico, Philippines Disaster
Resilience Fund, Columbia Adaptation Fund, the Turkish Catastrophe Insurance Pool, the Romanian
Catastrophe Risk Insurance Pool, and the Southeast Europe and Caucasus Regional Catastrophe Risk
Insurance Facility.



63.       Technical risk is assessed as substantial. The Program is well founded institutionally and at its
core is being managed by two established institutions: the MoI and the MEF. The MoI is principally in
charge of Sub-Programs One and Two and the MEF in charge of Sub-Program Three. For Sub-Program
Three, under the MoF, ACAPS is the technical leader for the implementation of the draft catastrophic risk
insurance law and as the insurance regulator well qualified to do so. The main risks identified in the
Technical Assessment pertain to the implementing agencies’ and their partners’ capacity to effectively
implement projects co-financed under Sub-Program One and Two. This stems from the fact that the
operation cuts across multiple sectors and responsible line Ministries, Public Agencies as well as layers of
government. In addition, local governments are less familiar with implementing risk reduction activities
as this is a newer area of engagement and responsibility for them. Technical risks are therefore assessed to
be substantial despite the fact that a large majority of non-structural and structural risk management
activities involve relatively standard and/ or smaller scale infrastructure investment program. It is
envisaged that specific technical strengthening activities are included under the Program, including, as
30
     Clarke and Hill. 2013. Cost-Benefit Analysis of the African Risk Capacity Facility.

                                                            30
     required, through the mobilization of qualified consultants. The Program also specifically targets
     upstream capacity building actions, targeted to working with potential project proponents to develop and
     submit good quality projects to be co-financed by the FLCN. Importantly, technical audits will be
     conducted by the General Inspectorate of Territorial Administration (IGAT, i.e. Inspection Générale de
     l’Administration Territoriale), a well-qualified department in the MoI, to ensure that the funded projects
     are implemented in line with the required technical standards. There is a residual risk in terms of ensuring
     that the co-financing required for FLCN funded projects materializes, but the risk is mitigated by
     requiring firm commitment for co-financing as part of the FA signed between the MoI, MEF and project
     implementation agencies and their partners.




     64.      A Program Action Plan (PAP) has been developed to identify key actions required to ensure
     successful Program implementation, including in light of the key risks identified. Technical aspects of the
     PAD are shown in Annex 8 and include three broad categories. First, actions to establish a transparent
     management, including with respect to M&E of investments financed by the FLCN. Second, actions to
     support the successful selection and implementation of risk reduction projects co-financed by the FLCN
     (training, capacity building, etc.). Third, actions to further develop Morocco’s risk assessment and
     monitoring, including in the area of actuarial modeling required for the implementation of the draft
     catastrophic risk insurance law.

                              Table 9: Technical Input into Program Action Plan
N°                Action Description                            Due Date             Responsib       Completion
                                                                                      le Party       Measurement
                                                    Program Management
1       Develop an M&E system for the               12 months after the                MoI       An M&E system for
        management of the FLCN                      Effectiveness Date                           the FLCN is created
2       Create an interactive website of the        18 months after the                MoI       The interactive website
        FLCN that (i) provides public access to     Effectiveness Date                           of the FLCN is created
        information, (ii) handles grievances, and
        (iii) reports on the M&E system
3       Include in the FA between MoI/ MEF          Annually (At signature date of   MoI/MEF     The FA included
        and the implementing agencies of            the FA)                                      provision for adequate
        eligible subproject of the FLCN,                                                         capacity of FLCN
        provisions to make available technical,                                                  subproject proponents
        environmental, social and fiduciary
        expertise
4       Prepare and implement a capacity            Annually (starting from 2017)      MoI       Submission and
        building plan including on technical,                                                    implementation of
        social, environmental and fiduciary                                                      annual capacity
        aspects                                                                                  building plan to
                                                                                                 strengthen
                                                                                                 implementation
                                                                                                 agencies
5       Prepare and implement an action plan        Annually                           MoI       Recommendations
        for technical and fiduciary audit                                                        made by technical and
        recommendations made by auditors                                                         fiduciary auditors are
                                                                                                 implemented
6       Develop probabilistic catastrophe risk      36 to 48 months after the        MoI/MEF/    The catastrophe risk
        models for (i) evaluation and assessment    Effectiveness Date                ACAPS      modeling tools are
        of risks (MoI), and (ii) catastrophe risk                                                developed within 36
        insurance program as per the draft law                                                   months and operational

                                                               31
N°                  Action Description                                Due Date                   Responsib             Completion
                                                                                                  le Party            Measurement
          (MEF/ACAPS)                                                                                            within 48 months after
                                                                                                                 the Effective Date of
                                                                                                                 the Loan Agreement.
                                                      Social and Environmental
7         Develop GRM for the FLCN at the               18 months after the                          MoI         GRM are in place
          national (website of the FLCN) and            Effectiveness Date–at the
          local levels                                  national level-and 6 month after
                                                        signature of the FA by the
                                                        project proponents – at the local
                                                        level

8         Prepare simplified technical guides for        18 months after the                         MoI         Technical guides
          FLCN subprojects on: (i) Environmental         Effectiveness Date                                      finalized
          and Social Management, incl. on public
          consultations and resettlement; and (ii)
          GRM
                                                              Fiduciary31
          Alignment with the triennial budget            For Effective Date of the 2019          MoI/ MEF        CAS-FLCN amended
          programming updated on a yearly basis          Budget Law                                              for the 2019 Budget
          for the CAS-FLCN
          Include in the FA between the MoI and          For each signature of FA                    MoI         The FA included
          project proponents of timeline for                                                                     implementation
          project implementation                                                                                 timelines




     65.      The objectives of the Implementation Support Plan (ISP) are (i) to monitor implementation
     progress of the Program (including its PAP) and the implementation of the risk mitigation measures
     defined in the technical, fiduciary, and safeguard assessments and (ii) to provide the counterpart with the
     technical advice necessary to facilitate the achievement of the PDO and contribute to the quality of the
     capacity building of stakeholders by providing best practices, benchmarks and training.

     66.     The Bank will provide regular implementation support to the Program as appropriate, including
     for the implementation of the PAP. Formal implementation support missions and field visits will be
     carried out semi-annually. The main focus of the implementation support is summarized below:

                                   Table 10. Main focus of Implementation Support
          Time              Focus               Skills Needed         Resource                         Partner Role
                                                                      Estimate
                                                                       (US$)
                        Task Team                  Project
                      Leadership and             management
                    Program supervision
                     Technical support              Risk
                       and capacity              management
                          building
                     M&E support and                 M&E

     31
       Regarding the action related to the availability of fiduciary competences for the implementation of subprojects, on must refer to
     the action n°3 under “Program management?.

                                                                    32
           capacity building
             Procurement        Procurement                    SDC financed international expert co-
First    support and capacity                                  located with MoI to support Program
twelve         building                                      Management with a focus on Sub-Programs
months      FM support and          FM          150,000 BB   One and Two (expert will start work before
           capacity building                                          Program effectiveness)
         Social development        Social
         support and capacity   development
               building
            Environmental       Environmental
         support and capacity    management
               building
         Technical support to   Risk Finance
            risk financing
                agenda
             Task Team            Project
           Leadership and       management
              Program
            Supervision
12-48     Technical support        Risk
months      and capacity        management      100,000 BB       Continued support by SDC financed
              building                            per year    international expert co-located with MoI
            Procurement         Procurement                  (financing agreed in principle with SDC as
            supervision                                          a continuation of year one activity)
          FM supervision            FM
           Environmental        Environment
            supervision         management
         Social development        Social
             supervision        development

         Technical support to   Risk Finance
            risk financing
                agenda




                                                33
Program Development Objective: To improve the institutional framework to finance disaster risk reduction activities and strengthen financial resilience to
natural disasters for targeted population in the Program area.

                                                                                     Target Values                                                                   Resp
                                                   CY2016            CY2017             CY2018             CY2019           CY2020                                  onsibi




                                                                                                                                         Frequency
                             Unit
PDO Level                                                                                                                                                Data         lity
                Core




                              of
                       DLI



 Results                            Baseline                                                                                                         Source/Metho     for
                             Meas
Indicators                                                                                                                                              dology       Data
                             ure
                                                                                                                                                                    Colle
                                                                                                                                                                     ction
PDO             ?      ☒                         Preparation      (i) the             The Steering      The Steering      The Steering               Program        MoI/
Indicator                                        of: (i) draft    Borrower’s          committee,        committee, the    committee,                 Progress       Secret
1: The                                           provisions to    2017 budget law     the National      National          the National               Report with    ariat
FLCN                                             be included in   includes            Selection         Selection         Selection                  supporting
strategic                                        the              provisions          Commission,       Commission,       Commission,                documents
orientation                                      Borrower’s       regarding the       the Secretariat   the Secretariat   the
                                    The
and                                              2017 budget      establishment of    and the FLCN      and the FLCN      Secretariat
                                    FLCN
governance                                       law, regarding   the Steering        website are       website are       and the
                                    focuses
structure                                        the              Committee, and      maintained        maintained.       FLCN
                                    mainly
are                                              establishment    the inclusion of                                        website are
                                    on post                                                             A national
redesigned                                       of the           local                                                   maintained.
                                    disaster                                                            integrated                       A
with a                                           Steering         governments
                                    event risk                                                          natural DRM       A national     n
focus on                                         Committee,       (collectivités
                             Text   response                                                            strategy is       integrated     n
disaster risk                                    and the          territoriales)
                                    outside                                                             prepared by the   natural DRM    u
reduction                                        inclusion of     among the
                                    the                                                                 Steering          strategy is    al
                                                 local            beneficiaries of
                                    context                                                             Committee.        adopted by
                                                 governments      FLCN
                                    of a                                                                                  the Steering
                                                 (collectivités   financing; and
                                    larger                                                                                Committee.
                                                 territoriales)   (ii) circulars
                                    DRM
                                                 among the        (Circulaires)
                                    strategy
                                                 beneficiaries    regarding the
                                                 of FLCN          establishment of
                                                 financing; and   the National
                                                 (ii) draft       Selection
                                                 circulars        Commission
                                                 (Circulaires)    and the

                                                                                     34
                                              to be issued      Secretariat have
                                              by the MoI        been issued by
                                              regarding the     the MoI.
                                              establishment
                                                                An interactive
                                              of the
                                                                FLCN website
                                              National
                                                                that provides
                                              Selection
                                                                public access to
                                              Commission
                                                                information,
                                              and the
                                                                handles
                                              Secretariat.
                                                                grievances, and
                                              The Minister      reports on the
                                              of Interior has   M&E system,
                                              decided on        has been created
                                              the annual
                                              allocation
                                              from the
                                              FLCN for the
                                              financing of
                                              Eligible Sub-
                                              projects
PDO             ?   ?                                                                                                                         Program            MI/
Indicator                                                                                                                                     Progress           Secret
2:                                                                                                                                            Report with        ariat
Cumulative                                                                                                                                    supporting data
number of                                                                                                                                A
beneficiarie                                                                                                                             n
                                                                                         1,000             4,000            40,000
s from                     #          0              –                  –                                                                n
                                                                                          (50)              (50)             (50)
eligible risk                                                                                                                            u
reduction                                                                                                                                al
subprojects
(%
women)32
PDO             ?   ☒      #          0              –                  –                  -           5.85 million      5.85 million    A    Program            MEF/


32
   This is indicator is a conservative estimate of potential number of beneficiaries protected by projects co-financed by the FLCN, counting direct and indirect
beneficiaries from structural and non-structural activities. Exact estimates are difficult as the totality of investments and allocation between structural and non-
structural investments as well as the type of risk reduction investments (i.e., flood protection vs seismic retrofitting) is not known ex ante. Indicator will be
reviewed and updated at mid-term in light of the underlying actual investment decisions made.

                                                                                   35
Indicator                                                                                                                  n    Progress         ACA
3:                                                                                                                         n    Report with      PS
Minimum                                                                                                                    u    data on actual
number of                                                                                                                  al   insurance
people in                                                                                                                       coverage (from
the                                                                                                                             MEF/ACAPS)
Program
Area
insured for
bodily
injury
against
catastrophic
events33
PDO              ?    ☒                                          The                  The              FSEC received            Program          MEF/
Indicator                                                        implementation       implementatio    initial financial        Progress         ACA
4:                                                               legal documents      n legal          contributions            Report and       PS
Establishm                                                       referred to in       documents        as per the               written          and
ent and                                                          Article 71 of the    referred to in   provisions of            evidence of      FSEC
operationali                                                     draft                Article 71 of    the                      implementatio
zation of                                                        catastrophic risk    the draft                            A    n legal
                                                                                                       catastrophic        n
the FSEC                                                         insurance law        catastrophic                              documents
                           Text                       –                                                risk insurance      n
to protect                                                       regarding the        risk insurance                            referred to in
                                                                                                       law                 u
the                                                              establishment of     law regarding                             Article 71 of
uninsured                                                        the FSEC are         the                                  al   draft law and
                                                                 prepared by the      establishment                             financial
                                                                 MEF and              of the FSEC                               contributions
                                                                 ACAPS                are adopted                               received by
                                                                                      by the                                    FSEC.
                                                                                      Government

Intermediate Results Area 1: Promoting Institutional Reform and Capacity Building




33
     Catastrophic events are defined as per the draft law n.110-14.

                                                                                     36
Intermedia    ?   ☒                                                                                                              Program            MI/
te Results                                                                                                                       Progress           Secret
Indicator                                                                                                                        Report             ariat
1:
Minimum
percentage
of entities                                                                                                                 A
responsible                                                                                                                 n
for the                                                                                                                     n
                        %         0            0                 50                  50               50            50
implementa                                                                                                                  u
tion of                                                                                                                     al
eligible
subprojects
receiving
technical
assistance
and/or
training
Intermedia    ?   ?                                                           Probabilistic      Probabilistic              A    Program            MoI/
te Results                                                                    catastrophe risk   catastrophe                n    Progress           Secret
Indicator                                                                     models for i)      risk models                n    Report and         ariat
2:                                                                            evaluation and     for i)                     u    revised cat risk
Improved                                                                      assessment         evaluation                 al   model
risk                                                                          (MoI), and ii)     and
assessment                                                                    catastrophic       assessment
models                                                                        risk insurance     (MoI), and
developed              Text      No            –                 –            program as per     ii)                –
and                                                                           the draft law      catastrophic
operational                                                                   (MEF) are          risk
                                                                              developed          insurance
                                                                                                 program as
                                                                                                 per the draft
                                                                                                 law (MEF)
                                                                                                 are
                                                                                                 operational
Intermediate Results Area 2: Scaling-up Disaster Risk Reduction Activities
Intermedia    ?   ☒                                                                                                         A    Program            MI/
                                           MAD 170           MAD 340              MAD 510         MAD 680        MAD 850
te Results              #         0                                                                                         n    Progress           Secret
                                            million           million              million         million        million
Indicator                                                                                                                   n    Report             ariat


                                                                             37
3:                                                                            u
Cumulative                                                                    al
amount of
FLCN
funds
allocated to
eligible
subprojects
Intermedia     ?   ☒                                                               Program    MI/
te Results                                                                         Progress   Secret
Indicator                                                                          Report     ariat
4:
Minimum                                                                       A
percentage                                                                    n
of FLCN                %   0   0   10           10         10         10      n
funds                                                                         u
allocated to                                                                  al
eligible
non-
structural
subprojects
Intermedia     ?   ☒                                                               Program    MI/
te Results                                                                         Progress   Secret
Indicator                                                                          Report     ariat
5:
Minimum
percentage
of total                                                                      A
funding of                                                                    n
eligible               %   0   0   35           40         45         50      n
subprojects                                                                   u
provided by                                                                   al
the entities
responsible
for
implementa
tion and
partners
Intermedia     ?   ☒                         MAD 100    MAD 350    MAD 600    A    Program    MI/
                       #   0   0   0
te Results                                    million    million    million   n    Progress   Secret

                                        38
Indicator                                                                                                n    Report            ariat
6:                                                                                                       u
Cumulative                                                                                               al
value of
total
funding of
completed
eligible
subprojects
achieving
disaster risk
reduction
targets
Intermediate Results Area 3: Improving Disaster Risk Financing and Insurance
Intermedia      ?   ☒                  The draft         The draft            The                             Program           MEF/
te Results                             catastrophic      catastrophic risk    implementation                  Progress          ACA
Indicator                              risk insurance    insurance law is     legal                           Report and        PS
7:                                     law is            transmitted to       documents                       written
Adoption                               transmitted by    the Parliament,      referred to in                  evidence of
of the                                 the General       and the              Article 71 of                   actual adoption
catastrophic                           Secretary of      implementation       the draft                       of law and
risk                                   the               legal documents      catastrophic                    implementatio
insurance                              Government        referred to in       risk insurance             A    n legal
legislative                            (Secrétariat      Article 71 of the    law and                    n    documents
and                     Text           Général du        draft                providing for      -   –   n    referred to in
regulatory                             Gouvernement)     catastrophic risk    the                        u    Article 71 of
framework                              to the relevant   insurance law        effectiveness of           al   the draft law.
                                       Ministries, and   and providing        the insurance
                                       is adopted by     for the              scheme, are
                                       the               effectiveness of     adopted by the
                                       Government        the insurance        Government
                                       Cabinet           scheme, are
                                       (Conseil du       prepared by the
                                       Gouvernement)     MEF and
                                                         ACAPS




                                                                             39
               Annex 2: Disbursement Linked Indicators, Disbursement Arrangements and Verification Protocols

                                               Table 1. Disbursement Linked Indicator Matrix
                               Total      As % of                                       Indicative timeline for DLI achievement
                             Financing     Total       DLI
                             Allocated   Financing   Baseline         CY2016            CY2017             CY2018           CY2019          CY2020
                              to DLI      Amount
DLI 1: The FLCN strategic                                         Preparation of:    (i) the            The Steering      The Steering   The Steering
orientation and governance                                        (i) draft          Borrower’s         committee, the    committee,     committee,
structure are redesigned                                          provisions to be   2017 budget        National          the National   the National
with a focus on disaster                                          included in the    law includes       Selection         Selection      Selection
risk reduction                                                    Borrower’s 2017    provisions         Commission,       Commission,    Commission,
                                                                  budget law,        regarding the      the Secretariat   the            the Secretariat
                                                                  regarding the      establishment      and the FLCN      Secretariat    and the FLCN
                                                                  establishment of   of the Steering    website are       and the        website are
                                                                  the Steering       Committee,         maintained.       FLCN           maintained.
                                                     The          Committee, and     and the                              website are
                                                                                                                                         A national
                                                     FLCN         the inclusion of   inclusion of                         maintained.
                                                                                                                                         integrated
                                                     focuses      local              local
                                                                                                                          A national     natural DRM
                                                     mainly on    governments        governments
                                                                                                                          integrated     strategy is
                                                     post         (collectivités     (collectivités
                                                                                                                          natural DRM    adopted by the
                                                     disaster     territoriales)     territoriales)
                                                                                                                          strategy is    Steering
                                                     event risk   among the          among the
                                                                                                                          prepared by    Committee.
                                                     response     beneficiaries of   beneficiaries of
                                                                                                                          the Steering
                                                     outside      FLCN               FLCN
                                                                                                                          Committee.
                                                     the          financing; and     financing; and
                                                     context of   (ii) draft         (ii) circulars
                                                     a larger     circulars          (Circulaires)
                                                     DRM          (Circulaires) to   regarding the
                                                     strategy     be issued by       establishment
                                                                  MoI regarding      of the National
                                                                  the                Selection
                                                                  establishment of   Commission
                                                                  the National       and the
                                                                  Selection          Secretariat
                                                                  Commission and     have been
                                                                  the Secretariat.   issued by the
                                                                  (US$8 million)     MoI. (US$7
                                                                                     million)


                                                                      40
                                Total      As % of                                      Indicative timeline for DLI achievement
                              Financing     Total       DLI
                              Allocated   Financing   Baseline       CY2016             CY2017           CY2018           CY2019    CY2020
                               to DLI      Amount

                                                                 The Minister of     An interactive
                                                                 Interior has        FLCN website
                                                                 decided on the      that provides
                                                                 annual allocation   public access
                                                                 from the FLCN       to information,
                                                                 for the financing   handles
                                                                 of Eligible Sub-    grievances, and
                                                                 projects. (US$7     reports on the
                                                                 million)            M&E system,
                                                                                     has been
                                                                                     created. (US$7
                                                                                     million)
Allocated amount (US$,
                                 35         17.5                        15                 14                0               3         3
millions):
DLI 2: Cumulative amount
                                                                    MAD 170            MAD 340          MAD 510          MAD 680    MAD 850
of FLCN funds allocated to                               0
                                                                     million            million          million          million    million
eligible subprojects
Allocated amount (US$,
                                 25         12.5                          5                5                 5               5         5
millions):
DLI 3: Minimum
percentage of FLCN funds
                                                         0                0                10               10              10         10
allocated to eligible non-
structural subprojects
Allocated amount (US$,
                                 8           4                            0                2                 2               2         2
millions):
DLI 4: Minimum
percentage of total funding
of eligible subprojects
provided by the entities                                 0                0                35               40              45         50
responsible for
implementation and their
partners


                                                                     41
                                Total      As % of                                      Indicative timeline for DLI achievement
                              Financing     Total       DLI
                              Allocated   Financing   Baseline       CY2016             CY2017            CY2018          CY2019        CY2020
                               to DLI      Amount
Allocated amount (US$,
                                 22          11                           0                8                 8               3              3
millions):
DLI 5: Cumulative value of
total funding of completed
                                                                                                         MAD 100         MAD 350       MAD 600
eligible subprojects                                     0                0                0
                                                                                                          million         million       million
achieving disaster risk
reduction targets
Allocated amount (US$,
                                 40          20          -                0                0                6.67           16.7           16.6
millions):
DLI 6: Minimum
percentage of entities
responsible for the
implementation of eligible                               0                0                50               50              50             50
subprojects having
received technical
assistance and/or training
Allocated amount (US$,
                                 10          5                            0                4                 2               2              2
millions):
DLI 7: Adoption of the                                           The draft           The draft         The
catastrophic risk insurance                                      catastrophic risk   catastrophic      implementation
legislative and regulatory                                       insurance law is    risk insurance    legal
framework and minimum                                            transmitted by      law is            documents
number of people in the                                          the General         transmitted to    referred to in
Program Area insured for                                         Secretary of the    the Parliament,   Article 71 of
bodily injuries against                                          Government          and the           the draft
catastrophic events                                              (Secrétariat        implementation    catastrophic
                                                         –       Général du          legal             risk insurance   5.85 million   5.85 million
                                                                 Gouvernement)       documents         law and
                                                                 to the relevant     referred to in    providing for
                                                                 Ministries, and     Article 71 of     the
                                                                 is adopted by the   the draft         effectiveness
                                                                 Government          catastrophic      of the
                                                                 Cabinet (Conseil    risk insurance    insurance
                                                                 du                  law and           scheme, are
                                                                                     providing for     adopted by the

                                                                     42
                              Total      As % of                                  Indicative timeline for DLI achievement
                            Financing     Total       DLI
                            Allocated   Financing   Baseline      CY2016          CY2017            CY2018          CY2019        CY2020
                             to DLI      Amount
                                                               Gouvernement)   the               Government
                                                                               effectiveness
                                                                               of the
                                                                               insurance
                                                                               scheme, are
                                                                               prepared by
                                                                               MEF and
                                                                               ACAPS


Allocated amount (US$,
                              34.5        17.25                     14.5              7                5               8            0
millions):
DLI 8: Establishment and                                                       The               The              FSEC
operationalization of the                                                      implementation    implementation   received
                                                                        -
FSEC to protect the                                                            legal             legal            initial
uninsured                                                                      documents         documents        financial
                                                                               referred to in    referred to in   contributions
                                                                               Article 71 of     Article 71 of    as per the
                                                                               the draft         the draft        provisions of
                                                                               catastrophic      catastrophic
                                                       -                                                          the
                                                                               risk insurance    risk insurance
                                                                                                                  catastrophic
                                                                               law regarding     law regarding
                                                                               the               the              risk
                                                                               establishment     establishment    insurance
                                                                               of the FSEC       of the FSEC      law
                                                                               are prepared by   are adopted by
                                                                               the MEF and       the
                                                                               ACAPS             Government
Allocated amount (US$,
                               25         12.5                          0             9                8               8            0
millions):
Capitalized front-end fee                              -                -             -                -                -           -
Allocated amount (US$,
                               0.5        0.25         -            0.5               0                0               0            0
millions):
Total Financing Allocated                                            35              49              36.67           47.67        31.66

                                                                   43
                               Total         As % of                                          Indicative timeline for DLI achievement
                             Financing        Total             DLI
                             Allocated      Financing         Baseline        CY2016           CY2017           CY2018           CY2019          CY2020
                              to DLI         Amount
(US$, millions):



                                                           Table 2. DLI Verification Protocol Table
#    DLI                         Definition/                 Scalability of       Protocol to evaluate achievement of the DLI and data/result verification
                         Description of achievement          Disbursements          Data            Verification                      Procedure
                                                             (Yes/No)          source/agency            Entity
1    The FLCN            DLI1 measures the evolution               No         Program                   IGAT          The Government of Morocco provides
     strategic           of the institutional                                 Progress Report/                        official documentation demonstrating
     orientation and     arrangements and                                     Secretariat                             that all agreed milestones have been
     governance          management of the FLCN as                                                                    reached each year. DLI results and
     structure are       well as the progress of the                                                                  accuracy of information will be
     redesigned with a   development of the national                                                                  independently verified.
     focus on disaster   integrated DRM strategy.
     risk reduction
                         Yr 1: All documents that are
                         required for the preparation
                         of: (i) the draft provisions to
                         be included in the Borrower’s
                         2017 budget law, regarding
                         the establishment of the
                         Steering Committee, and the
                         inclusion of local
                         governments (collectivités
                         territoriales) among the
                         beneficiaries of FLCN
                         financing; and (ii) draft
                         circulars (Circulaires) to be
                         issued by MoI regarding the
                         establishment of the National
                         Selection Commission and
                         the Secretariat. These
                         documents will reflect that
                         new strategic orientation of
                         the FLCN focuses on risk

                                                                              44
#   DLI           Definition/                Scalability of      Protocol to evaluate achievement of the DLI and data/result verification
          Description of achievement         Disbursements         Data            Verification                   Procedure
                                             (Yes/No)          source/agency           Entity
          reduction. Risk reduction is
          defined as an action resulting
          in an expected decrease in
          loss given the occurrence of a
          natural hazard—before a
          disaster event occurs.
          The Minister of Interior has
          decided on the annual
          allocation from the FLCN for
          the financing of Eligible Sub-
          projects. An annual allocation
          from the FLCN is defined by
          the inclusion of the
          allocations in the FLCN
          budget program (programme
          d’emploi). The minutes of the
          meetings of the governance
          bodies of the FLCN and the
          process of the CfP (launch,
          selection, and approval of
          sub-projects) will be verified.
          Yr 2: Evidence that: (i) (i) the
          Borrower’s 2017 budget law
          includes provisions regarding
          the establishment of the
          Steering Committee, and the
          inclusion of local
          governments (collectivités
          territoriales) among the
          beneficiaries of FLCN
          financing; and (ii) circulars
          (Circulaires) regarding the
          establishment of the National
          Selection Commission and
          the Secretariat have been


                                                              45
#   DLI           Definition/                Scalability of      Protocol to evaluate achievement of the DLI and data/result verification
          Description of achievement         Disbursements         Data            Verification                   Procedure
                                             (Yes/No)          source/agency           Entity
          issued by the MoI.
          In addition, an interactive
          FLCN website will be created
          which shall be accessible by
          the public and provide
          information on subproject
          eligibility, selection criteria,
          status and results, and shall
          provide a mechanism for the
          public to submit and track
          grievances and their
          resolution.
          Yr 3: Achievement will be
          measured by the fact that the
          Steering Committee, the
          National Selection
          Commission, the Secretariat
          and the FLCN website are
          maintained and fulfil their
          intended functions.
          Maintained and fulfill their
          intended functions means the
          governance arrangements
          specified in the Budget law
          and associated circulars, as
          well as the FLCN website are
          being implemented as
          planned.
          Yr 4: Achievement will be
          measured by the fact that the
          Steering Committee, the
          National Selection
          Commission, the Secretariat
          and the FLCN website are
          maintained and fulfil their


                                                              46
#   DLI           Definition/                Scalability of      Protocol to evaluate achievement of the DLI and data/result verification
          Description of achievement         Disbursements         Data            Verification                   Procedure
                                             (Yes/No)          source/agency           Entity
          intended functions.
          In addition, a national
          integrated natural DRM
          strategy will be prepared in
          line with the requirements of
          the POM. It is a document
          that assesses the lessons
          learned from FLCN’s
          experience to date and sets
          DRM goals and their
          priorities for Morocco. Risk
          management goals means an
          acceptable level of risk and
          resilience, and corresponding
          management structures and
          procedures, that Morocco
          will achieve at a stated point
          in the future. Preparation
          means production of the
          strategy ready for adoption
          by FLCN.
          Yr 5: Achievement will be
          measured by the fact that the
          Steering committee, the
          Selection Commission, the
          Secretariat and the FLCN
          website are maintained and
          fulfil their intended functions.
          In addition, the national
          integrated natural DRM
          strategy will be adopted.
          Adoption means formal
          approval of the document by
          FLCN Steering Committee
          (justified by the minutes) and


                                                              47
#   DLI                            Definition/              Scalability of      Protocol to evaluate achievement of the DLI and data/result verification
                           Description of achievement       Disbursements         Data            Verification                   Procedure
                                                            (Yes/No)          source/agency           Entity
                           publication of the strategy on
                           the FLCN webpage.
2   Cumulative             DLI2 measures the                Yes              Program            IGAT                The Government of Morocco provides
    amount of FLCN         cumulative amount of FLCN                         Progress Report/                       evidence on FLCN funds allocated to
    funds allocated to     funds allocated to eligible                       Secretariat                            eligible subprojects focusing on risk
    eligible subprojects   sub-projects as specified in                                                             reduction. DLI results and the accuracy
                           the POM.                                                                                 of information will be independently
                                                                                                                    verified.
                           The Steering Committee
                           following a recommendation
                           of the National Selection
                           Commission and based on a
                           set of clear eligibility and
                           selection criteria approves
                           annually a list of eligible
                           subprojects focusing on risk
                           reduction. Cumulative
                           amount of FLCN funds
                           allocated is calculated as the
                           cumulative sum of funding
                           from the FLCN for those
                           subprojects whose
                           proponents and their partners
                           have signed an FA with the
                           MoI and MEF. Focusing
                           means the primary and major
                           effort of a subproject. Risk
                           reduction means that the
                           eligible subproject’s outcome
                           is credibly expected to result
                           in lower losses (that is,
                           decreased deaths, injuries,
                           property loss and economic
                           activity) given the occurrence
                           of a natural hazard. Risk
                           reduction will need to be
                           documented in the

                                                                             48
#    DLI                         Definition/               Scalability of      Protocol to evaluate achievement of the DLI and data/result verification
                         Description of achievement        Disbursements         Data            Verification                   Procedure
                                                           (Yes/No)          source/agency           Entity
                        application forms submitted
                        for FLCN financing and be
                        measurable and verifiable
                        (for example, by flood maps
                        before and after project
                        implementation).
3    Minimum            DLI3 measure the percentage        No               Program             IGAT               The Government of Morocco provides
     percentage of      of funds allocated to non-                          Progress Report /                      evidence on FLCN funds allocated to
     FLCN funds         structural sub-projects                             Secretariat                            eligible non-structural subprojects. DLI
     allocated to       relative to the total of all                                                               results and accuracy of information will
     eligible non-      subprojects.                                                                               be independently verified.
     structural
                        The Steering Committee
     subprojects
                        following a recommendation
                        of the National Selection
                        Commission approves
                        annually a list of eligible non-
                        structural subprojects.
                        Percentage of FLCN funds is
                        calculated as the sum of
                        funding for non-structural
                        eligible subprojects versus all
                        eligible subprojects, both of
                        whose proponents have
                        signed an FA. Non-structural
                        subprojects are subprojects,
                        such as risk assessments,
                        planning, capacity building/
                        training, awareness raising
                        and early warning systems.34
                        A list of non-structural
                        projects will be specified in

34
  See
http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/COUNTRIES/EASTASIAPACIFICEXT/EXTEAPREGTOPRISKMGMT/0,,contentMDK:22239627~pagePK:
34004173~piPK:34003707~theSitePK:4077908,00.html and http://www.preventionweb.net/english/professional/terminology/v.php?id=505 for further
information.

                                                                            49
#   DLI                            Definition/               Scalability of      Protocol to evaluate achievement of the DLI and data/result verification
                           Description of achievement        Disbursements         Data            Verification                   Procedure
                                                             (Yes/No)          source/agency           Entity
                           the POM. For the purposes of
                           this project, small-scale
                           structural subprojects whose
                           total investment is less than
                           MAD 5 million are
                           considered non-structural.
4   Minimum                DLI4 measures the leverage        No               Program            IGAT                The Government of Morocco provides
    percentage of total    factor of FLCN financing.                          Progress Report/                       evidence on total financing sources of
    funding of eligible                                                       Secretariat                            eligible subprojects. DLI results and
                           The Steering Committee
    subprojects                                                                                                      accuracy of information will be
                           ensures that a minimum
    provided by the                                                                                                  independently verified.
                           percentage of additional
    entities responsible
                           financing is mobilized to
    for the
                           complement FLCN funding
    implementation
                           received by selected eligible
    and their partners
                           subprojects. Additional
                           financing would be mobilized
                           by entities responsible for
                           implementation and their
                           partners. Additional
                           Financing will need to be
                           confirmed in writing through
                           the FA. Minimum percentage
                           is measured by the financing
                           mobilized by entities
                           responsible for
                           implementation and their
                           partners relative to total cost
                           of subprojects as shown in
                           signed FAs. Entities
                           responsible for
                           implementation are those
                           entities submitting a
                           subproject’s application to
                           FLCN, and assume the
                           financial, management and
                           legal responsibility for the

                                                                              50
#   DLI                           Definition/                Scalability of      Protocol to evaluate achievement of the DLI and data/result verification
                          Description of achievement         Disbursements         Data            Verification                   Procedure
                                                             (Yes/No)          source/agency           Entity
                          subproject. They are likely to
                          include line ministries, local
                          and provincial governments,
                          public entities and state-
                          owned enterprises. Partners
                          are any other entity except
                          FLCN, who participate in the
                          project through financial,
                          management, beneficiary or
                          other mechanisms.
                          The verification is based on
                          the amounts mobilized by
                          partners as described in the
                          FA.
5   Cumulative value      DLI5 measures the value of         Yes              Program            IGAT                The Government of Morocco provides
    of total funding of   FLCN financing mobilized                            Progress Report/                       evidence that completed eligible
    completed eligible    for the completed projects                          Secretariat                            subprojects have achieved risk reduction
    subprojects           achieving their disaster risk                                                              targets. DLI results and the accuracy of
    achieving disaster    reduction targets.                                                                         the information will be independently
    risk reduction                                                                                                   verified.
                          The Steering Committee
    targets
                          provides evidence that
                          eligible subprojects achieve
                          their risk reduction targets.
                          Cumulative value of funding
                          is the sum of the total costs of
                          completed eligible
                          subprojects that have
                          received funding from FLCN.
                          A subproject is considered
                          completed when the
                          subproject proponent
                          provides FLCN (a) for
                          structural subprojects, a
                          Provisional Completion
                          Report issued as per Morocco


                                                                              51
#   DLI           Definition/               Scalability of      Protocol to evaluate achievement of the DLI and data/result verification
          Description of achievement        Disbursements         Data            Verification                   Procedure
                                            (Yes/No)          source/agency           Entity
          regulations and Cahier des
          Charges, and (b) for non-
          structural subprojects, a
          Declaration of Completion
          issued by the subproject
          proponent. Achieving disaster
          risk reduction targets means
          that eligible subprojects have
          achieved the targets
          determined by a baseline, as
          agreed at the selection stage
          and verified at project
          completion. Each
          subproject’s baseline and risk
          reduction targets shall be
          defined in the application
          form submitted for FLCN
          funding. Risk reduction
          targets vary depending on the
          type of risk reduction activity
          undertaken and could
          include:
             For flood protection
              projects: the number of
              people and value of
              economic assets within
              the mitigated flood risk
              zone (MFRZ), defined as
              the area within the pre-
              project 100 year flood
              zone, and outside the
              post-project 100 year
              flood zone;
             For earthquake
              protection projects:
              estimated reduction in


                                                             52
#   DLI                            Definition/               Scalability of      Protocol to evaluate achievement of the DLI and data/result verification
                           Description of achievement        Disbursements         Data            Verification                   Procedure
                                                             (Yes/No)          source/agency           Entity
                                loss (people not killed
                                and savings of economic
                                assets) to be achieved by
                                the project;
                            For early warning
                                systems: the number of
                                people within the area
                                served by an early
                                warning system;
                            For planning activities:
                                the estimated reduction
                                in loss (people not killed
                                and savings of economic
                                assets) achieved by
                                improved hazard
                                planning;
                            For capacity building
                                activities: number of
                                institutions and people
                                trained in improved risk
                                management practices.
                           Verification will be based
                           among other things on:
                           completion of project,
                           adherence to the FA and
                           adherence to the technical
                           specifications as defined in
                           the application documents
                           that were used to define the
                           reference values and disaster
                           risk reduction targets.
6   Minimum                DLI6 measures the                 No               Program            IGAT                The Government of Morocco provides
    percentage of          percentage of entities                             Progress Report/                       evidence of technical assistance and/ or
    entities responsible   responsible for the                                Secretariat                            training received. DLI results and the
    for implementation     implementation of sub-                                                                    accuracy of the information will be
    and their partners     projects financed by the                                                                  independently verified.
    having received        FLCN who received technical

                                                                              53
#   DLI                            Definition/               Scalability of      Protocol to evaluate achievement of the DLI and data/result verification
                           Description of achievement        Disbursements         Data            Verification                   Procedure
                                                             (Yes/No)          source/agency           Entity
    technical assistance   assistance and/ or training
    and/or training        relative to the total number of
                           implementing agencies.
                           The Steering Committee
                           provides evidence that
                           entities responsible for
                           implementation have
                           received technical assistance
                           and/ or training each year in
                           either technical or fiduciary
                           or social or environment
                           areas, per an Annual Capacity
                           Building and Training Plan.
                           Each year (starting in the
                           second year) an Annual
                           Capacity Building and
                           Training Plan is developed
                           that targets specific capacity
                           building and training needs
                           for entities responsible for
                           implementation and their
                           partners). Receiving technical
                           assistance or training is
                           defined for the purposes of
                           this DLI as have received at
                           least one training event (at a
                           minimum one person
                           attending one training event)
                           or a technical assistance
                           (consulting services
                           mobilized) in either technical
                           or fiduciary or social or
                           environment areas relevant to
                           the Program.
7   Adoption of the        Yr 1: The draft catastrophic      No               Program            SAI                 The Government, through MEF/ACAPS,
    catastrophic risk      risk insurance law is                              Progress Report,                       provides evidence of actual approval of

                                                                              54
#   DLI                           Definition/              Scalability of        Protocol to evaluate achievement of the DLI and data/result verification
                          Description of achievement       Disbursements           Data            Verification                       Procedure
                                                           (Yes/No)           source/agency            Entity
    insurance             transmitted by the General                        including                                the draft law, and preparation and
    legislative and       Secretary of the Government                       specific                                 adoption of implementation legal
    regulatory            (Secrétariat Général du                           information on                           documents referred to in Article 71 of
    framework and         Gouvernement) to the                              insurance aspects                        the draft catastrophic risk insurance law.
    minimum number        relevant Ministries, and is                       and copies of the                        The Government also provides written
    of people in the      adopted by the Government                         draft law and                            detailed evidence on the coverage
    Program Area          Cabinet (Conseil du                               copies of                                provided by the catastrophic risk
    insured for bodily    Gouvernement)                                     implementation                           insurance law, such as number of auto
    injuries against                                                        legal documents                          and property insurance policies sold.
                          Yr 2: The draft catastrophic
    catastrophic events                                                     referred to in                           DLI results and accuracy of information
                          risk insurance law is
                                                                            Article 71 of the                        will be independently verified.
                          transmitted to the Parliament,
                                                                            draft catastrophic
                          and the implementation legal
                                                                            risk insurance
                          documents referred to in
                                                                            law.
                          Article 71 of the draft
                                                                            MEF/ACAPS.
                          catastrophic risk insurance
                          law are prepared by the MEF
                          and ACAPS
                          Yr 3: The implementation
                          legal documents referred to in
                          Article 71 of the draft
                          catastrophic risk insurance
                          law are adopted by the
                          Government.
                          Yr 4–5: Actual coverage of
                          people by the catastrophic
                          risk insurance achieved. The
                          insurance program will
                          provide coverage against
                          property damage and bodily
                          injury (permanent disability
                          or death). Evidence shall rely
                          on the number of people
                          covered for bodily injury, and
                          data on the current insurance
                          market in Morocco; such that


                                                                            55
#       DLI                          Definition/              Scalability of        Protocol to evaluate achievement of the DLI and data/result verification
                             Description of achievement       Disbursements           Data            Verification                   Procedure
                                                              (Yes/No)            source/agency           Entity
                             number of automobile
                             liability insurance policies
                             sold, number of residential
                             property insurance policies
                             sold. Actual coverage means
                             the number of people in the
                             Program Area insured for
                             bodily injury against
                             catastrophic events.
8       Establishment and    Yr 2: The implementation         No                 Program              SAI               The Government, through MEF/ACAPS,
        operationalization   legal documents referred to in                      Progress Report,                       provides evidence of actual approval of
        of the FSEC to       Article 71 of the draft                             copies of legal                        the draft law, and preparation and
        protect the          catastrophic risk insurance                         documents                              adoption of implementation legal
        uninsured            law regarding the                                   referred to in                         documents referred to in Article 71 of
                             establishment of the FSEC                           Article 71 of the                      the draft catastrophic risk insurance law
                             are prepared by the MEF and                         draft catastrophic                     regarding the establishment of the FSEC.
                             ACAPS.                                              risk insurance                         The Government also provides written
                                                                                 law regarding the                      detailed evidence on the first financial
                             Yr 3: The implementation
                                                                                 establishment of                       contributions to the FSEC. DLI results
                             legal documents referred to in
                                                                                 the FSEC,                              and accuracy of information will be
                             Article 71 of the draft
                                                                                 MEF/ACAPS                              independently verified.
                             catastrophic risk insurance
                             law regarding the
                             establishment of the FSEC
                             are adopted by the
                             Government.
                             Yr 4: FSEC received initial
                             financial contributions as per
                             the provisions of the
                             catastrophic risk insurance
                             law



                                                              Table 3. Bank Disbursement Table

    #      DLI                Bank             Deadline for        Minimum DLI           Maximum DLI            Determination of Financing Amount to be
                                                                               56
                        financing      DLI                value to be           value(s) expected to   disbursed against achieved and verified DLI
                        allocated to   Achievement        achieved to trigger   be achieved for Bank   value(s) 4
                        the DLI                           disbursements of      disbursements
                                                          Bank Financing        purposes
1   The FLCN                35         Before closing             n.a.                    n.a.         Pass/ fail
    strategic                          date except for
                                                                                                       Yr 1 disbursements
    orientation and                    year 1, 2, and 3
    governance                         where the DLI                                                   a) (US$8 million) based on evidence of
    structure are                      value needs to                                                  preparation of: i) the draft provisions to be
    redesigned with a                  be met in each                                                  included in the Borrower’s 2017 budget law,
    focus on disaster                        year                                                      regarding the establishment of the Steering
    risk reduction                                                                                     Committee, and the inclusion of local
                                                                                                       governments (collectivités territoriales) among
                                                                                                       the beneficiaries of FLCN financing; and (ii)
                                                                                                       draft circulars (Circulaires) to be issued by the
                                                                                                       MoI regarding the establishment of the National
                                                                                                       Selection Commission and the Secretariat.
                                                                                                       b) (US$7 million) based on evidence that the
                                                                                                       Minister of Interior has decided on the annual
                                                                                                       allocation from the FLCN for the financing of
                                                                                                       Eligible Sub-projects.
                                                                                                       Yr 2 disbursements
                                                                                                       a) (US$7 million) based on evidence that (i) the
                                                                                                       Borrower’s 2017 budget law includes
                                                                                                       provisions regarding the establishment of the
                                                                                                       Steering Committee, and the inclusion of local
                                                                                                       governments (collectivités territoriales) among
                                                                                                       the beneficiaries of FLCN financing; and (ii)
                                                                                                       circulars (Circulaires) regarding the
                                                                                                       establishment of the National Selection
                                                                                                       Commission and the Secretariat have been
                                                                                                       issued by the MoI
                                                                                                       b) (US$7 million) based on evidence that an
                                                                                                       interactive FLCN website that provides public
                                                                                                       access to information, handles grievances, and
                                                                                                       reports on the M&E system, has been created.
                                                                                                       Yr 4 disbursements (US$3 million) based on


                                                                        57
#   DLI                  Bank           Deadline for     Minimum DLI           Maximum DLI            Determination of Financing Amount to be
                         financing      DLI              value to be           value(s) expected to   disbursed against achieved and verified DLI
                         allocated to   Achievement      achieved to trigger   be achieved for Bank   value(s) 4
                         the DLI                         disbursements of      disbursements
                                                         Bank Financing        purposes
                                                                                                      evidence that the Steering committee, the
                                                                                                      National Selection Commission, the Secretariat
                                                                                                      and the FLCN website are maintained. In
                                                                                                      addition a national integrated DRM and
                                                                                                      resilience strategy prepared by the Steering
                                                                                                      Committee.
                                                                                                      Yr 5 disbursements (US$3 million) based on
                                                                                                      evidence that the Steering Committee, the
                                                                                                      National Selection Commission, the Secretariat
                                                                                                      and the FLCN website are maintained. In
                                                                                                      addition, the national integrated DRM and
                                                                                                      resilience strategy was adopted by the Steering
                                                                                                      Committee.
2   Cumulative                25        Before closing    MAD 100 million        MAD 850 million      Formula-based
    amount of FLCN                          date
                                                                                                      Yr 1–Yr 5 disbursements will be made based on
    funds allocated to
                                                                                                      evidence of allocation of FLCN funds to
    eligible
                                                                                                      eligible risk reduction subprojects. For each
    subprojects
                                                                                                      MAD 1,000 of FLCN allocation to eligible risk
    focusing on risk
                                                                                                      reduction subprojects, US$ 29.4 may be made
    reduction
                                                                                                      available for withdrawal by the Borrower. The
                                                                                                      actual disbursement in each year is calculated
                                                                                                      according to:
                                                                                                      Formula: Loan amount allocated to the DLI
                                                                                                      divided by the DLI end-line value for CY20
                                                                                                      multiplied by the number by which the actual
                                                                                                      result achieved for a given CY exceeds the
                                                                                                      results achieved for the previous CY.
                                                                                                      In addition, for withdrawals to be made
                                                                                                      available to the Borrower, every year at least
                                                                                                      MAD 100 million will need to be allocated to
                                                                                                      eligible risk reduction subprojects from the


                                                                       58
#   DLI                  Bank           Deadline for      Minimum DLI           Maximum DLI            Determination of Financing Amount to be
                         financing      DLI               value to be           value(s) expected to   disbursed against achieved and verified DLI
                         allocated to   Achievement       achieved to trigger   be achieved for Bank   value(s) 4
                         the DLI                          disbursements of      disbursements
                                                          Bank Financing        purposes
                                                                                                       FLCN.
3   Minimum                   8           DLI value             ≥ 10%                  ≥ 10%           Pass/ fail
    percentage of                        needs to be
                                                                                                       Yr 2–Yr 5 disbursements (US$2 million in each
    FLCN funds                           meet in each
                                                                                                       year) based on evidence that the specified
    allocated to                         year starting
                                                                                                       percentage of FLCN funds are allocated to
    eligible non-                          from the
                                                                                                       eligible non-structural subprojects.
    structural                           second year
    subprojects                                                                                        In addition, for withdrawals to be made
                                                                                                       available to the Borrower, every year at least
                                                                                                       MAD 100 million will need to be allocated to
                                                                                                       eligible risk reduction subprojects from the
                                                                                                       FLCN (minimum condition for disbursement
                                                                                                       under DLI 2).
4   Minimum                   22           DLI value             30%                    50%            Pass/ fail
    percentage of                       needs to be met
                                                                                                       Yr 2–Yr 3 disbursements (US$8 million in each
    total funding of                      in each year
                                                                                                       year) based on evidence that a minimum level
    eligible                             starting from
                                                                                                       of additional funding was mobilized for
    subprojects                         the second year
                                                                                                       subprojects co-financed by the FLCN.
    provided by the
    entities                                                                                           Yr 4–Yr 5 disbursements (US$3 million in each
    responsible for                                                                                    year) based on evidence that a minimum level
    implementation                                                                                     of additional funding was mobilized for
    and their partners                                                                                 subprojects co-financed by the FLCN.
                                                                                                       In addition, for withdrawals to be made
                                                                                                       available to the Borrower, every year at least
                                                                                                       MAD 100 million will need to be allocated to
                                                                                                       eligible risk reduction subprojects from the
                                                                                                       FLCN (minimum condition for disbursement
                                                                                                       under DLI 2).
5   Cumulative value          40        Before closing             0              MAD 600 million      Formula-based.
    of total funding                        date
                                                                                                       Yr 3–Yr 5 disbursements will be made based on
    of completed

                                                                        59
#   DLI                  Bank           Deadline for      Minimum DLI           Maximum DLI              Determination of Financing Amount to be
                         financing      DLI               value to be           value(s) expected to     disbursed against achieved and verified DLI
                         allocated to   Achievement       achieved to trigger   be achieved for Bank     value(s) 4
                         the DLI                          disbursements of      disbursements
                                                          Bank Financing        purposes
    eligible                                                                                             evidence that the FLCN co-financed eligible
    subprojects                                                                                          subprojects achieve risk reduction targets. For
    achieving disaster                                                                                   each MAD 1,000 completed works of eligible
    reduction targets                                                                                    risk reduction subprojects, US$66.7 may be
                                                                                                         made available to the Borrower. The actual
                                                                                                         disbursement in each year is calculated
                                                                                                         according to:
                                                                                                         Formula: Loan amount allocated to the DLI
                                                                                                         divided by the DLI end-line value for CY20
                                                                                                         multiplied by the number by which the actual
                                                                                                         result achieved for a given CY exceeds the
                                                                                                         results achieved for the previous CY.
6   Minimum                   10           DLI value             50%                      50%            Pass/ fail
    percentage of                       needs to be met
                                                                                                         Yr 2 disbursements (US$4 million) based on
    entities                              in each year
                                                                                                         evidence that the minimum percentage of
    responsible for                      starting from
                                                                                                         entities responsible for implementation of
    the                                 the second year
                                                                                                         eligible subproject have received technical
    implementation
                                                                                                         assistance and/ or training.
    of eligible
    subprojects                                                                                           Yr 3–5 disbursements (US$2 million) based on
    having received                                                                                      evidence that the minimum percentage of
    technical                                                                                            entities responsible for implementation of
    assistance and/or                                                                                    eligible subproject have received technical
    training.                                                                                            assistance and/ or training.
7   Adoption of the                                                                                      Pass/ fail
    catastrophic risk
                                                                                                         Yr 1 disbursement (US$14.5 million) based on
    insurance
                                                                                                         evidence that the draft catastrophic risk
    legislative and
                                                                                                         insurance law is transmitted by the General
    regulatory
                                                                                                         Secretary of the Government ( Secrétariat
    framework and
                                                                                                         Général du Gouvernement) to the relevant
    minimum number
                                                                                                         Ministries, and is adopted by the Government
    of people in the         34.5       Before closing    5.85 million people   > 5.85 people in years


                                                                        60
#   DLI                  Bank           Deadline for     Minimum DLI           Maximum DLI            Determination of Financing Amount to be
                         financing      DLI              value to be           value(s) expected to   disbursed against achieved and verified DLI
                         allocated to   Achievement      achieved to trigger   be achieved for Bank   value(s) 4
                         the DLI                         disbursements of      disbursements
                                                         Bank Financing        purposes
    Program Area                             date          in years 4 and 5           4 and 5         Cabinet (Conseil du Gouvernement).
    insured for bodily
                                                                                                      Yr 2 disbursement (US$7 million) based on
    injuries against
                                                                                                      evidence that the draft catastrophic risk
    catastrophic
                                                                                                      insurance law is transmitted to the Parliament,
    events
                                                                                                      and the implementation legal documents
                                                                                                      referred to in Article 71 of the draft catastrophic
                                                                                                      risk insurance law and providing for the
                                                                                                      effectiveness of the insurance scheme, are
                                                                                                      prepared by the MEF and ACAPS.
                                                                                                      Yr 3 disbursement (US$5 million) based on
                                                                                                      evidence that the implementation legal
                                                                                                      documents referred to in Article 71 of the draft
                                                                                                      catastrophic risk insurance law and providing
                                                                                                      for the effectiveness of the insurance scheme,
                                                                                                      are adopted by the Government.
                                                                                                      Yr 4 disbursement (US$8 million) based on
                                                                                                      evidence that at least 5.85 million people are
                                                                                                      insurance for bodily injuries against
                                                                                                      catastrophic events, as per the catastrophic risk
                                                                                                      insurance law.
8   Establishment             25        Before closing             n.a.                  n.a.         Pass/ fail
    and                                      date
                                                                                                      Yr 2 disbursement (US$9 million) based on
    operationalization
                                                                                                      evidence that the implementation legal
    of the FSEC to
                                                                                                      documents referred to in Article 71 of the draft
    protect the
                                                                                                      catastrophic risk insurance law regarding the
    uninsured
                                                                                                      establishment of the FSEC are prepared by the
                                                                                                      MEF and ACAPS
                                                                                                      Yr 3 disbursement (US$8 million) based on
                                                                                                      evidence that implementation legal documents
                                                                                                      referred to in Article 71 of the draft catastrophic
                                                                                                      risk insurance law regarding the establishment

                                                                          61
  #    DLI               Bank           Deadline for   Minimum DLI           Maximum DLI            Determination of Financing Amount to be
                         financing      DLI            value to be           value(s) expected to   disbursed against achieved and verified DLI
                         allocated to   Achievement    achieved to trigger   be achieved for Bank   value(s) 4
                         the DLI                       disbursements of      disbursements
                                                       Bank Financing        purposes
                                                                                                    of the FSEC are adopted by the Government.
                                                                                                    Yr 4 disbursement (US$8 million) based on
                                                                                                    evidence that the FSEC received initial
                                                                                                    financial contributions as per the provisions of
                                                                                                    the catastrophic risk insurance law.
Note: n.a. = Not applicable.




                                                                     62
The FLCN was established by the 2009 Budget Law as a dedicated budget line (CAS, Compte d’Affection
Spéciale) within the MoI, in response to a series of natural catastrophes in Morocco, specifically the
floods in Gharb province in 2008. The total budget of the CAS-FLCN for the period 2009-2012 was
MAD 1960 million (USD 228 million), composed of an initial MAD 861 million donation from Saudi
Arabia in the immediate aftermath of the 2008 floods, MAD 300 million from the Hassan II Fund for
Economic and Social Development and MAD 800 million from the national budget over this four year
period (MAD 200 million per year). A total of MAD 830 million or 43% of the funds went to
reconstruction and repair of areas affected by the floods (e.g., damaged roads, irrigation infrastructure,
emergency program for housing flood victims and housing reconstruction, and support for post-disaster
business re-startup). In addition, funds were allocated to pre-disaster risk reduction measures and
preparedness, including flood protection works and construction or improvement of weather stations for
improved quality and accuracy of weather forecasts. This preventative investment portion represented
MAD 800 million or 40% of the FLCN’s 2009-2012 budget resources. The remaining MAD 310 million
(17%), was spent for emergency response preparedness, including equipment for the Civil Protection.
Flood protection works were constructed at 50 high priority locations in Tanger Fnideq, Nador, Al
Hoceima, Boulemane and Oujda. Other measures included the extension of weather radar coverage,
installation of flood warning dissemination systems, improving the density of the weather observation
network, strengthening the network of automatic observation systems, improving numerical weather
prediction models, development of data collection, and dissemination systems, bulletins and weather
alerts. As an example, the FLCN has also participated in funding, together with eight other central and
local government departments and public agencies, the construction of an underground tunnel of 7 km
(“Super Collecteur Ouest?) able to enhance the drainage capacities of the City of Casablanca and
evacuate excessive water flow towards the Atlantic Ocean. The construction started in 2014 and should be
completed by 2017.


                         Figure 1. FLCN allocations between 2009 and 2013
                                 National                                Ministry of
                                Meteorology,                            Equipement,
                                  10.80%                                  12.90%

                                                                            Ministry of
                                                           Repairs; 830     Agriculture,
                                                           MDH: 41.2%         7.70%
                 Department of Protection and                                    Ministry of
                 Water, 30.40% Reinforcement of                                Housing, 5.20%
                               monitoring and alert
                               systems: 800 MDH,                                 Ministry of
                               41.2%                                          Education, 4.10%


                                             Strengthening of
                                             response                     Ministry of Trade
                    Royal                    capacities: 310               and Insdustry,
                 Gendarmerie,                MDH ; 16%
                    0.50%          Civil Protection,            Ministry of 12.90%
                                        10.30%                Interior, 5.20%




                                                      63
                                FINANCE ACT N ° 40-08 FOR FISCAL YEAR 2009

          Creation of a special account entitled "Fund to fight against the effects of natural disasters" (FLCN)
                                                        Article 16a
 I. In order to enable the recording of transactions relating to the fight against the effects of natural disasters, as of 1
   January 2009, a special account is created, entitled "Fund to fight against the effects of natural disasters" whose
                                      authorizing officer is the Minister of Interior.
II. This account will trace:
Credit:
- The allocations from the general budget;
- Resources from the Hassan II Fund for Economic and Social Development ;
- Donations , legacies, grants and various contributions ;
- Other resources available to that fund in accordance with the laws and regulations
Debit:
- Expenditures for emergency response operations ;
- Expenditure on relief and assistance to the affected populations;
- Expenditures for programs aiming to improve the response capacities of the agencies specialized in the fight
against the effects of natural disasters;
- Expenditures for restoration or rebuilding of facilities that were damaged by natural disasters;
- Expenditures for the construction of various prevention infrastructures;
- Expenditures necessary to the fight against the effects of natural disasters.

III. The credits for expenses referred to above shall be paid to the budgets of ministerial departments, public
institutions, businesses and special Treasury accounts involved in operations against the effects of natural disasters.

Engagement in anticipation of the special account entitled "Fund to fight against the effects of natural disasters
(FLCN)




                                                            64
