Botswana
Country
Partnership
Framework
                 The date of the last Country Partnership Strategy was May 21, 2009

                                         CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
                                          (Exchange Rate as of May 13, 2015)
                                         Currency Unit = Botswana Pula (BWP)
                                                   BWP 9.8 = US$1
                                            WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
                                                 Metric System
                                                  FISCAL YEAR
                                                  April 1–March 31


                                      ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

AML       Anti-money laundering                                JICA        Japan International Cooperation Agency
ARV       Anti-retroviral                                      M&E         Monitoring & Evaluation
ASA       Advisory Services and Analytics                      MDG         Millennium Development Goals
BAIS      Botswana AIDS Impact Survey                          MFDP        Ministry of Finance and Development
                                                                           Planning
BCP       Botswana Congress Party                              MMEWR       Ministry of Minerals Energy and Water
                                                                           Resources
BDC       Botswana Development Company                         MOH         Ministry of Health
BDP       Botswana Democratic Party                            MTEF        Medium Term Expenditure Framework
BNAPS     Botswana National HIV/AIDS Prevention                MW          megawatt
          Support
BPC       Botswana Power Company                               NCD         Non-communicable disease
BTC       Botswana Telecommunications Company                  NDP         National Development Plan
CBM       Coal-bed methane                                     ODA         Official development assistance
CIWA      Cooperation in International Waters in Africa        PCG         Partial credit guarantee
CPF       Country Partnership Framework                        PEFA        Public Expenditure and Financial
                                                                           Accountability
CPS       Country Partnership Strategy                         PFM         Public Financial Management
CPI       Consumer price index                                 PPADB       Public Procurement and Assets Disposal
                                                                           Board
CPS CLR   Country Partnership Strategy Completion and          PPP         Public Private Partnership
          Learning Report
CWIS      Core Welfare Indicators Survey                       RAS         Reimbursable Advisory Services
DLI       Disbursement linked indicators                       REIPPP      Renewable Energy Independent Power
                                                                           Producers Procurement Program
DRM       Disaster risk management                             SACU        Southern African Customs Union
DWA       Department of Water Affairs                          SADC        Southern African Development
                                                                           Community
EDF      European Development Fund                           SCD         Systematic Country Diagnostic
ETSSP     Education and Training Sector Strategic Plan         SMEs        Small and medium enterprises
FDI       Foreign direct investment                            TA          Technical assistance
GDP      Gross domestic product                              TB          Tuberculosis

                                                          ii
GoB         Government of Botswana                           UDC         Umbrella for Democratic Change
HIES         Household Income and Expenditure Survey           UNICEF      United Nations International Children's
                                                                           Emergency Fund
HIMS         Health Information Management Systems             UNDP        United National Development Program
HIV/AIDS     Human Immunodeficiency Virus / Acquired           USAID       U.S. Agency for International
             Immune Deficiency Syndrome                                    Development
IBRD         International Bank for Reconstruction and         WBG         World Bank Group
             Development
ICT          Information and Communications technology         WAVES       Wealth Accounting and the Valuation of
                                                                           Ecosystem Services
IFC         International Financial Corporation               WHO         World Health Organization
                                                               WTO         World Trade Organization
IMF          International Monetary Fund
IPF          Investment Project Finance                        WUC         Water Utilities Corporation




                              IBRD                       IFC                             MIGA
       Vice President         Makhtar Diop               Nena Stoiljkovic                Keiko Honda
       Director               Guang Zhe Chen             Oumar Seydi                     Ravi Vish
       TTLs                   Elene Imnadze              Saleem Karimjee                 Stephan Dreyhaupt
                              Ivan Velev                 Eric Soubeiga
                                                         Aimilios Chatzinikolaou




                                                         iii
                                FY16–20 COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP FRAMEWORK
                                                                     FOR
                                                  REPUBLIC OF BOTSWANA


                                                     TABLE OF CONTENTS


I.       INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................. 1

II. COUNTRY CONTEXT AND DEVELOPMENT AGENDA .................................. 2
      2.1    Social and Political Context .................................................................. 2
      2.2    Recent Economic Developments .......................................................... 4
      2.4    Development Challenges....................................................................... 8

III. WORLD BANK GROUP PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY .................................... 11
      3.1    Government Program and Medium-term Strategy .............................. 11
      3.2   Proposed World Bank Group Partnership Framework ....................... 12
      3.2.1 Lessons Learned ................................................................................. 12
      3.2.2 Overview of World Bank Group Strategy........................................... 14
      3.2.3  Engagement Areas and Objectives Supported by the WBG Program 18
      3.3   Implementing the FY16–20 Country Partnership Framework ............ 26
      3.3.1 Financial Envelope .............................................................................. 26
      3.3.2 Government Procurement and Financial Management Systems ......... 28
      3.3.3 Partnership and Coordination .............................................................. 28

IV. MANAGING RISKS TO THE CPF PROGRAM ................................................. 30

ANNEXES ........................................................................................................................ 32
    Annex 1. CPF Results Framework ........................................................................ 33
    Annex 2. Systematic Operations Risk-Rating Tool .............................................. 40
    Annex 3. Development Partners and Areas of Engagement ................................. 42
    Annex 4. Completion and Learning Report .......................................................... 43
    Annex 5. Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management ................ 63
    Annex 6. Operations Portfolio (IBRD and Grants) ............................................... 64
    Annex 7. Statement of IFC’s Held and Disbursed Portfolio ................................. 65
    Annex 8. Summary of Stakeholder Consultations ................................................ 66
    Annex 9: Map of Republic of Botswana ............................................................... 67

                                                              List of Tables

          Table 1. Main challenges………………………………………………………....11
          Table 2. CPF indicative IBRD lending program FY16–20……………………....27

                                                     List of Boxes and Figures

Box 1. Filtering process to define CPF areas of engagement………………………….…14
                                                                       iv
Figure 1. Poverty headcount rates………………………………………………………….....6
Figure 2. Botswana shared prosperity………………………………………………………...6
Figure 3. Inequality index …………………………………………………………................7
Figure 4. Poverty rate by regions……………………………………………………………..7
Figure 5. Cascading SCD, CPF priorities and government development areas……………..15
Figure 6. CPF areas of engagement and strategic objectives…….………………………….16
Figure 7. Expected combined contribution of proposed instruments to CPF results
(Engagement Area 1) …………………………………………………………......................19
Figure 8. Expected combined contribution of proposed instruments to CPF results
(Engagement Area 2) …………………………………………………………......................23
Figure 9. Expected combined contribution of proposed instruments to CPF results
(Engagement Area 3) …………………………………………………………......................26


                                        Acknowledgements

  This World Bank Group CPF was initiated under the guidance of Asad Alam, former Country
  Director, AFCS1, and finalized under the guidance of Guang Zhe Chen, Country Director,
  AFCS1, and Saleem Karimjee, Senior Manager, CAFE4. The core team included Elene
  Imnadze, Ivan Velev, Thomas Farole, Lolo Tibone, Kathrine Plangemann, Catriona Purfield,
  Chunlin Zhang, David Sislen, and Patrick Osewe. Aimilios Chatzinikolaou, Eric Soubeiga, and
  Stephan Dreyhaupt contributed from the IFC and MIGA.
  The CPF team would like to thank the government representatives at the Ministry of Finance
  and Development Planning (MFDP), Office of the President, National Strategy Office (NSO),
  various line ministries, and state institutions for their valuable contribution. In particular, the
  team wishes to recognize the guidance provided by Hon. Kenneth Matambo, Minister, MFDP;
  Mr. Solomon Sekwakwa, Permanent Secretary, MFDP; Dr. Taufila Nyamadzabo, Secretary for
  Economic and Financial Policy, MFDP; Mr. Cornelius Dekop, Secretary for Development and
  Budget, MFDP; Mr. Uttum Corea, Director General, NSO.

  The core team is grateful to development partners and representatives from civil society and
  the private sector who helped inform this CPF through several in-country consultations.

  Finally, this team effort benefited from the numerous contributions from across the World Bank
  Group, reflecting the keen interest in the Botswana country program. Our special thanks go to
  Makhtar Diop, Regional Vice President, Jan Walliser, in his capacity of former Director for
  Strategy and Operations, and Jamal Saghir, Senior Regional Advisor, AFRVP for their support
  and guidance. Many thanks to Andreas Blom, Ben Gericke, Cemile Hacibeyoglu, David Lord,
  Emily Weedon, Glenn-Marie Lange, Manuel Salazar, Marcus Wishart, Nalini Kumar, Nelli
  Khachatryan, Ross Hughes, Sheila Dutta, R. Sudharshan Canagarajah, Victor Sulla, Vladislav
  Vucetic, Xiaonan Cao, and many colleagues who provided substantive contribution, comments
  that helped strengthen and sharpen the client focus of this CPF.




                                                      v
                                   I.   INTRODUCTION
1.       This document details the scope and the main elements of the Country Partnership
Framework (CPF) with the Republic of Botswana for FY16–20. The previous Country
Partnership Strategy (CPS), considered by the Board on May 21, 2009 and completed in 2013 has
built a solid foundation to design the new World Bank Group (WBG) program. The proposed CPF
supports the government’s ongoing National Development Plan (NDP10) that has recently been
extended until 2017. It also reviews the new NDP11 now under preparation.

2.      The Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) was completed after Botswana’s General
Elections in October 2014. The SCD drew on all available research and benefited greatly from
the series of stakeholder consultations conducted in the country between March and September,
2014. The report was well received by the national authorities and sent for information to the Board
on March 31, 2015.

3.      The SCD identified the following priority development challenges: (a) Despite rapidly
declining poverty, low job creation keeps inequality extremely high; (b) With the weakening of
traditional growth drivers, a new growth model is needed that is jobs-intensive, export-oriented,
and private sector-driven; (c) Despite broad and well-intentioned investment, inclusion barriers
remain; (d) Sustainability is threatened as resource vulnerability challenges long-term growth and
inclusion.

4.      The CPF also considers the lessons learned and key suggestions presented in the
FY09–13 Country Partnership Strategy Completion and Learning Report (CPS CLR). In
particular, it notes the importance of assessing the client’s implementation capacity and providing
implementation support. The CPF maintains a strong Advisory Services and Analytics (ASA) and
technical assistance (TA) program. This was seen as a key strength of the CPS, and highly valued
by the client. Proper consideration is given to introducing robust monitoring and evaluation
systems since the latter were deemed essential for assessing the impact of government programs.
The findings of the World Bank Country Survey 2013 are also taken into consideration.
        
5.      During the two year period (FY14–15) not covered by any strategic document, the
WBG engagement focused on implementation support to the lending operations initiated
during the CPF FY09–13. No new lending operations were approved during FY14-15. The
dialogue started with the Government of Botswana (GoB) in 2011 on economic diversification
issues led to the government’s request for Reimbursable Advisory Services (RAS) in business
environment, trade and industry policy, infrastructure services, access to finance, public sector
management, and innovation and skills development. As a result, the Economic Diversification
Competitiveness RAS was signed in February 2013 and implemented during 2015. 




                                                 1
              II. COUNTRY CONTEXT AND DEVELOPMENT AGENDA
        2.1 Social and Political Context

6.      Botswana has a stable political environment and regular elections cycle. The 11th
General Elections were held on October 24, 2014. The ruling Botswana Democratic Party (BDP)
retained majority in the National Assembly, though its presence was reduced by eight seats and
held 37 of the 57 seats. The Umbrella for Democratic Change (UDC) came second with 17 seats,
and the Botswana Congress Party (BCP) had third place with three seats. President Seretse Khama
Ian Khama was sworn in for his second term and the new cabinet was formed in November, 2014.
These elections saw a high turnout of around 824,000 registered voters and were considered the
most competitive for the BDP since the country’s independence in 1966. The elections again
attested to Botswana’s consistent record of uninterrupted, free and fair democratic elections.

7.      Botswana, an upper middle-income country1, has been one of the world’s fastest
growing economies. Although land-locked, Botswana is strategically located at the center of the
southern region of Africa and can position itself to be a land bridge to South Africa in the south,
Namibia and Angola in the west, and Zambia, Zimbabwe and eastern Africa in the east. With a
small, open economy, the country has signed numerous bilateral and regional trade agreements. It
is a member of the South African Development Community (SADC), South African Customs
Union (SACU), and the World Trade Organization (WTO). In the 2015 survey, Botswana ranked
as the second most free economy in the Sub-Saharan Africa region on the Economic Freedom
Index (EFI) and thirty-sixth in the world. The EFI scores for management of government spending
and investment freedom are among the highest against the regional and world averages.

8.      The country has maintained solid macroeconomic stability and financial sector
resilience in times of crisis. Good governance and prudent macroeconomic and natural resources
management by the Botswana authorities during the last three decades have gained the country an
impressive increase in the GDP per capita. Botswana made solid progress on governance indicators
in recent years. The Ibrahim Index of African Governance ranked the country third in 2014,
reflecting a steady rise of its score over the past five years. The latest press release on the Ibrahim
Index (2015) suggests slight deterioration in certain areas underpinning the governance ranking
for Botswana. The SCD and CPF address a few of these areas within the scope of WBG
engagement. The country also maintained the first position in Africa and was 31st globally in the
Transparency International Corruption Perception Index of 2014. 

9.      The country’s growth over the past decade has been strongly pro-poor. The largest
decline in poverty occurred in rural areas, where it fell by almost 21 percentage points. Several
factors drove reductions in poverty and improvements in welfare. These included a substantial
increase in wages and other formal and informal labor-related incomes, reductions in
unemployment, and growth in labor market participation in rural areas. Government subsidies—
through programs such as the Integrated Support Program for Arable Agricultural Development
(ISPAAD)—continue to support agricultural incomes and employment.



1
    2014 GNI per capita (Atlas method) US$7,240. Source: World Bank.

                                                             2
10.     Fast rural growth pre-defined poverty reduction in Botswana, reducing the gap
between rural and urban areas and subsequently reducing income inequality. In addition to
moving people out of poverty, Botswana successfully transitioned them to higher levels of
consumption. While only 36 percent of the population had consumption of more than twice the
poverty line in 2003, this increased to 53 percent by 2010. Massive poverty and inequality
reduction were accompanied by significant regional and rural urban convergence. Yet, despite
Botswana’s significant economic and social improvements, it still grapples with unequal
distribution of wealth, high levels of poverty and unemployment, and HIV. The official
unemployment rate in 2009-2010 was 17.8 percent, and HIV/AIDS prevalence remains at 22
percent among adults 15-49 years.2

11.     Unemployment decreased between 2003 and 2010, as the number of employed in the
working age population grew about 3 percentage points. However, most employment growth
came through heavily subsidized smallholder agriculture; therefore, sustainability of these jobs
remains questionable, especially since they are low productivity jobs. Participation rates have been
declining across all demographics and locations. The situation among the young is especially
severe. The private sector employs less than 20 percent of the working age population, failing to
deliver quality employment for a growing youth population. Annual private sector job creation is
only equivalent to one job for every six young Batswana entering the labor market. The small and
sluggish non-farm informal sector cannot absorb a large and growing inactive labor force. The
declining labor productivity indicates a slow pace of economic transformation and competitiveness
improvement.

12.     Botswana has made progress in almost all Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).
It has already achieved or is likely to achieve most of the targets, except for the under-five and
infant mortality targets (MDG 4) and the maternal mortality target (MDG 5). Botswana’s main
maternal health challenge is to reduce maternal deaths that occur in hospitals and clinics, mostly
because of sub-standard care and poor decisions in the referral process. To this end, the
Government of Botswana, through the MDG Acceleration Compact (also called MAF Action
Plan), prioritized and is implementing the interventions that have near-term impact to achieve its
commitment. The government also reaffirmed its commitment to the new UN Development
Framework for fifteen years beyond 2015.

13.    Botswana’s long-term development challenge is not only to maintain the current
growth performance, but to ensure growth that leads to job creation. A growth model
underpinned by an enabling business environment that creates private sector jobs would reduce
inequality—an important prerequisite for more poverty reduction. In addition, a focus on human
development that encompasses health, human capital, freedom, and voice would be critical for
ensuring sustained economic gains and for achieving the twin goals of eliminating extreme poverty
and shared prosperity. In the education sector, reform initiatives will have to be aligned with the
needs of the labor market. They will have to provide for reducing the country’s reliance on
diamonds, shifting toward a knowledge-based economy. In health, priority must be given to
building systems that address the multiple needs of the population (including the poor and most


2   Source: UNAIDS, 2013


                                                 3
vulnerable groups), rather than only a few specific diseases. Finally, the social protection system
has to be strengthened to target social assistance programs and improve benefits for the poor. 

14.    Pursuing these second generation reforms would require complex solutions. Bank
financing, while small relative to total public financing, could be of strategic importance. The
WBG can offer value as a knowledge provider and broker, and support implementation that
achieves demonstrable results.

    2.2 Recent Economic Developments

15.     After more than 40 years of sustained, often rapid growth, Botswana’s economy
experienced a sharp contraction of almost 8 percent during the global economic crisis in
2009. This followed the collapse of the global diamonds market, highlighting the country’s macro
and fiscal vulnerability and dependence on diamonds. The economy has rebounded well, having
grown almost 6 percent per year since 2010.

16.    Continued demand in the global market for rough diamonds, offset by declining
prices in other key export commodities, resulted in a stable economic performance for
Botswana in 2014. GDP growth slowed slightly to 5.0 percent, down from 5.8 percent in 20133.
Value-added growth in the mining sector moderated to just over 4 percent, while growth in the
non-mining private sector remained steady at around 5 percent, driven by strong growth in the
services sector. This marks a continuation of the post-crisis structural change of the Botswana
economy, which has seen the services sector jump from around 40 percent of GDP in the two
decades prior to the crisis to 60 percent of GDP in 2014.

17.    This structural shift to services is mirrored by a similar shift from export-led to
consumption-led growth in the post-crisis years. Household consumption rose from less than
40 percent of GDP in the pre-crisis years to 54 percent between 2012 and 2013, with per capita
consumption expanding nearly 9 percent annually in real terms between 2004 and 2013. In 2014,
however, consumption growth decelerated sharply, with household consumption growing just 3.6
percent and government spending remaining flat.

18.     The recent slowdown in consumption highlights concerns about rising household debt
and the sustainability of consumption-led growth. Between 2004 and 2013, bank lending to
households grew by more than 20 percent annually. This comes off a low base—bank credit to the
private sector in Botswana still represents only around 30 percent of GDP. But this is almost double
the level of a decade ago and comes amidst a backdrop of stagnant employment and wage growth.

19.     Weak local demand is reflected in the sharp fall in inflation in recent years. After
sitting well above the Bank of Botswana’s 3–6 percent target range for much of the last decade,
Consumer Price Index (CPI) inflation fell within the range during 2013, and recently falling oil
prices helped inflation reach a low of 3.8 percent in December 2014. In an effort to stimulate
investment and consumption, and given the stable, low inflation outlook, the Bank of Botswana
reduced the base interest rate by 100 basis points in February 2015 to 6.5 percent in 2013— its
lowest level in 25 years.

3
    Source: 2015 Budget Speech, Ministry of Finance and Development Planning;

                                                        4
20.     Following four straight years of deficit (averaging more than 5 percent of GDP)
between 2009 and 2012, higher diamond shipments and prices returned the current account
to a significant surplus in 2013 (at 10.4 percent of GDP). The recent improvements in mineral
exports have enabled Botswana to rebuild its reserves, which were severely depleted by the crisis.
The collapse of exports during the crisis led to a fall in foreign exchange reserves from 90 percent
of GDP in December 2008 to just 55 percent of GDP in December 2013. Slow rebuilding has
brought foreign exchange reserves to P79 billion, an all-time peak in pula terms, sufficient to
finance at least 13 months of imports.

21.     While export growth overall is positive, Botswana has come to rely even more on
diamonds, which in 2013 accounted for almost 90 percent of goods exports and more than
80 percent of total exports, up from just 61 percent in the five years prior to the crisis. One
factor contributing to this is the evolution of exchange rates. Between January 2013 and December
2014, the pula depreciated almost 17 percent against the US dollar (the trading currency for
diamonds) while appreciating 10.5 percent against the South African Rand (the main market for
non-minerals exports and the principal source of imports). Nonetheless, diamond exports comprise
a significant share of domestic value added, accounting for almost 23 percent of total GDP. 

22.     Economic growth in Botswana is set to slow on the back of weaker diamond prices
and slower growth in key trading partners. With the slowdown in demand in China and some
other large economies, diamond prices have fallen by 14.7 percent between mid-2014 and mid-
2015 and output is also being cut. In addition, growth is also slowing sharply in South Africa, one
of Botswana’s key export partners. Real GDP growth is forecast to ease to 2.6–3.0 percent in 2015
and to recover to the 4 percent range in 2016–17 as cuts in diamond production help stabilize
prices4. 

23.     Still, with diamonds comprising one-third of government revenues and transfers from
the Southern African Customs Union (SACU) a further one-quarter, there will be a
significant fiscal deterioration. The fiscal balance is expected to swing from a surplus of 14.5
percent of GDP in 2014 to a deficit of 2 percent of GDP in 2015, and then remain at a slight deficit
between 2016 and 2017. But public debt remains low (it had peaked 26.5 percent of GDP in 2011-
2012 and fell to 22.3 percent of GDP in 2014-2015, with domestic debt at just 7 percent5). With
the significant savings amassed in the Pula Fund and high levels of international reserves,
Botswana has ample fiscal space to smooth this shock and avoid any sharp adjustment measures.
But the deterioration in the growth and fiscal outlook only underscores the risks associated with a
high dependency on diamonds and therefore the need for diversification. Botswana has to bolster
its international competitiveness and attract investment in tradable sectors outside of mining.
Foreign direct investments (FDI) represent on average just over 3 percent of GDP annually.

24.   Keenly aware of its overexposure to diamonds, along with its heavy reliance on
revenues from the SACU customs pool, the government has continued to exercise fiscal
prudence to build deeper financial buffers. The Ministry of Finance and Development Planning
(MFDP) has made a formal proposal to Parliament to adopt two new fiscal rules. The first of these

4
    Source: Draft 2016-2017 Budget Strategy Paper; MFDP; August, 2015
5
    Ibid.

                                                       5
rules aims to broaden revenues sources by requiring non-mining revenues to amount to at least 30
percent of non-mining GDP. The second aims to force tighter controls on spending and ensure
greater long-term savings by requiring that 40 percent of mineral revenues are set aside in an inter-
generational savings fund.

25.    The slow down in growth also shows that government spending must be both efficient
and effective to support growth and poverty alleviation. The government faces two main
challenges on the expenditure side: reducing the public wage bill and improving the efficiency of
spending on public investment projects. While annual growth of the wage bill has continued to fall
since FY10-11, expenditures on wages remain consistently above budgeted levels—20 percent
above in the case of FY12-13. Underspending against the capital budget has been a consistent
problem; in FY12-13 and FY13-14 development budget was underspent by an average 20 percent.
The International Monetary Fund plans to conduct an Article IV consultation at the end of 2015.

26.     Poverty declined sharply and living standards improved in Botswana over the last
decade. Between 2003 and 2010, poverty fell from 30.6 percent to 19.4 percent. The largest
decrease in poverty incidence occurred in the rural areas, and poverty had become more urban
(figure 1). This rapid reduction in poverty stemmed mainly from increasing agriculture incomes,
including subsidies, and demographic changes that led to a reduction in household sizes and
dependency ratios. Improvements in rural area labor market outcomes, access to education,
progressively from primary to secondary and tertiary education, as well as increases in the amount
of household loans, were important sources of poverty reduction and welfare improvements. Social
transfers also benefited the poor, accounting for about 3.9 percent of the reduction.

27.     Poverty reduction has been accompanied by significant improvements in shared
prosperity. Consumption per capita among the bottom 40 percent of population grew 4.9 percent
annually in real terms between 2003 and 2010, compared with just 1.1 percent for the upper two
quintiles. Botswana’s performance on the “shared prosperity indicator” was among the best in
Africa, although just average compared with other upper middle income countries (figure 2).
Consumption growth in rural areas was far above urban areas. And in urban areas, per capita
consumption actually declined for the top 40 percent of the income distribution between 2003 and
2010, suggesting the possibility of a squeeze on the urban middle class.




                                                 6
Figure 1: Poverty headcount rates6                                   Figure 2: Botswana shared prosperity




Source: World Bank Poverty Assessment, 2015

28.     Inequality remains high but has fallen significantly. Between 2003 and 2010, inequality
expressed by the Gini coefficient fell from 64.7 to 60.5, with a majority of the fall caused by
welfare improvement in the rural areas, while inequality in the cities had increased slightly (figure
3). With a Gini of 60.5, Botswana remains one of the most unequal countries in the world.
Demographic characteristics such as household size and number of children—in conjunction with
the changes in the geographical location, level of education and labor participation—play a
significant role in explaining the inequality.

29.     Despite these positive trends in poverty and shared prosperity, poverty remains a
serious concern in Botswana. Poverty has a strong regional dimension, with acute levels found
in more remote areas, most prominently in the far northwest, as well as in the west and southwest
of the country (figure 4). It is also closely linked to specific demographic indicators. Children,
large households, households with low educational achievement, and the unemployed or inactive
all suffer disproportionally from poverty. Moreover, a large fraction of the population remains
vulnerable to a significant risk of falling back into poverty. This risk is still higher among rural
households that depend on small-scale subsistence farming.

Figure 3: Inequality index (Gini)                                    Figure 4: Poverty rate by regions, 09/10




6 The
     National poverty rate calculated at national poverty line as defined by Statistics Botswana. Extreme poverty rate calculated
 based on food portion of the national poverty line as defined by Statistics Botswana. US$1.25 per day is the internationally
 comparable measure of extreme poverty, which measures the share of the population with consumption per capita less than $1.25
 PPP a day expressed in the 2005 prices.


                                                               7
      2.4 Development Challenges

30.     Botswana’s key development challenge is to find a new growth model that creates
sufficient, broad-based employment. While Botswana has made substantial progress in poverty
reduction over the past decade, both poverty and inequality remain high for a country of its income
level. This is because growth in Botswana, being driven by the minerals sector, has not been linked
to job creation. Therefore, the SCD concludes that eliminating poverty and improving the welfare
of the bottom 40 percent of the population will require moving away from Botswana’s traditional
growth model. That model has depended on extractives and involved channeling diamond
revenues through the government, with subsequent high investment in education, health, and
infrastructure. While the model has served well over several decades, it also has significant
weaknesses: (i) it has been inadequate in generating jobs, contributing to high inequalities, and (ii)
it has created a strong dependency on the state, both as the main investor and employer in the
economy.

31.     Transition to a new growth model would only be possible by developing a competitive
and export-oriented private sector. The private sector in Botswana remains shallow, albeit
entrepreneurs are emerging. The formal private sector created just one job for every six new
entrants to the labor market over the past decade. The SCD argues that a more outward-oriented
private sector, particularly in employment intensive sectors where Botswana can exploit global or
regional comparative advantage, would be key to sustaining poverty reduction. As the domestic
economy is small, the success of private sector development will depend on export markets.
Botswana’s firms need to be better integrated into regional value chains, which requires addressing
trade policy and trade facilitation barriers. The inward-looking investment environment needs to
be reformed, and the high costs of operating in Botswana need to be addressed to encourage
entrepreneurs to invest in export-oriented activities. Acknowledging that the process of necessary
structural changes will take time, the SCD focuses on increasing the opportunities and returns to
self-employment by raising productivity of smallholders and microenterprises.

32.     Sustainable job creation for the poor and vulnerable, especially youth and women, is
essential for addressing the twin goals. The sharp decline in unemployment over the last
decade— from 23.9 percent to 17.2 percent between 2002-2003 and 2010, was shared across
gender. Still, unemployment for males decreased more significantly than for females, resulting in
a much larger gap between female and male unemployment—from 4.7 to 7.0 percentage points.
Participation trends show some important differences across gender. Even though female
participation remained relatively constant, while male participation declined substantially, the
male participation rate remains more than 13 percentage points higher than the female rate.

33.     The trends in participation and employment vary across age cohorts. While the
differences are not dramatic, it is clear that the older population has gained at the expense of the
younger population. The biggest decline in employment came in the 25–34 age group, while the
biggest growth happened in the 55–64 age group. Within Botswana’s labor market, the formal
private sector accounts for little more than 39 percent of total employment, with less than 20

                                                  8
percent of the working age population earning a wage in the private sector. The failure of the
formal private sector to deliver quality employment, especially to the growing youth population,
is a significant challenge and a serious barrier to structural transformation of the economy. In
addition, the employment growth to date—coming in subsistence agriculture, public sector, and
local non-tradables—raises major concerns about sustainability.

34.     A step change in the productivity of Botswana’s firms is dependent on substantial
improvements in human capital. The SCD notes that, despite huge public investment in the
education sector (around 8.5 percent of GDP), outcomes are not only unequal but also weak across
the board. The shortfalls of the education system coupled with a labor market failure to create
employment opportunities, restricts the long-term prospects for youth —the segment of the
population already impacted most by high unemployment. Ensuring equitable access to the
secondary level of diverse education and training options would be especially critical for a
diversified and inclusive economy.

35.    The SCD identifies health challenges as a major factor hindering individual capacity
and contributing to poverty in Botswana. The SCD lists the health barriers to skills acquisition
and labor market participation, in particular childhood malnutrition, and the impact of disease
(especially HIV) on female participation in income-earning activities. The SCD also highlights
that while Botswana has one of the most progressive anti-retroviral (ARV) programs in the world,
high HIV prevalence (at 22 percent of the adult population 15–49 years) is a major source of
vulnerability for the country. Indeed, the free ARV program is itself a source of fiscal vulnerability,
adding a huge rise in healthcare spending (per capita health spending in Botswana rose 12 percent
per year between 1995 and 2012).

36.    Botswana’s geography and low population density causes health service delivery to
be resource-intensive, especially at decentralized levels. Strengthening and sustaining health
systems, including hard-won gains in both HIV/AIDS prevention and treatment, poses a special
challenge, especially in a context of reduced donor funding. While much of the health focus in
Botswana has been directed toward communicable diseases, particularly HIV/AIDS, non-
communicable diseases (NCDs) are also a growing problem. These diseases already account for
an estimated 30 percent of deaths in the region and will become the leading cause of morbidity
and mortality by 2030. The long-term care needs of chronic diseases, both communicable and
NCDs, pose an increasing and substantial challenge to the health system. Multi-drug resistant
tuberculosis (TB) and extensively drug-resistant TB are also emerging challenges in Botswana,
primarily among migrant worker populations.

37.     Despite strong political commitment, progress on key maternal and child health
indicators has stalled in recent years. Botswana’s child malnutrition and mortality estimates
remain high and are not commensurate with national investments to improve child health and
survival. An examination of child malnutrition in Botswana reveals that stunting rapidly increases
to over 40 percent within the first 24 months of life after which it stabilizes at around 30 percent—
a pattern typically associated with challenges in infant feeding and child care practices and a high
infectious diseases burden in young children. Recent studies have indicated that low-birth weight
infants and stunted children may be at greater risk of chronic diseases, such as diabetes and heart
disease, than children who start out well-nourished. Furthermore, more than half of all deaths of
children under five in Botswana are a result of preventable diseases. Improving the health
                                                  9
environment would be essential for ensuring that all individuals contribute to productivity and are
in a position to enjoy adequate human development outcomes.

38.     Focusing on infrastructure and policies for water and sanitation is key to sustainable
growth of formal commercial activities, sustainable livelihoods, and quality human
development outcomes. None of Botswana’s growth opportunities will be achieved over the long
term if sustainable sources of water are not available, if new technologies are not adopted, and if
pricing policies are not reformed to ensure efficient use of water. And addressing the major gaps
in access to sanitation will be critical for ensuring improved livelihoods and reducing disease and
malnutrition. Botswana’s success in ensuring wide access to clean water is notable, with more than
95 percent of the population having access to improved drinking water sources. However, access
to a piped water supply is uneven, ranging from 80 percent in Gaborone to 20–30 percent in some
other urban centers; and only 42 percent of rural households have access to proper sanitation. In
addition, some 33 percent of all water supply in Botswana is lost through the Water Utilities
Corporation (WUC) distribution system; Botswana’s wastewater re-use practices are limited and
fall well short of the country’s ambitious objectives.

39.     The SCD finds electricity supply to be a major infrastructure challenge for Botswana.
Domestic generation capacity is inadequate to meet the increasing demand. Electricity imports
from the region are not available during peak load times to fill the substantial electricity supply
gap, which keeps growing. Botswana will thus need to add a substantial power generation capacity.
The country will also have to continue developing its electricity transmission and distribution
infrastructure and strengthening regional integration. Energy efficiency and demand-side
management should also be part of the solution. Access to electricity in the off-grid rural areas
remains inadequate and is a key constraint to reducing rural poverty. Developing renewable
energy, which Botswana has in abundance (solar energy), is important both for adding bulk
generation supply to the power system, strengthening its sustainability, and for increasing off-grid
electricity access in rural areas.

40.     Adopting key reforms within Botswana’s social protection system could add
substantial savings to these programs, which could then be re-invested in expanding benefits
to poor households to help reduce extreme poverty. The government commits around 4.4
percent of GDP to social protection spending, which is playing an important role in poverty
reduction. The simulated poverty headcount at the national poverty line is 25 percent lower than it
would be in the absence of social protection transfers (19.4 versus 24.3). However, the
effectiveness of the social protection programs can be improved to increase their contribution to
poverty and inequality reduction. Significant gaps and overlaps in coverage remain, including a
number of poor households not receiving adequate support, along with a large group of non-poor
who receive benefits and a significant proportion of people enrolled in multiple programs.
Prioritizing social protection reform in the short term seems an obvious first step to addressing the
twin goals.

41.    Finally, the SCD identifies the modernization of the public sector and improved
management of increasingly scarce natural resources as priority interventions for
sustainable progress on the twin goals. To address challenges and maintain sustainability, public
investment management, project management, and program delivery will have to be improved.
This will depend on adopting modern technologies, systems and processes, and on introducing
                                                 10
systematic and meaningful processes for monitoring and accountability. Strengthening public
sector performance through improved public service management, a government-wide system of
performance M&E and removing bottlenecks to service-delivery are increasingly important
challenges. Over the medium term, planning systems will have to be set up that take account of
the (often irreversible) implications on critical resources. Table 1 presents the main constraints
highlighted by the SCD as having fundamental impact on the twin goals.

                                     TABLE 1. MAIN CHALLENGES

     High inequality
                                                      Low rural access to sanitation and
     Small, domestic private sector focused           electricity
      on non-tradable
     High structural unemployment/low job            Water scarcity
      creation
                                                      Natural resource vulnerability
     Poor outcomes of health and nutrition
                                                      Medium-term fiscal vulnerability
     Inadequate educational outcomes



42.    The development priorities of the government of Botswana reflect many aspects of the
challenges identified by the SCD.


           III. WORLD BANK GROUP PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
    3.1 Government Program and Medium-term Strategy

43.     The national development priorities were presented in Botswana’s Vision 2016:
Towards Prosperity for All. The government implementation program is formulated in the
NDP10. The NDP10 saw course corrections during its mid-term review in March 2013; the new
parliament extended the implementation period of the NDP10 until the end of March 2017 to allow
for better transition to NDP11 and harmonization with the new vision document. Under the
amended NDP10, four thematic areas have strategic priority for the government: (i) economy and
employment; (ii) social upliftment; (iii) sustainable environment; and (iv) governance safety and
security.

x   Economy and employment. Addressing this priority is seen through the lens of economic
    diversification and through establishment of a policy environment favorable to private sector
    development and conducive to attracting FDI. Acknowledging the shortage of skilled labor
    and its adverse effect on production and economic growth, the short-term strategy focuses on
    policy interventions that allow easy access to needed skills outside the country. Skills and
    reforms of the education system are considered medium to long-term priorities. Investing in
    infrastructure is critical for the growth of the tourism, mining, and agriculture sectors. The
    ICT national program is expected to be one of the main drivers of the country’s social and
    economic transformation through effective application of ICT for e-government, e-commerce,
    e-health, and e-education.

                                                11
x   Social ‘upliftment.’ The priorities in this thematic area will be placed on social development
    and health interventions, including HIV/AIDS. Some of the primary goals are for poverty
    eradication, adequate social protection, youth empowerment, affordable, quality health care,
    and prevention of new HIV infections. To achieve these goals, a multi-sectoral approach has
    been adopted. Socio-economic empowerment schemes, implemented to enhance social
    welfare, include the flagship programs of Poverty Eradication, Remote Area Development,
    and the Youth Empowerment Scheme. This also includes interventions that provide
    consumption support to the poor and vulnerable through cash and in-kind transfers. Some of
    the priority interventions aimed at supporting affordable healthcare and HIV/AIDS services
    include (i) strengthening primary health care; (ii) establishing cross-sectoral links to tackle the
    underlying causes of disease; (iii) intensifying public awareness; (iv) adopting HIV prevention
    strategies; (v) strengthening the Health Information Management Systems (HIMS); and (vi)
    greater mobilization and better utilization of resources.

x   Sustainable environment. Botswana is now developing policies, strategies, and plans that
    support the conservation and protection of natural resources and promote the use of renewable
    energy as alternatives. The country is also adopting and mainstreaming global multi-lateral
    environmental agreements and protocols for pollution prevention and control, sustainable
    utilization of natural and cultural resources, and climate change. The enactment of the Water
    Act intends that enough water is available for future development. During the remainder of
    NDP10, measures will be implemented to promote reuse, recycling, and reduction of water
    use in all sectors of the economy. The NDP10 also envisages effective adaptation and
    mitigation climate actions. This process is expected to mainstream climate change
    considerations into national macroeconomic and sectoral policies, planning, and budgeting.

x   Governance. The priorities in this area are to strengthen the efficiency and effectiveness of
    the public sector for improved service delivery and enhance accountability and transparency.

44.    The NDP10 priorities and the emerging areas of focus in the new long-term Vision
Framework correlate strongly with the recommendations of the World Bank’s Systematic
Country Diagnostic. The Framework for a Long Term Vision for Botswana, currently under
preparation, identifies the following five strategic priorities: (i) eradicating extreme poverty and
reducing inequality; (ii) strengthening human development outcomes; (iii) diversification and
export-led growth and employment; (iv) balancing growth and environment sustainability; and (v)
deepening democracy and strengthening governance. After broad national consultations, the new
Vision document is expected to be adopted in December 2015.


    3.2 Proposed World Bank Group Partnership Framework

       3.2.1   Lessons Learned

45.     The CPS FY09–13 Completion and Learning Report was prepared in December 2014.
The CPS included four pillars. Pillar I focused on public sector effectiveness and had four
objectives. Pillar II concentrated on increased effectiveness of HIV/AIDS prevention efforts and
included one objective. Pillar III dealt with increased economic competitiveness and was the
                                                 12
largest pillar both in lending and analytical work. It had ten objectives. Pillar IV focused on the
environment and covered six objective. Each objective indicator was evaluated and rated as either
being achieved, mostly achieved, partially achieved, or not achieved. The CPS CLR rates the
program performance as moderately unsatisfactory across all four pillars, as most of the outcome
indicators were only partially achieved. The report’s overall ranking for Bank performance as good
reflects the Bank’s effort since the beginning of FY13 to address implementation problems with
substantial budget increases and stronger implementation teams.

46.     The CPS FY09–13 covered the Bank’s re-engagement with Botswana after a long
hiatus. While the results were less than anticipated, the Bank has developed a solid partnership
with the government that bodes well for future Bank assistance to Botswana, particularly in
analytical and advisory work. The report identifies the following lessons for the design of the new
CPF:
x Provide a candid risk assessment of the development results and link risk levels with the
    intensity of the implementation support. The CPS CLR concludes that the Bank
    overestimated implementation capacity and therefore did not provide adequate
    implementation support during the initial period. It was only in FY13, when task teams and
    implementation support resources were strengthened, that implementation problems began to
    be managed effectively.
x Engage early in the preparation process with full due diligence to inform client and
    management decisions, even if the Bank participates with partial obligations.
    Specifically, the CPS CLR suggests that, in the case of the power project, had there been
    closer scrutiny of the contractors, the plant design, legal agreements, the capacity of the client,
    and contract supervision arrangements before approving the Partial Credit Guarantee (PCG),
    problems facing the plant today might have been identified.
x Establish relevant, clear and measurable indicators to ensure an objective assessment of
    the program performance. The CPS CLR notes that overly ambitious indicators used for the
    CPS undermined the realism of its objectives. The new CPF is advised to provide candid
    explanation of the challenge with identifying concrete results indicators, given the early stage
    of the lending operations.
x Deliver a strong program of ASAs and TAs that the client values. The CPS CLR notes
    that the government uses and appreciates the Bank’s ASA and TA. It contributed to the policy
    dialogue and often yielded follow-up activity, such as the ongoing RAS on economic
    diversification and competiveness. This suggests that the overall success of Bank ASA and
    TA work should make it a key component of the next program.
x Provide prompt response to client needs and emerging opportunities through
    representation on the ground. The CPS CLR states that establishment of a Bank office in
    Botswana headed by experienced Bank staff has enhanced the dialogue with the government,
    helped to identify new areas of involvement (the RAS, and the Wealth Accounting and the
    Valuation of Ecosystem Services, WAVES), and provided crucial assistance to
    implementation support missions.
x   Establish robust monitoring and evaluation systems to assess the impact of government
    programs. In particular, the CPS CLR notes the MFDP concern about the lack of ability to
    evaluate the impact of programs and policy interventions and to apply lessons learned to future
    interventions. The new CPF is advised to build on the work under the RAS to assure that
    adequate monitoring and evaluation (M&E) systems are in place.

                                                  13
47.     The CPF consultations with the stakeholders were conducted in the country in March,
2015. These consultations involved government counterparts, representatives from the civil
society and private sector, and key development partners. The consultations provided an
opportunity to again validate the SCD conclusions and priorities identified, as well as the proposed
structure of the new CPF, addressing the government’s strategic priorities in water and sanitation,
social protection, education and health (see annex 8). 

        3.2.2   Overview of World Bank Group Strategy

48.     The proposed CPF FY16–20 aims at supporting Botswana in addressing national
priorities of eradicating abject poverty, reducing inequality, and promoting job creation. The
CPF builds on the priority interventions identified in the SCD and focuses on the areas with strong
country ownership and client demand. Box 1 presents the selectivity filters applied: (i) alignment
to the government’s own development program and requests for WBG support to date; (ii) focus
on priority areas identified by the SCD; (iii) comparative advantage and experience of the WBG
globally and in-country as well as vis à vis other development partners in the country.

                   Box 1: Filtering process to define CPF areas of engagement




 Filter 1: Alignment with government program. Of the four development areas of the government’s
 program (NDP10 described above), the CPF engages in the following three: (i) economy and
 employment; (ii) social upliftment; and (iii) sustainable environment.

 Filter 2: SCD priority areas. The SCD identified eleven main challenges that were grouped under the
 six priority areas, as follows: (i) facilitating a competitive, export-orientated private sector; (ii) raising
 productivity of smallholder and microenterprises; (iii) improved access to water and sanitation; (iv)
 improving health and education outcomes by reducing the disease burden and raising and aligning
 skills; (v) reforming social protection to reduce fragmentation and improve targeting, efficiency, and
 links; and (vi) modernizing the public sector through improved technology, management, and systems
 of accountability.

 Filter 3: WBG comparative advantages. Clients seek WBG assistance because of its ability to bring
 together global knowledge, technical assistance, financial assistance, and policy dialogue in the
 delivery of concrete results. This filter seeks to identify the context specific comparative advantage.
 Since its re-engagement with Botswana, the WBG has deepened its engagement in a number of
 sectors, including energy, health, water and sanitation, environment, and transport. The recent
 technical assistance products have also triggered program development in social protection and
 education. Moreover, the RAS instrument has scaled up activities in areas in which the Bank was not
 active before, such as governance, public and private sector development.



                                                       14
49.     Following the selectivity logic above, the six fundamental SCD priorities were narrowed
down further and grouped under the three priority engagement areas for the CPF as presented in
figure 5.

       Figure 5: Cascading SCD, CPF priorities and government development areas




                                             CPFProrityEngagement                     Government
              SCDPriorities
                                                      Areas                           DevelopmentAreas


       Facilitatingacompetitive,export
      orientedprivatesectorbyaligning
           incentivesandimproving              Yes.PrivatesectorͲled,       Economyand
                  connectivity                    jobsͲintensivegrowth                   Employment


       IncreasingthereturnstoselfͲ
          employmentbyraising
      productivityofsmallholdersand                       No
             microenterprises




         Ensuringimprovedaccessto          Yes.Strengthenedhumanand               Sustainable
            waterandsanitation                       physicalassets                   environment



       Improvinghealthandeducation
           outcomesbyreducingthe
        diseaseburdenandraisingand
                 aligningskills
                                                  Yes.EffectiveResource                  Social
                                                       Management                         Upliftment

        Reformingsocialprotectionto
          reducefragmentationand
         improvetargeting,effeciency
                andlinkages



        Modernizingthepublicsector                                                    Governance,
        throughimprovedtechnology,                                                     securityand
                                                             No
         managmentandsystemsof
               accountability                                                                safety




                                                           15
50.     The WBG proposed program will focus on (i) promoting private sector-led, jobs-
intensive growth; (ii) strengthening human and physical assets; and (iii) supporting effective
resource management. These areas of engagement and related objectives, as presented in figure 6
are interlinked. A set of interventions proposed under each area will together bring about the
greatest impact on achieving the twin goals of eliminating absolute poverty and boosting shared
prosperity.


                     Figure 6: CPF areas of engagement and strategic objectives


                        CPFAreasofEngagementandStrategicObjectives




            AREA1
                                                         AREA2                                                      AREA3
    PromotingPrivate
     SectorͲled,JobsͲ                      StrengtheningHumanand                                      SupportingEffective
    intensiveGrowth                            PhysicalAssets                                         ResourceManagement




                                  OBJECTIVE:                       OBJECTIVE:                    OBJECTIVE:
                                  Improving                                                                       OBJECTIVE:
    OBJECTIVE:     OBJECTIVE:                                   Improving       OBJECTIVE:     Improving                       OBJECTIVE:
 Addressingkey                   equitable    OBJECTIVE:    efficiencyand    Upgrading    theefficiency      Creating   Strengthening
                    Promoting    accessand    Improving    sustainability                                       national
  constraintsto                                                                 roadsand          and                           natural
                      private   relevanceof     health        ofwater                                       performance
  development                                                                    increasing   effectiveness                      resource
                      sector       senior      outcomes       supplyand                                       management
     ofnonͲ                                                                     connectivity      ofsocial                    management
                     growth       secondary                     sanitation                                       framework
 diamondsector                                                                                   protection
                                  education                       services                          system




51.    The WBG program could evolve over time as the government finalizes the National
Vision beyond 2016 and progresses with NDP11 preparation. The CPF performance and
learning review, due by the time of NDP11 approval (2017), will reconfirm the alignment of the
Bank’s engagement with the country’s development priorities as well as consider the emerging
ones. This approach builds on the experience under the previous CPS and allows the WBG to
maintain adaptability in the implementation of its program and remain relevant to the policy
dialogue with the government. At this stage the CPF FY16–20 envisages increased engagement in
the social sectors, such as education, health and social protection, while reducing direct
involvement in the environment sector. This flexible approach will enable the WBG to identify


                                                              16
new areas of potential collaboration with government and stimulate demand for WBG products in
SCD priority areas not currently covered, such as energy and public sector modernization. 

52.     The SCD and the Government’s program have identified modernization of the public
sector as a fundamental enabler for private sector development. The limited scale and capacity
of the private sector is often hampered by the domestic business environment. Government
protection and lack of incentives, have not been very effective in increasing the firm
competitiveness. Some of the biggest challenges with competition arise in those sectors where the
parastatals play a dominant role - energy, transport, and communications – resulting in
underinvestment and lack of competition. The limited capacity and will to implement privatization
and public-private partnerships (PPPs) narrows the scope for domestic private sector investment,
raising the costs of entrepreneurial activity and lowering the service quality of inputs. However,
during the consultations, the GoB made it clear that it intends to address the broader public
administration modernization challenge with its own resources and does not see the need for a
lending operation in this area. Therefore, the CPF aims to contribute to addressing governance and
public sector management challenges in two ways – (a) through policy advice and technical
assistance for building PPP capacity and modernizing procurement; and (b) by mainstreaming
interventions through sector engagement and operations. Also the new lending operations in
education, social protection, and water sectors envisage substantial support to institutional aspects
by enhancing operational tools and processes, developing management information systems, and
strengthening monitoring and evaluation. The WBG will also continue to engage through RAS as
the GoB considers the latter a more appropriate instrument for public sector management
engagement.

53.     Gender dimension is linked to the jobs agenda because, despite significant gains over
the past decade, the labor market still reflects substantial barriers to the inclusion of women
in Botswana. Gender will therefore be integrated into the CPF results framework as it cuts across
the engagement areas and several objectives. Gender disaggregated education, health and social
protection indicators will be introduced for the respective lending operations as they are prepared.
The gender gap is especially large among the young—in the 20–24 age cohort, where nearly 47
percent of the population is either unemployed or inactive. The impact of HIV/AIDS also differs
markedly by gender. As noted in the Botswana AIDS Impact Survey (BAIS) IV Statistical Report
(2013), male and female HIV prevalence patterns show differential peaks, with women’s
prevalence peaking (at 50.6 percent) at an earlier age (35–39 age cohort), in comparison with
men’s prevalence, which peaks (at 43.8 percent) in the 40–44 age group. For ages below 50 years,
female prevalence was generally higher than male prevalence, while beyond age 50, male
prevalence was higher. And while the gender gap is narrow on measures of overall poverty (20.5
percent of females versus 18.2 percent of males), female-headed households are significantly more
likely to be poor. Fifty-eight percent of poor households are headed by females— a gap that has
widened over the past decade. Thus, gender dimensions will continue to be integrated in operations
and analytical work.

54.    Botswana is seeing changes in rainfall patterns and longer drought periods, which are
being attributed to climate change. As droughts and floods are expected to increase, climate
change is expected to put pressure on the country’s water resources and to adversely affect a range
of sectors, such as subsistence and commercial agriculture, energy, mining, and tourism. And
although naturally induced disasters cause significant economic losses in the national and local
                                                 17
GDPs, Botswana’s response to disasters is mainly reactionary. The country is vulnerable to at least
nine naturally induced hazards, including droughts, floods, wild land fires, storms, and agriculture
and health hazards. However, the data on disaster losses are not used to inform the country’s short-
term or long-term development plans. The CPF will therefore respond to the impact of climate
change as a cross-cutting theme. These vulnerability issues will be addressed through the Bank’s
ongoing regional work with SADC. The Bank will explore opportunities for engaging at the
country level as well.

       3.2.3 Engagement Areas and Objectives Supported by the WBG Program

Engagement Area 1: Promoting private sector-led, jobs intensive growth

55.     Establishing an environment for private sector-led, jobs-intensive growth is a key
prerequisite for the country’s shifting to a growth model that does not depend on extractives
and the public sector. Botswana’s transition to such a model is constrained by a combination of
factors: administrative and regulatory burdens, policy environment, and dominance of
state/parastatals that crowd out the private sector, raise input costs, and jeopardize quality. Current
industrial and trade policy is biased against investment in tradables; integration in regional and
global markets is limited. In addition, skills and competency gaps and poor work ethic are
exacerbated by difficult access to work permits for importing skills. Low productivity of
agriculture and livestock smallholders limits the potential of the non-farm private sector. Non-farm
self-employment and microenterprises are relatively small in size and cannot absorb the large
structurally unemployed population. The CPF proposes a strong program of technical and financial
support to address policy shortcomings and provide long-term capital for private projects (see
figure 7).
   Objective 1.1: Addressing key constraints to the development of non-diamond sectors

56.     The WBG has been assisting the GoB in implementing its strategies and policies in
economic diversification and competitiveness through the ongoing Economic Diversification
and Competitiveness RAS program. The first RAS assignment aimed at accelerating the
implementation of reforms in five priority areas: (i) business environment, (ii) trade and industrial
policies, (iii) infrastructure, (iv) access to finance, and (v) skills and innovation. Implementation
of most of the activities will be completed in the timeframe of this CPF. IFC is implementing the
business environment component (a little less than half of the total first assignment under the
program) and will continue to engage in Botswana as a joint practice and deliver new areas in the
RAS as identified by the client. The Bank will build on the outcomes of this program to explore
opportunities for future engagement and generate demand for support. Under the second
assignment, which will continue into the new CPF period, technical support will be delivered to
the Public Procurement and Asset Disposal Board (PPADB) as the agency implements its
devolution and capacity building strategy.

57.    The WBG will aid in improving trade facilitation and transparency in Botswana by
supporting the establishment of the Botswana Trade Information Portal. The Trade Portal will be
a website and database system that contains all regulatory trade-related information for import,
export, and transit. This information—comprising all laws, regulations and other legal
instruments—will be aggregated on the Trade Portal and presented dynamically in response to

                                                  18
trader queries. The goal is that traders would be able to see, in response to a single query, all the
obligations they need to comply with in order to import or export a specific good. Establishment
of a Trade Portal will also help Botswana become compliant with commitments under the WTO
Bali Agreement on Trade Facilitation.

   Objective 1.2: Promoting private sector growth

58.    Botswana’s small population limits the market potential for private sector
enterprises, thereby limiting opportunities for IFC from the WBG to play a significant role in the
country’s private sector. But IFC can still bring both its advisory and investment services to bear
while also taking an opportunistic approach.

59.     Advisory services:
a.      IFC’s PPP advisory will, at the request of government, explore and develop solutions to
areas where private sector expertise and capital could support the public sector, including in the
areas of renewable energy (e.g., solar), water and sanitation, transport, health, and education.

60.      Investment services:
b.       An emerging theme for IFC in Botswana is small and medium enterprises (SME) and
financial inclusion. IFC will seek to deepen and widen the financial sector through providing
capital and capacity building to the banking sector, and support non-bank financial institutions that
transform their business models. IFC will also leverage experience from the highly successful
MSME (Micro, Small and Medium-sized Enterprises) finance program with BancABC, which
culminated in the bank’s recognition (by the Global and Finance Review) as the best SME Bank
in the country. IFC will continue to look for opportunities to support expansion of local financial
institutions outside of Botswana (given the small size of their home market).
c.       Other areas of consideration include the private provision of social services such as
education and health, commercial agri-business, and tourism and hospitality.

  Figure 7: Expected combined contribution of proposed instruments to the CPF results

                                                                         CPFINSTRUMENTS:
     CPFOBJECTIVES:                    CPFEXPECTED RESULTS:
                                                                         ͲEconomicDiversification
     ͲAdressingkey                    ͲExportdiversified              andCompetitiveness
     constraintsto                                                     (RAS)
     developmentofnonͲ                ͲReformsimplemented
     diamondsectors                    toimprovebusiness             ͲBotswanaTrade
                                        environment                      Facilitation(TA)
     ͲPromotingprivate
     sectorgrowth                      ͲInvestmentsmobilized           ͲIFCInvestmentsand
                                                                         AdvisoryServices



Engagement Area 2: Strengthening human and physical assets

61.    The WBG will support Botswana along the top two SCD priorities aimed at ensuring
sustainable income and employment opportunities for the bottom 40 percent of the
population: (i) improving human development outcomes and ensuring that individuals can

                                                 19
contribute to growth and competitiveness of the economy; and (ii) upgrading physical
infrastructure to improve connectivity and close gaps in access to basic services in rural areas,
particularly sanitation, but also access to electricity. The SCD points out that despite heavy
investments in education, test scores and labor market outcomes indicate serious gaps in
knowledge, poor skills alignment, and poor “intangible” skills (work ethic, communication, etc.).
Inadequate education outcomes eventually lower the potential for self-employment activities and
reduce private sector investment in employment-creating activities by lowering productivity.

62.     Health is a major factor hindering individual capacity and contributing to poverty in
Botswana. This includes the health barriers to skills acquisition and labor market participation, in
particular childhood malnutrition, and the impact of disease (especially HIV) on female
participation in income-earning activities. The Bank’s contribution through policy advice and
targeted investments would address the quality of and equitable access to secondary and tertiary
education, thus establishing stronger grounds for lowering youth unemployment, a faster transition
to the labor market, increased earnings, and, over time, to shared prosperity. Building on positive
outcomes of the Bank-supported HIV/AIDS prevention program, the Bank would broaden the
scope of its engagement to address the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of both non-
communicable and communicable diseases, as well as institutional constraints hampering the
quality and efficiency of health service delivery.
        
63.     The SCD observes that access to water resources has always been a critical
determinant of well-being in Botswana. Despite significant improvements in access to essential
services, inequities in access and quality persist. Piped water supply service coverage ranges from
80 percent in Gaborone to 20–30 percent in some other urban centers, and service quality in a
number of areas remains below the government’s policy objectives. Sanitation remains a serious
gap; only 64 percent of the population, and just 42 percent in rural areas, has access to improved
sanitation. Expansion of a sustainable piped water supply and sewerage services, as well as overall
water security, are critical for reducing poverty and inequalities in the country. The Bank’s
engagement will support lowest-cost, sustainable solutions to help Botswana achieve higher levels
of coverage and improved services (see figure 8).

   Objective 2.1: Improving equitable access and relevance of senior secondary education

64.    Inadequate education outcomes represent a significant barrier to much-needed
productivity improvements and competitiveness. Sustainable economic and employment
growth depends on the ability of the education system to equip the country’s workforce with skill
sets that meet market needs. Moreover, higher quality and relevance of education for the
disadvantaged would lead to improved job and earnings prospects, and lower inequality.

65.     Acknowledging the vital role of education as a pre-requisite for a productive
workforce, which is necessary for sustainable economic growth, the government is finalizing a
five year Education and Training Sector Strategic Plan (ETSSP) that aims at providing an overall




                                                20
policy and strategic framework for the sector. The ETSSP is currently with the cabinet for
approval.

66.     To support implementation of the ETSSP, the Bank has initiated consultations with
government counterparts on the scope and nature of the interventions under the proposed lending
operation. The project will address the gaps faced by the sector through the interventions that will
focus on improving the relevance of curricula, education, developing qualifications for teachers
and trainers, upgrading school infrastructure, and increasing efficiency in education resources
management. The proposed operation is expected to generate improvements in student learning
outcomes and contribute to better skills alignment with market needs. This means greater
employability of the graduates, including better pathways to upper- and post-secondary education
and life-long learning.

   Objective 2.2: Improving health outcomes

67.     Botswana will address the challenge of maintaining the quality and coverage of the
health system, particularly given its small, dispersed population. Addressing the HIV/AIDS
and tuberculosis epidemic, including elimination of mother-to-child transmission, remains a
priority. But NCDs as well as other diseases, such as drug-resistant TB and potentially malaria,
are a growing issue (NCDs are expected to become the leading cause of morbidity and mortality
by 2030). The Ministry of Health (MoH) was recently restructured to better address decentralized
service delivery and now has a strategy to address the growing burden of NCD. The NCD strategy
explicitly capitalizes on existing health sector resources, facilities, and capacities. There is a high
political commitment to addressing health challenges in Botswana, which over recent years has
translated into increasing health expenditures.

68.     To date, the Bank’s health sector engagement has been through the Botswana
National HIV/AIDS Prevention Support (BNAPS) Project that closed on March 31, 2015. The
Bank is discussing options for future cooperation with counterparts to improve coverage and
efficiency of prioritized HIV/AIDS/TB and other critical health services. Also, through the
ongoing Botswana Health Sector Specific Public Expenditure Review and Fiscal Space Analysis,
the Bank aims to assist the government in gathering evidence on efficiency and sustainability at
the sector level, and discussing the findings within the context of the macro economy and the
country’s development objectives. This analytical work will contribute to deliberations on the
sustainability of HIV/AIDS financing as well as on broader health financing. It will also help
ensure adequate resources for the post 2015 Development Agenda, which calls for clearer
articulation of the links between health and development.

   Objective 2.3: Improving efficiency and sustainability of water supply and sanitation
   services

69.    The provision of water and wastewater services presents a significant challenge to the
government’s efforts to sustain economic growth, stimulate diversification, address poverty
eradication, improve health and sanitation services, and ensure more equitable wealth
distribution. In 2008, the Government of Botswana launched an ambitious reform program that
included the re-alignment of roles and responsibilities within the water sector. The reform

                                                  21
incorporated a number of key recommendations from the 2006 National Water Master Plan
Review to introduce a series of policy and regulatory instruments for improving water demand
management and water use efficiency. Investments in wastewater re-use and reclamation schemes
were identified as a strategy to enhance water supply security and improve operational efficiency
of wastewater services.

70.    The Bank provided support to the Ministry of Minerals Energy and Water Resources
(MMEWR) to implement water sector reforms through two fee-based service agreements
over the period 2008–2010. Interventions were considered successful, with the government
making substantial progress in moving forward the reform agenda. The Bank has also been
providing support to the MMEWR through a recipient-executed grant (US$2 million) under the
multi-donor trust fund for Cooperation in International Waters in Africa (CIWA). This project
provides technical assistance to support MMEWR in assessing the viability of water resource
development options for Botswana to access water from the Highlands of Lesotho.

71.     The Botswana Water Security and Efficiency Project proposed under this CPF will
improve efficiency and sustainability of water supply and sanitation services as well as
increase capacity for wastewater management and re-use in selected systems. The project will
finance high priority strategic water supply investments in selected systems operated by the Water
Utility Corporation (WUC), serving about six urban areas. The project will also support and
strengthen water sector institutions—including the MMEWR, Department of Water Affairs
(DWA), and WUC —to further develop, refine, and advance the sector reform process. It will
enable engineering design and supervision, project management/auditing, and technical studies
and training and capacity development, including specialized skills as required.

72.     The project is expected to include the following four components: (i) service expansion
and improvement, including support to WUC for the development of priority infrastructure to
increase coverage and quality of services, and to improve the operational efficiency of the urban
water and sanitation system, including non-revenue water reductions and demand management;
(ii) national wastewater enhancement, which will support WUC’s efforts to improve the
operational efficiency and enhance the capacity to manage, treat, dispose, and re-reuse wastewater
through strategic and targeted investments across the country; and (iii) in Botswana’s urban areas
through strategic and targeted investments; (iv) strategic planning and institutional support to build
capacity and strengthen sector institutions to plan and execute sector investments, enhance sector
policy and regulation.

    Objective 2.4: Upgrading roads and increasing connectivity

73.      Efficient and cost effective transport is critical for growth and a necessary condition
to increase competitiveness. For the transport sector development vision, the country adopted a
shift from inward to outward looking connectivity, placing itself as hub in the region. In the urban
context, priority is being given to developing appropriate public transportation system, as lack of
the latter may increasingly become a barrier to inclusion.

74.     The Bank is already engaged in the transport sector through the ongoing Integrated
Transport Project under the existing portfolio. The overall objective of the project is to enhance
the efficiency of the transport system by building modern business management capacity, and by
                                                 22
improving the strategic planning aspects of inter-regional transport and critical transport
infrastructure. The project supports government with the finalization of the National Transport
Policy and the development of the national multi-modal Transport Master Plan. Along with
capacity building and institutional strengthening, the project envisages significant investments in
rural, semi-urban, and urban roads infrastructure. The operation finances an innovative long-term
output and performance-based road contracting method covering a road network of around 330
km and designed to increase the efficiency and effectiveness of road asset management. Financing
is also provided for a wide range of support in Greater Gaborone city, including the development
of a modern public transport system. The new system will partially replace the current mini-bus
system with scheduled, large bus services and replace the traffic signaling system. It will also
include selected road investments to solve the growing urban congestion problem.

  Figure 8: Expected combined contribution of proposed instruments to the CPF results


                                                                        CPFINSTRUMENTS:
                                                                        ͲTransformingSenior
   CPFOBJECTIVES:              CPFEXPECTED RESULTS:                   SecondaryEducation(IPF)
   ͲImprovingequitable        ͲImprovedtransitionratesfrom        Ͳ HealthSystemsSupport
   accesstoand               juniortoseniorsecondary              (IPF)
   relevanceofsenior
   secondary                   ͲIncreasedintakeofsenior            ͲHealthPER;Healthand
   education                    secondaryschool                       HIV/AIDSFiscalSpace
                                                                        Analysis(TA)
   ͲImprovinghealth           ͲImprovedquailityandefficiency
   outcomes                     ofhealthservicedelivery              ͲWaterSecutiryand
                                                                        EfficiencyProject(IPF)
   ͲImproving                  Ͳ Expandedwatersupplyand
   efficiencyand              sewerageservice                        ͲLesothoHighlandsͲ
   sustainabilityof                                                   BotswanaWaterTransfer
                                Ͳ Enhancedwastewater
   watersupplyand                                                    Study;OkovangoMultiͲ
                                managementandreuse
   sanitation                                                           SectorInvestment
                                ͲImprovedroadsafety                   OpportunityAnalysis(TA)
   ͲUpgradingroads
   andincreasing                                                      Ͳ IntegratedTransport
   connectivity                                                         Project(IPF)




Engagement Area 3: Supporting effective resource management

75.     Engagement in this area tackles the SCD priority of ensuring the sustainability of
growth and inclusion. The SCD underlines that competing demands on Botswana’s vulnerable
natural resources puts sustainability of growth at risk by depleting key sources of comparative
advantage and inefficient use of scarce resources, such as water. Exhausting sources of livelihoods,
especially in rural areas, also risks sustainability of poverty elimination. The government’s
relatively high budgetary allocation to social protection demonstrates a critical investment in the
redistribution of resources. However, as noted above, the social protection system exhibits a
number of key inefficiencies that hinder effective resource management in the sector. In particular,

                                                 23
because of categorical and weak poverty targeting methodologies, a large proportion of households
in the top quintiles not only receive social protection benefits (65 percent of Q4 and 41 percent of
Q5) but actually benefit from multiple programs (17 percent of Q4 and 8 percent of Q5).
Implementing objective and effective targeting of social protection programs, and social assistance
in particular, would redirect spending to benefit the country’s poor and help achieve the twin goals
of eliminating extreme poverty and promoting shared prosperity. Improved coordination and
administration of programs would make spending more efficient and better link social protection
programs with other key interventions, including health, education, and active labor market
programs. In addition, effective resource management requires a general strengthening of the
capability to monitor the performance and impact of government policies and programs. Current
institutional constraints, including weaknesses in statistical capacity, hinder evidence-based
policymaking and undermine the efficiency and effectiveness of service delivery. The WBG will
focus selectively on resource management and service delivery by offering a combination of
advisory services and lending instruments aimed at addressing inefficiencies and capacity
limitations (see figure 9).

   Objective 3.1: Improving the efficiency and effectiveness of Botswana’s social protection
   system

76.     A focus on reforming social protection could help increase the impact of the
government’s already substantial expenditures in social protection. The 2013 Botswana Social
Protection Assessment highlights the government’s substantial and sustained commitment to
robust social assistance expenditures. This investment could be tailored to close the country’s
consumption gap and help eradicate poverty by reducing the fragmentation of existing programs,
building a coordinated social assistance system, emphasizing programs that are pro-poor and well-
targeted, and adopting innovative program designs to help break the cycle of inter-generational
poverty transmission. Leveraging synergies between programs and prioritizing coverage of the
poor could help maximize the government’s investment in social protection to combat poverty.

77.     The operation proposed under the CPF aims at improving the efficiency and
effectiveness of Botswana’s social protection system to support the poorest households to
mitigate the impact of poverty and access opportunities to graduate from safety nets
programs. In achieving this objective, the proposed operation would be structured around
two interrelated components. The first component will provide results-based financing with
disbursements linked to specific indicators (DLI) in three results areas: (i) reforming key
operational tools and strengthening institutional processes to increase program efficiency; (ii)
improving effectiveness through harmonization of selected social protection programs and links
to promote productive inclusion; and (iii) building robust national data through continuous multi-
topic surveys to inform social protection and poverty eradication policies and programming
decisions. As noted, the government of Botswana already makes a significant and sustained
investment in social projection programs; however, it recognizes that systematic reform could help
improve the outcomes from these interventions. The proposed use of the DLIs under this project
would support the government to take specific actions linked to gains in the efficiency and
effectiveness of the country’s social protection system. The second component would finance
technical assistance to help achieve the reforms outlined above, and to increase the government’s



                                                24
statistical capacity to monitor and measure poverty eradication and to make evidenced-based
policy decisions about social protection programming.

   Objective 3.2: Creating national performance management framework

78.     WBG has an ongoing engagement through the Economic Diversification and
Competitiveness RAS program. Technical assistance provided supports strengthening planning
and performance management, focusing on the design and implementation of a government-wide
monitoring and evaluation system, including its linkages to planning, budgeting, public service
and public investment management. The Bank also works closely with the Statistics Office of
Botswana to enhance the national statistical monitoring systems and improve the frequency and
quality of the survey data. Technical support is delivered to the PPADB as the agency implements
its devolution and capacity building strategy.

   Objective 3.3: Strengthening natural resource management

79.     Botswana is rich in natural resources. A combination of minerals, energy, and protected
areas as well as crop, pastureland and non-timber forest products, makes the country’s natural
capital worth a third of its total wealth. This natural capital already plays a huge role in supporting
Botswana’s economy, providing food, fuel, shelter, and livelihood to thousands of people. It also
underpins key activities, such as diamond mining, which has dominated Botswana’s economy for
more than 30 years. The country’s natural wealth will be even more critical in the future. The
government has identified several areas for growth—including nature-based tourism, mining, and
agriculture—which it hopes will help diversify the economy and reduce poverty. To meet all three
development goals, the government will need to optimize use of natural resources.

80.     The WBG, through the WAVES program, is assisting the country to fill key
information gaps and improve economic decision making. The program covers four priority
areas for natural capital accounting: (i) water accounts, (ii) mineral & energy accounts, (iii) land
accounts, and (iv) ecosystems’ accounts. In particular, it focuses on implementing revised
indicators that account for natural capital, including Adjusted Net National Income and Adjusted
Net Savings; and building comprehensive wealth accounts to assess the prospects for long-term,
sustainable growth. It also provides support to building detailed accounts about Botswana’s energy
resources and energy use to assess the optimal energy mix for the future and examine the role of
Botswana’s coal in a green economy. The program assists with creating national and ecosystem-
based tourism accounts to inform management of eco-tourism in four key ecosystems: Okavango,
Chobe, Makgadikgadi Pans, and Central Kalahari. It also supports compilation of water accounts
for managing scarce water supplies and contributing to the policy on a national water tariff,
scheduled for 2013–14.

81.     The Bank is also supporting the GoB’s efforts in renewable energy and energy
efficiency. The SCD finds electricity supply constraints to be a major challenge. Through ongoing
technical assistance, the Bank will help the GoB to identify investment projects in the renewable
energy and energy efficiency sectors, and recommend implementation arrangements. The WBG
could also support selected investments in the energy sector to expand rural access, increase the
use of renewable energy, improve energy efficiency, and strengthen grid infrastructure and
regional integration, with appropriate technical assistance in policy, regulatory, and investment
                                                  25
planning. The support will consider various modalities, such as PPPs and guarantees for supporting
private investments, and capitalizing on the demonstrated efficiency of private investments in the
region, such as REIPPP market for solar energy in South Africa, which brings together
technological innovation and transparent procurement processes.

82.      The proposed lending operation for the water sector envisages strategic planning and
institutional support to the MMEWR. The objective is to build capacity and strengthen
institutions to plan and execute sector investments and enhance sector policy and regulation. The
institutional and policy activities under the proposed project will support MMEWR to address
issues of water resource and environmental management, including, watershed and aquifer
management, enhanced wastewater management and re-use, and improved sector regulation.
These activities will support the protection and sustainable use of surface and groundwater sources.

  Figure 9: Expected combined contribution of proposed instruments to the CPF results




                                  CPFEXPECTED RESULTS:
                                  ͲReducedpercentof                   CPFINSTRUMENTS:
 CPFOBJECTIVES:                  households(Q4andQ5)
                                  receivingbenefitsfrommore           Ͳ SocialPortection
 ͲImprovingthe                                                          Modernization (IPF)
 efficiencyand                  thanoneprogram
 effectivenessofsocial         ͲIncreasedpercentofpoor            Ͳ Economic
 protectionsystem                beneficiaries(Q1andQ2)             Diversificationand
                                  supportedbySPprograms               Competitiveness(RAS)
 ͲCreatingnational
 performance                     Ͳ M&Etoolsusedtoenhance           Ͳ WaterSecutiryand
 management                      serviceͲdelivery                      EfficiencyProject(IPF)
 framework                                                               Ͳ WAVES(TA)
                                  ͲTimelinessandqualityof
 ͲStrengthening                  statisticsimproved                     Ͳ RenewableEnergyand
 naturalresource                                                        EnergyEfficiency(TA)
                                  ͲIncreasedpercapitawealth
 management
                                  includingnaturalcapital
                                  Ͳ Increasedshareofrenewable
                                  energyintotalelectricity
                                  productioncapacity




    3.3 Implementing the FY16–20 Country Partnership Framework

       3.3.1    Financial Envelope

83.    Botswana CPF FY16–20 will build on the ongoing portfolio, which continues to be
aligned with the proposed objectives of the new program. The portfolio comprises two
operations for a total of US$191.5 million in commitments, of which US$166.77 million is

                                                 26
undisbursed (87 percent) as of September 30, 2015. The Northern-Botswana Human Wildlife
Coexistence Project financed by the GEF grant will close in 2016. The closing date for Integrated
Transport project is January 31, 2020.

84.     The CPF FY16-20 proposes an indicative IBRD new lending pipeline of US$270
million to finance operations for FY16–18 (see table 2). The IBRD lending program will be
revisited in one years when the government’s new NDP11 will be launched, expected in June 2017.
Lending volumes on the remainder of the CPF will depend on country demand and overall
performance during the CPF period as well as global economic developments that affect IBRD’s
financial capacity and demand by other Bank borrowers. IFC investments are expected to reach
around US$30 million during the CPF period (estimate based on current pipeline). A strong
program of TA will be integral to the CPF, likely to be supported by the ongoing RAS program as
well as strategic ASA. MIGA currently does not have an active portfolio in Botswana, but it
remains open for business across all lines of its Political Risk Insurance Products, including
Transfer Restrictions, Expropriation, Breach of Contract, and War and Civil Disturbance as well
as Non-Honoring of Sovereign Financial Obligations.

                Table 2: CPF Indicative IBRD Lending Program and IFC Investments FY16–20

             FY                           PROJECT                         IBRD (US$ million)
                       Current lending7:
                          x Northern-Botswana Human Wildlife
                               Coexistence                                     0.46
                          x Integrated Transport                               166.30

        FY16–18        Proposed IBRD lending:
                          x Botswana Water Security and Efficiency               150
                          x Social Protection Modernization                      30
                          x Transforming Senior Secondary Education              50
                          x Health Systems Support                               40

                       Indicative IFC Investments                                30
        FY19–20         Additional projects TBD as per performance and
                                                                                TBD
                        learning review in 2017 to align with the NDP11

85.    Analytical work and knowledge support will be an important part of the CPF
program. The ASA will contribute to the CPF objectives by filling in knowledge gaps in poverty,
trade and global value chains, water transfer studies, health fiscal space analysis, and
programmatic poverty work. An education public expenditure review could be considered to
determine opportunities for better cost-effectiveness of sizable education spending (around 8
percent of GDP). Country-specific analytical work will be backed by regional ASA demographics,
a water-energy nexus study, and financial inclusion. The work under the ongoing WAVES
program is expected to feed key policy and planning processes—such as the Poverty-Environment



7
    Total undisbursed balance as of September 23, 2015.

                                                          27
Initiative and preparation of the NDP11—by ensuring real consideration of natural resources and
ecosystems, thus enabling better decisions.

86.      The World Bank will continue to support Botswana’s efforts for compliance with
anti-money laundering and combating of financing terrorism (AML/CFT) obligations as a
way to promote shared prosperity. In an effort to comply with international standards on
AML/CFT, Botswana has passed a number of laws and regulations. However, very little progress
has been made in using this legal framework. The Bank‘s support includes conducting a national
risk assessment for money laundering and terrorism financing, improving the skills and knowledge
of the 14 government agencies in assessing these risks, and applying a risk-based approach to
AML/CFT implementation. The ongoing anti-corruption work under the Stolen Asset Recovery
Initiative (StAR) focuses on enhancing the policy and legal framework for asset recovery, and
assisting the Anti-Corruption Agency with stakeholder awareness-raising and training for law
enforcement agencies.

87.    For cross-cutting themes, analytical work to assess the extent and causes of gender,
poverty, and inequality in Botswana will propose actionable recommendations for
addressing the main gender challenges. The World Bank will build on existing gender studies
conducted by the government, other donor agencies, and the civil society to track levels and
changes in poverty indicators over time and across regions. The Bank will conduct the gender
assessment early in the CPF period to address needs in gender responsive policies and actions for
poverty reduction and economic growth, and to inform Bank project and task-level interventions.
Building on the regional disaster risk management (DRM) work, the World Bank can support
national level institutions by building capacity to monitor disaster risks and integrate the risk
management interventions into national development planning.

88.     The CPF results framework presents the intervention logic and the results chain for
the WBGs’ program in Annex 1. The result chain has been informed by the Government NDP
strategic planning and goal-setting and comprises 16 results indicators tracking progress towards
the nine strategic objectives of the CPF.

       3.3.2   Government Procurement and Financial Management Systems

89.    The Botswana Use of Financial Management Systems study was completed in FY12.
The report validates and documents the considerable use of country financial management systems
for Bank-financed projects. Government is implementing a comprehensive public financial
management (PFM) reform agenda. However, Bank procurement systems are being used for on-
going projects. The Bank is reviewing its procurement policy to increase the use of country systems
and reduce thresholds. This should be completed in FY16 and be implemented in FY17. From the
previous CPS, the client has gained some experience with Bank policies and procedures. The
program will continue to use government processes to establish implementation arrangements.

       3.3.3   Partnership and Coordination
90.     The CPF envisages continued collaboration and coordination with development
partners present in Botswana. Financial support provided to Botswana by bilateral and
multilateral partners has been decreasing. Notably significant reduction is expected in the health

                                                28
sector with a number of HIV/AIDS support programs ending by 2016. Still, foreign assistance
continues to be important, especially in supporting capacity building. Although Botswana is
eligible for only a relatively low amount of official development assistance (ODA), a Development
Partners Forum was established in 2007 comprised of diplomatic missions, bilateral donors,
multilateral organizations, UN agencies, and the government. The forum meets twice a year and
is co-chaired by the MFDP and UNDP. The objective of the forum is to (i) share information about
development policies and programs; (ii) improve donor coordination and harmonization of
programs and; (iii) sensitize partners about development challenges.

91.     The Bank will explore the opportunities for cooperation with the leading development
partners according to their interest and presence in the sectors covered by the CPF (see annex
3). The possibilities for strategic partnerships in the education sector and social protection are
being discussed with the EU delegation and UNICEF. The WBG will also coordinate closely with
partners on infrastructure, climate change, and private sector development issues in light of their
present and planned programs, described below:
 a. The European Union (EU), through the EU-Africa Strategic Partnership, has a Country
    Strategy Paper (CSP) and the National Indicative Program (NIP), which is implemented
    through the 11th European Development Fund (EDF) for the period 2014–20. The main sectors
    envisaged under the 11th EDF include (i) macroeconomic support; (ii) education with a focus
    on implementation of system level reforms in the Education and Training Strategic Sector Plan
    (ETSSP); (iii) public sector reform, such as public management and service delivery systems,
    including public finance management within a multi-year fiscal framework; and (iv) civil
    sector organizations. In addition, a few EIB initiatives in infrastructure, water and electricity
    are being examined for the period 2014–20. The indicated financial resources available are
    EUR 33 million, which is a significant reduction of EUR 73 million from the previous CSP
    (2008–13).
 b. The UN, through its most recent strategy Program Operational Plan 2009–14, focused on the
    following areas: (i) governance and human rights promotion, (ii) economic diversification and
    poverty reduction, (iii) health and HIV/AIDS, (iv) environment and climate change, and (v)
    children, youth and women empowerment. Global Funds, through UNAIDS, has allocated
    US$25 million for the period 2014–16 for malaria, TB, and HIV/AIDS interventions. This is
    a reduction from previous years.
 c. USAID focuses on the Centre for Disease Control (TB, HIV prevention research, health
    strengthening systems specific to AIDS). USAID, through its regional program on Southern
    Africa Regional Environment Program, also seeks to strengthen trans-boundary water resource
    management, protect biodiversity, and improve water supply and sanitation. However, funding
    from the President's Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR) has declined over the last
    few years, from US$84 million in 2011 to US$75 million in 2012, and will be about US$35
    million by 2016.
 d. The Country Strategy Paper 2015–19 for the African Development Bank (not final yet) will
    support Botswana in its economic diversification efforts with a focus on two pillars: (i)
    infrastructure development (energy, water and sanitation, policy reform), and (ii) private sector
    development (PPPs, facilitating access to finance).




                                                 29
                IV. MANAGING RISKS TO THE CPF PROGRAM

91.     Overall, the risk for achieving the objectives of CPF is moderate (see annex 2 for
detailed SORT risk description). The external risks to the program, such as macroeconomic risk
and stakeholders risk, are rated as low. Despite certain vulnerabilities that became apparent in the
past with the financial crisis and SACU transfers volatility, with substantial fiscal savings and
international reserves the government has managed in the past to maintain fiscal discipline and
stay on debt reduction path.

92.     The political and governance, technical design and program, fiduciary, environment,
and social risks are also rated low. Botswana enjoys longstanding political stability. The last
elections in October 2014 were free and fair. Government has environment and social safeguard
policies that it enforces. The legal framework governing procurement and financial management
aspects is robust, and despite some capacity issues, the budgeting, accounting, and reporting
processes are well established and institutionalized.

93.     The risk associated with the sector strategies and policies is moderate. Even though the
country is highly rated for sound sector level strategies, the coordination between the line
ministries is inadequate. This risk will adversely affect mostly the implementation under
Engagement Area 1 (Promoting Private Sector-led, Jobs-Intensive Growth). A combined approach
to the proposed lending operations, engagement through advisory and analytical services, as well
as continued work on a national monitoring and evaluation system under the RAS will mitigate
the coordination risks.

94.     The institutional capacity risk during the implementation period will be substantial.
This risk may undermine the sustainability of the results particularly under the strategic objectives
in Engagement Area 2 (Strengthening Human and Physical Assets) and partially Engagement Area
3 (Objective 3.1 Improving the Efficiency and Effectiveness of the Social Protection System). The
government implementing agencies have significant capacity; however, they lack experience with
preparation and implementation of Bank-financed projects and programs. The proposed lending
operations in support of secondary education and social protection consider the use of results-
based financing approaches, which will be new to the government. This risk will be mitigated
during project preparation by (i) providing technical assistance to the government for consensus
building around reforms; (ii) conducting an institutional assessment of the implementing ministries
and providing capacity building as needed; and (iii) developing a detailed preparedness and
implementation plan to outline the necessary actions to support readiness.

95.      The CPF also builds on the experience and the lessons learned from the previous CPS,
particularly on strengthening the risk analysis, realism in target setting, and proper choice of
higher-level indicators. Institutional risks will be mitigated by including more targeted capacity
assistance in new lending, as well as by incorporating institutional reform elements and providing
capacity support to line ministries, including through RAS. In addition, this risk will be mitigated
through careful sequencing of projects and by allocating enough time for preparation and
adjustments, as well as extending adequate implementation support throughout the project life-
cycle. 

                                                 30
                    RISK CATEGORIES                                          RATING
Political and Governance                                       Low
Macroeconomic                                                  Low
Sector strategies and policies                                 Moderate
Technical design of program                                    Low
Institutional capacity for implementation and sustainability   Substantial
Fiduciary                                                      Low
Environmental and Social                                       Low
Stakeholders                                                   Low
Overall                                                        Moderate




                                                   31
`




    ANNEXES




      32
                                                                 Annex 1. CPF Results Framework


     ENGAGEMENT AREA 1: Promoting private sector-led, jobs-intensive growth
     Changing the growth model and developing an export-oriented, diversified economic base in Botswana is critical for sustained economic growth,
     employment creation, and poverty reduction. This change requires a strong private sector, entrepreneurship, and competitiveness to expand to export
     markets. Attracting domestic entrepreneurs and FDI to invest in tradables in Botswana requires (i) a policy environment that enables private firms to be
     competitive and provide them with the export focus incentive; and (ii) higher levels of private sector investment.
     CPF Objective 1.1: Addressing key constraints to the development of non-diamond sectors

     Intervention logic: The domestic environment and government policies, have not been effective in significantly raising the bar for firm competitiveness.
     Protection incentives for focusing on the domestic market undermine the potential for a competitive private sector to emerge. There is a need for integration
     into the global markets. The WBG interventions aim at assisting the GoB in addressing the policy constraints and successfully implementing strategies and
     policies in economic diversification and competitiveness. The Bank will provide (i) advisory services to support accelerated implementation of reforms in
     five priority areas: business environment, trade and industrial policies, infrastructure, access to finance, (in particular of the MSMEs), skills and innovation;
     (ii) development of non-diamond priority clusters including tourism, beef, ICT and financial services; (iii) technical assistance to the PPADB for
     implementation of government devolution and a capacity building strategy; (iv) trade facilitation TA for improved trade facilitation and transparency by
     supporting the establishment of a Trade Information Portal.

                          CPF objective indicators                             Supplementary progress indicators                        WBG Program




33
     Export diversification, defined as the percent of non-diamond               i. Decrease in time, number of steps       Ongoing
     export in real GDP                                                             and cost required to start a business   Economic Diversification and
         Baseline: 15 percent (2014)                                            ii. Decrease in time, number of steps       Competitiveness (RAS)
                                                                                    and cost required for a new
         Target: 20 percent (2020)                                                  electricity connection
                                                                               iii. Decrease in time and number of          New
     Improvement in the Distance to Frontier score (on DBI)                         payments to comply with tax             Botswana Trade Facilitation TA (FY16)
         Baseline: 64.87 (2015)                                                     requirements
         Target: at least 2 points increase (2020)                             iv. Decrease in time, number of steps        Follow up Economic Diversification
                                                                                    and cost required to transfer a         and Competitiveness (RAS3)
                                                                                    property
                                                                                v. Decrease in time, number of steps
                                                                                    and cost required to obtain a
                                                                                    construction permit
     CPF Objective 1.2: Promoting private sector growth
     Intervention logic: The growth of the working age population in Botswana increases the expectations for job creation. However, the private sector is
     struggling to create enough employment, and non-farm self-employment levels remain low. The household and microenterprise sectors do not appear to
     be dynamic enough to absorb the increasingly large inactive labor force. Taking into account the limited potential of the domestic market size, the WBG,
     especially IFC, will be assisting the government to promote private sector growth by (i) supporting financial institutions, focusing on financial
     inclusion/access to finance for MSMEs; (ii) supporting investment opportunities in state-owned or -controlled financial institutions that are being
     commercialized or privatized; (iii) exploring, through PPP advisory, areas where private sector expertise and capital could be brought in to support the
     public sector, including in renewable energy (e.g. solar, water and sanitation, transport, health, education).
                         CPF objective indicators                             Supplementary progress indicators                      WBG Program
                                                                            Impacts related to “Investment
                                                                            Mobilized–FIs” shall be monitored
     Investment Mobilized – FIs ($M)                                        through data on the proxies:                 At the request of GoB, IFC will explore
       Baseline: 0 (FY16)                                                        i. Number of SMEs reached               PPP advisory services
       Target: 30 (FY20)                                                        ii. Loans disbursed (# & $)
                                                                              iii. No. of jobs created or saved
                                                                               iv. Sales revenue growth

     ENGAGEMENT AREA 2: Strengthening human and physical assets

     Developing a new growth model will require a step change in the productivity of Botswana’s firms. The latter depends on substantial improvements in




34
     human capital, including education and health: (i) Improving the quality of education, developing skill sets demanded by the labor market, and increasing
     access to appropriate job training programs will be necessary for reducing unemployment and poverty and achieving the country’s much-needed economic
     diversification, sustainable growth, and job creation. (ii) Addressing health barriers to skills acquisition and labor market participation would be essential
     for ensuring that all individuals have the capacity to contribute to productivity and are in the position to enjoy human development outcomes. Such
     sustainable livelihoods will require focus on strengthening physical assets, including infrastructure for water and sanitation.

     CPF Objective 2.1: Improving equitable access and relevance of senior secondary education

     Intervention logic: The education sector, and secondary education in particular, faces challenges that present important opportunities for reforms. These
     include (i) unequal access to senior secondary school; (ii) low and declining learning achievements; (iii) outdated and unconnected vocational streams of
     secondary education; and (iv) high levels but inefficient use of investment in education and training. To help the government improve the labor market
     relevance and address the inequities in the system, the World Bank will provide investment lending assistance that focuses on the secondary school, and
     senior secondary school system. The interventions will aim to (i) expand the general senior secondary education in underserved areas; (ii) establish labor
     market-relevant, professional education streams for senior secondary education; and (iii) strengthen the capacity and accountability of managing and
     sustaining system expansion at the senior secondary and post-secondary levels.
                          CPF objective indicatorsa
                                                                                   Supplementary progress indicators                           WBG Program


     Improved transition rate from junior secondary to senior secondary
     education, including enrollment in the vocational/professional
     training stream; girls transition rate;                                         i. School mapping completed with
          Baseline: 62 percent (2015)                                                   forecasted demand for secondary
          Target: TBD (2020)                                                            education per district                    New
                                                                                    ii. Identification of locations for           Transforming Senior Secondary
     Increased intake into senior secondary school in underserved                       conversion of under-utilized              Education, Investment Project Finance
                                                                                        school infrastructure or new
     districts (to be defined as per school mapping and cost analysis                   construction completed                    (IPF)
     during project preparation); intake rate for girls;                           iii. Curricula for a professional
           Baseline: # of districts and intake in thousands; TBD (2015)                 stream of secondary education
           Target: TBD (2020)                                                           developed



     CPF Objective 2.2: Improving health outcomes

     Intervention logic: Health is a major factor hindering individual capacity and contributing to Botswana’s human development outcomes that are among
     the lowest in the world for a MIC country. The impact of HIV/AIDS pandemic – one of the principal factors behind the poor outcomes – remains widespread.
     Through investment lending the World Bank will support interventions for: (i) training health professionals, (ii) improving health information system, and
     (iii) improving prevention, diagnosis and treatment of NCDs and communicable diseases. More specifically, proposed World Bank lending will support




35
     the Ministry of Health in strengthening implementation of its service delivery integration agenda (with respect to more efficiently addressing the national
     communicable and non-communicable disease double burden along a health care continuum from disease prevention, treatment and care, and
     rehabilitation); in addressing persistent maternal and child health challenges; and supporting organizational changes at the MOH and related decentralization
     arrangements by helping build and strengthen institutional capacity, technical, managerial, and operational to improve access to quality health services.
     Analytical work will inform evidence-based policy making and operational design by examining overall sector expenditures and, to improve (a) the value
     for money in the sector, and (b) produce better health outcomes.




        a
          Note: expected results are outlined below; however concrete baseline and target indicators are not identified yet, given the early stage of new project
        preparations. These indicators will be updated during the PLR
                              CPF Objective Indicators                                     Supplementary progress indicators                              WBG Program

     Quality and efficiency in health service delivery improved,                             i. Health information management
     measured by:                                                                               system (HMIS) improved, with
                                                                                                respect to standardization and              Ongoing
     Percent children (under five years) with suspected pneumonia taken                         timely data collection
                                                                                            ii. Hospital electronic HMIS                    Health and HIV/AIDS Fiscal Space
     to appropriate health provider; boys/girls ratio per age group;
                                                                                                expanded beyond the 27 largest              Analysis (TA)
          Baseline: 14.1 percent (2014)b
                                                                                                public hospitals currently utilizing
          Target: 30 percent (2020)
                                                                                                the Integrated Patient                      New
                                                                                                Management System (IPMS)                    Health Systems Support (IPF)
     Percent children (under five years) with diarrhea treated with oral                   iii. Health financing strategy
     rehydration solution (ORS); boys/girls ratio per age group;                                developed, based on on-going and
                                                                                                planned analytic work                       Health PER (TA)
         Baseline: 48.9 percent (2014)c
         Target: 70 percent (2020)


     CPF Objective 2.3: Improving efficiency and sustainability of water supply and sanitation services


     Intervention logic: Botswana has succeeded in ensuring wide access to clean water, with more than 95 percent access to improved drinking water sources.
     However, access to piped water supply remains uneven, ranging from 80 percent (Gaborone) to 20–30 percent in some urban centers. Only 42 percent of




36
     rural households have access to proper sanitation. System losses amount to 33 percent. The World Bank will support the government through a package of
     financial and knowledge services to improve the provision of water and sanitation while addressing affordability concerns, and will specifically (i) support
     the WUC investment program in underserved localities; (ii) strengthen water sector institutions, including the MMEWR, DWA, WUC and the sector
     regulator, to further pursue water sector reform; (iii) provide technical assistance for improving the prioritization of new investments and the selection
     process.




        b   Data source: UNICEF (2015) State of the World’s Children Country Statistical Tables-Botswana (Note: this baseline figure derives from national MICS survey data)
        c   Ibid.
                         CPF Objective Indicators                            Supplementary progress indicators           WBG Program

                                                                                i. Preparation of WUC District
                                                                                   Center Investment Plans
                                                                               ii. Preparation of Feasibility Studies,   Ongoing
                                                                                   Designs and Bidding Documents         Lesotho Highlands-Botswana Water
     Expansion of water service coverage in selected systems                  iii. Preparation of Utility                Transfer Study (TA)
         Baseline: 60 percent (2015)                                               Performance Improvement Plans
         Target: 80 percent (2020)                                            iv. Implementation of Priority Works       Okovango Multi-sector Investment
                                                                                   Contracts (water distribution,
                                                                                   wastewater treatment facilities)      Opportunity (TA)
     Improved operating efficiencies— reduction in non-revenue water
         Baseline: 33 percent (2015)                                           v. Implementation of key activities
                                                                                   from Utility Performance              New
         Target: 23 percent (2020)
                                                                                   Improvement Plans                     Water Security and Efficiency Project
                                                                              vi. Implementation of Second Phase         (IPF)
                                                                                   Works Contracts

     CPF Objective 2.4: Upgrading roads and increasing connectivity
     Intervention logic: Roads are the predominant mode of transport for Botswana carrying over 90 percent of freight and passenger traffic. While Botswana’s
     internal infrastructure is generally well developed, significant gaps remain in connecting to regional and global markets. The country’s landlocked position
     and distance from ports is a structural barrier that raises costs for exporters and importers and hinders the country’s ability to exploit regional and global
     trade opportunities. Some of the major challenges include increased traffic growth, deterioration of the road network, higher operation and management
     (O&M) costs; effective traffic management. With its ongoing IPF operation from the current portfolio engagement, the World Bank will continue to invest
     in critical transport infrastructure that enhances the efficiency of the transport system by building modern strategic planning and management capacity in
     the sector.




37
     CPF objective indicators                                                Supplementary progress indicators           WBG Program
                                                                                i. Rehabilitation and maintenance of
                                                                                   project roads carried out
                                                                                   successfully under OPRCs
     Improved road safety                                                          methodology
       Baseline: Number of annual accidents on project roads (2015)            ii. Capacity and knowledge
       Target: Number of annual accidents on project roads down by 20              enhancement of Road Department        Ongoing
                                                                                   staff improved
       percent (2020)                                                         iii. Satisfactory financial                Integrated Transport Project (IPF)
                                                                                   management and reporting
                                                                              iv. Traffic situation improved by
                                                                                   traffic management solutions
     ENGAGEMENT AREA 3: Supporting effective resource management

     The priority interventions outlined in the engagement areas above will not deliver rapid and sustainable progress on the twin goals without addressing
     fundamental enablers, including improving public resource management and service delivery by strengthening performance monitoring and
     evaluation, including linkages for enhanced planning, budgeting, civil service and public investment management. Botswana’s natural resources will
     remain at the heart of the country’s success. But they are highly constrained, fragile, and face many competing demands. Therefore, putting in place
     effective systems for natural resource management that take clear account of the implications on important resources will be critical to ensure
     sustainability over the medium term.
     CPF Objective 3.1: Improving the efficiency and effectiveness of social protection system
     Intervention logic: Despite considerable government investment in the social protection sector, the targeting of this social protection spending is
     relatively regressive, and significant ground needs to be covered to support eradication of extreme poverty and address the high inequality in Botswana.
     The current set of transfers lacks coherence and is prone to duplication. In absence of proper targeting of the beneficiaries, significant resources are being
     allocated to the non-poor, and program coverage is often too small to have a real impact on the recipient. The World Bank will support improvements in
     the efficiency and effectiveness of Botswana’s social protection system through the interventions aiming to (i) promote efficiency by improving targeting
     of the poorest, and by implementing a social registry of beneficiaries and a monitoring of information system; (ii) improve effectiveness of the social
     protection system by expanding coverage and delivering rationalized packages of benefits; and (iii) ensure the availability of relevant and updated data for
     implementation, monitoring, and decision making.

                          CPF objective indicators                               Supplementary progress indicators            WBG Program

     Percent reduction of households in Q4 and Q5 receiving benefits
     from more than one program; female beneficiaries
         Baseline: Q4 = 17.4 percent; Q5 = 7.9 percent




38
         Target: Q4 = 11.6 percent; Q5 =5.3 percent                             i. Number of beneficiaries of selected
         Note: target is reduction of 1/3 in each quintile                         social protection programs enrolled
                                                                                   based on new targeting methodology         New
      Percent of poor beneficiaries (Q1 and Q2) supported by social            ii. Number of poor households receiving a      Social Protection Modernization
     protection programs; female beneficiaries;                                    consolidated package of benefits
                                                                              iii. Number of poor households receiving        (IPF)
          Baseline: Q1 = 91.6 percent; Q2 = 87.3 percent
          Target: Q1 = 96.6 percent; Q2 = 93.3 percent                             social intermediation services
          Note: target represents an increase of 5 percentage points in
          each quintile, equivalent to roughly 20,000 additional people
          in each quintile
     CPF Objective 3.2: Creating national performance management framework
     Intervention logic:Weak planning and monitoring and evaluation of policies, programs and projects reduced public sector efficiency, effectiveness,
     transparency and accountability, resulting in weak service-delivery. Low frequency data collection and delays in dissemination impede evidence based
     policymaking, and the implementation of programs designed to address employment, poverty, and growth. Through the ongoing engagement under the RAS
     second assignment, the Bank will: (i) support the NSO efforts to put in place a government-wide performance M&E system, including linkages to planning,
     budgeting, public service and public investment management; and (ii) provide technical assistance to Statistics Botswana with the implementation of a
     multi-topic household survey as a core instrument for data collection.
                          CPF objective indicators                              Supplementary progress indicators                      WBG Program
     Monitoring and evaluation policy approved by Cabinet, and M&E
     tools are used to enhance service-delivery                                i.   M&E Policy Framework developed
          Baseline: no M&E policy (2015)                                                                                    Ongoing
                                                                              ii.   Monitoring tools developed              Economic Diversification and
     
          Target: M&E policy operationalized (2020)                          iii.   Rapid evaluations carried out
                                                                             iv.    Multi-topic survey published            Competitiveness (RAS2)
     Timeliness and quality of statistics improved                                                                          
          Baseline: no Multi-topic household survey implemented (2015)
          Target: Multi-topic household survey implemented (2020)
     CPF Objective 3.3: Strengthening natural resources management
     Intervention logic: Botswana is one of the most water-stressed countries in the world, with general scarcity and high dependency on internationally shared
     and trans-boundary waters. As water scarcity is growing, Botswana will have to be in a position to make careful and informed allocation strategies that
     prioritize the most beneficial sectors, balancing economic, strategic, and livelihood benefits, including employment. The World Bank will support the
     government in addressing this challenge through knowledge, advice, and lending for (i) building capacity and strengthening sector institutions to plan and
     execute sector investments, and to enhance sector policy and regulation; and (ii) financing the design and development of a monitoring system for the
     assessment and control of water resources, sector policy support, and crisis response mechanisms. Technical assistance will be provided to the MMEWR for




39
     staff training, strategic assessments, feasibility studies, and assessing water security tradeoffs. Given the scale of Botswana’s coal and solar resources and
     comparative advantage, the Bank will be supporting the government in developing a strategy for exploring long-term investment opportunities in the sector.
                            CPF objective indicators                              Supplementary progress indicators                     WBG Program

     Per capita wealth including natural capital (pula per person in           i. Publication of satellite water accounts   Ongoing
     constant 2006 prices)                                                        Department of Water Affairs
          Baseline: BWP139,992 (2014)                                         ii. Adjusted National Savings indicator       WAVES (TA)
          Target: to be set in the new Vision document (2020)                     developed using national dataset, and     Renewable Energy and Energy
                                                                                  reported as part of national accounts
                                                                                                                            Efficiency (TA)
                                                                             iii. Renewable energy and energy               
     Share of renewable energy in total electricity production capacity           efficiency strategies and                 New
         Baseline: less than 0.2 percent (2015)                                   implementation plans adopted              Water Security and Efficiency Project
         Target: 5 percent (2020)                                                                                           (IPF)
                         Annex 2. Systematic Operations Risk-Rating Tool



RISK CATEGORIES                           RATING                             MITIGATION
                           Low:
                           Recent elections concluded in October
                           2014 with re-election of incumbent
    Political and
                           president. Elections were free and fair.
    Governance
                           Continuity in government strategy is
                           expected. Country manages its
                           economic and social resources for
                           development.

                           Low:
                           Country practices prudent
                           macroeconomic management and
                           policies. There are strong (adequate)
                           institutions. Budgets are consistent
  Macroeconomic
                           with fiscal sustainability. Even though
                           there are vulnerabilities to external
                           shocks, due to sound management,
                           there economy has shown resilience
                           over the last five years.

                           Moderate:
                                                                      The WBG, through
                           Country highly rated for sound sector–
                           level strategies policies and              consultation with MFDP, has
Sector strategies and      governance arrangements. There is a        ensured that projects and
      policies             risk of poor coordination and              activities supported by the
                           implementation across various              Bank are aligned with the
                           ministries and misalignment of             national development plans.
                           strategies.

                           Low:                                       Bank has sufficient
Technical design of                                                   experience with the client and
     program               Risk that mix of tools used in the CPF     has considered lessons learnt
                           are not appropriate for the Client.        from the previous CPS.

                           Substantial:
                                                                      Bank will play a more
                           Risk of some weakness of technical
Institutional capacity                                                proactive role in providing
                           knowledge and project management in
 for implementation                                                   technical assistance and
                           implementing agencies. Some agencies
  and sustainability                                                  implementation support in
                           have limited experience with the Bank
                                                                      this CPF as appropriate.
                           operations.




                                                    40
RISK CATEGORIES     RATING                                        MITIGATION
                    Low:
                    The CPF proposes IPF program in
                    water, social protection, education and
                    health. The overall fiduciary
                                                                  Staffing at entities is being
                    environment is strong. The legal and
                                                                  strengthened and
                    regulatory environment for
                                                                  procurement practices are
                    procurement is adequate with strong
                                                                  being enhanced by capacity
                    procurement oversight from PPADB
                                                                  building of government staff
                    who are also transforming into a
                                                                  and private sector and
                    regulatory body having devolved most
                                                                  simplification of the bidding
                    of their functions to entities. Staffing at
    Fiduciary                                                     process. PPADB have
                    some entities is inadequate and some
                                                                  proposed changes to the
                    procurement also experiences delays.
                                                                  procurement law to focus on
                    Procurement planning though required
                                                                  regulatory functions and
                    by law is inadequate. Contract
                                                                  devolve executive
                    management remains a concern. The
                                                                  procurement responsibilities
                    current Bank portfolio has not had
                                                                  to entities thereby increasing
                    major fiduciary problems. The
                                                                  accountability.
                    budgeting and planning systems are
                    based on sound policy and institutional
                    foundations and are accompanied by
                    solid accounting and auditing system.


                                                                  Bank safeguards for the
                                                                  pipeline Water Security and
                    Low:                                          Efficiency project to be
Environmental and
                    Government has regulations and                considered
      Social
                    policies in place.                            Government takes seriously
                                                                  the enforcement of
                                                                  regulations and policies


                    Low:
                    Consultations with the development
  Stakeholders      partners, private sector and civil
                    society organizations have been part of
                    the process.

  Overall                        MODERATE




                                             41
                                       Annex 3. Development Partners and Areas of Engagement

        Development
          Partners
                                                                                        SECTORS




                          Education
                          & Skills
                                      Health
                                               Social
                                               Policy &
                                               Protection
                                                            Poverty
                                                            Eradication
                                                                          Agriculture
                                                                                        Energy
                                                                                                 Water and
                                                                                                 Sanitation
                                                                                                              Climate
                                                                                                              Change
                                                                                                                        Natural
                                                                                                                        Resources
                                                                                                                                    Economic
                                                                                                                                    Growth &
                                                                                                                                    Trade
                                                                                                                                               Tourism
                                                                                                                                                         Public
                                                                                                                                                         Sector & PFM




     ADB                                                                   X            X           X                                           X
     EU                      X                                                                                                         X                     X
     France                           X                                                                                                X       X
     Germany (GIZ, KfW)                                                    X                        X                                          X
     IMF                                                                                                                                                     X
     JICA                                                                               X                       X
     UK                      X
     UNDP                                                      X                                                                                             X
     UNICEF                  X        X           X            X
     USAID                                                                              X                       X                      X       X             X




42
     US Government                    X
     WHO                              X
                             Annex 4. Completion and Learning Report
                    BOTSWANA COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FY09-FY13
                           COMPLETION AND LEARNING REPORT


 CPS Board Discussion:                                                 May 21, 2009
 CPS Progress Report (Board Presentation):                             October 5, 2011
 Period Covered by CPS Completion Report:                              FY09-13


                                             INTRODUCTION

1.     This Country Partnership Strategy Completion and Learning Report (CPSCLR)
reviews the experience of implementing the FY09–13 WBG Country Partnership Strategy
(CPS) for the Republic of Botswana (Report No. 47520 BW, Date: May 21, 2009). The
document provides a self- assessment of: (i) the extent to which the CPS was successful in
achieving its stated objectives; (ii) the WGB performance in terms of the design and
implementation of the program; (iii) and lessons learned from the implementation of the CPS
program that should be considered during the preparation of the new Country Partnership
Framework FY16-20. In addition to discussions with the country team and Government
counterparts, this assessment is based on reference documents such as the CPS, the CPS Progress
Report, Project Appraisal Documents, Implementation Status Reports, ICRs, supervision reports,
and reports related to Economic and Sector Work. The findings of the CPSCLR have informed the
preparation of the FY16-FY20 CPF.

                        SUMMARY OF KEY FINDINGS AND RATINGS

2.     Botswana had reached a critical juncture in 2009 when the CPS (FY09-13) was presented
to the Bank’s Board on May 21, 2009. Forty-three years of good governance, sound macro-
economic management, and prudent development of mineral wealth had fueled sustained growth
and propelled the country to middle income status. Growth rates averaged 8.7 percent per annum
between 1966 and 2008 and per capita income grew from US$70 at independence to US$8,533 in
2011. Sound fiscal management over the years allowed the Government to fund numerous social
and investment programs from its own budgets while at the same time building up large reserves.

3.     Despite the rapid growth, high levels of unemployment, poverty and inequality persisted.
Income distribution was markedly inequitable leading to high poverty rates despite the high
income per capita.11 In 2009/2010 the poverty rate stood at 19.3 percent of the population and
while the diamond sector was the engine of growth, it employed few people. The private sector
struggled and was neither dynamic nor competitive and created few jobs. The official
unemployment rate in 2009/2010 was 17.8 percent; however, the actual rate was 30 percent when
discouraged workers who dropped out of the job market were taken into account.12 Given the
paucity of jobs in the private sector there was a high level of dependency on Government for
employment and social assistance. Government Programs aimed at improving human welfare but
11
 The per capita consumption Gini coefficient was 0.49 in 2009/2010.
12
 The figures on inequality, poverty and unemployment are drawn from the Botswana Social Protection
Assessment, World Bank, 2013 and are based on Botswana Core Welfare Indicator survey of 2009/10 by Statistics
Botswana

                                                      43
often suffered from inadequate implementation, poor targeting and limited impact.

4.      Also in 2009 the country was dealing with the global financial crisis that cut export of
diamonds sharply, reducing revenues and forcing the Government to draw-down reserves to
maintain key social programs. The economy contracted in 2008 and 2009, and while growth
returned in 2010 it has yet to reach pre-crisis levels. Other challenges included the HIV/AIDS
epidemic and shortages in the availability of power as South Africa announced its intentions to
phase out power exports to Botswana in face of its growing internal demand for energy.

5.      The immediate challenges at the launch of the CPS were the global financial crisis and the
impending power shortages caused by South Africa’s decision to end exports to Botswana. The
impact of the financial crisis on diamond revenues was a precursor to the longer-term challenges
facing Botswana. Diamond production has peaked and Botswana faces a future of gradually
declining supplies and higher mining costs. Of immediate concern was how the Government could
sustain crucial public services in face of sharp contractions in diamond exports and Government
revenues. To address the impending power shortage the Government-owned Botswana Power
Company (BPC) undertook construction, through an Engineering, Procurement, and Construction
(EPC) contract to build a coal fired power plant and implemented demand management measures
aimed at self-sufficiency in power generation.

6.      Medium-term challenges centered on how the Government could position Botswana to
move beyond an economy dominated by diamond production. Efforts would focus on diversifying
the economy, improving the climate for foreign and domestic investment, and creating a skilled
workforce. In face of the medium term prospect of declining Government revenues, the NDP 10
also identified the need to improve the effectiveness of the public sector programs. Two key areas,
where effective public sector programs were crucial, were the HIV/AIDs pandemic and removing
infrastructure constraints. The main infrastructure priorities were identified in energy, water supply
and roads.

7.     The Government’s planning process accurately identified the challenges facing Botswana.
The Government’s NDP10 was developed to support the last seven years of Government Strategy
-Vision 16, and focused on meeting both immediate and medium-term challenges. The NDP10
provided the framework within which the CPS was developed. The CPS was fully consistent with
the development challenges identified by the NDP10.

8.           The FY09-13 CPS included four pillars. For each pillar the CPS identified broad
outcomes but did not include outcome indicators. These were added in the CPS Progress Report
which had twenty one objectives. Pillar I focused on public sector effectiveness and had four
objectives. Pillar II concentrated on increased effectiveness of HIV/AIDS prevention efforts and
included one objective. Pillar III dealt with increased economic competitiveness and was the
largest pillar both in lending and analytical work. It had ten objectives. Pillar IV focused on the
environment and covered six objective. Each objective indicator was evaluated and rated as either
being achieved, mostly achieved, partially achieved, or not achieved. This cumulative rating was
based on the rating the sub-indicators for each objective respectively. The overall outcome of the
program was then evaluated across all ratings to determine whether the overall program was highly
satisfactory, satisfactory, moderately satisfactory, moderately unsatisfactory, unsatisfactory or
highly unsatisfactory. The overall CPS development outcome is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory
according to the ratings per pillar in the table below.


                                                 44
                                  Outcome Rating by Pillars                               Development
                                                                                           Outcome
             Pillar 1            Pillar 2             Pillar 3            Pillar 4          Rating
                               Moderately           Moderately          Moderately
          Unsatisfactory
                              Unsatisfactory        Satisfactory       Unsatisfactory
                                                 Objective 3.1- MA
                                                 Objective 3.2 – PA
                                                                      Objective 4.1-NA
                                                 Objective 3.3 – A
        Objective 1.1 – NA                                            Objective 4.2- A     Moderately
                                                 Objective 3.4 – A
        Objective 1.2 – MA                                            Objective 4.3- NA   Unsatisfactory
                                                 Objective 3.5 – A
        Objective 1.3 – NA   Objective 2.1- PA                        Objective 4.4-MA
                                                 Objective 3.6 – PA
        Objective 1.4 – NA                                            Objective 4.5- PA
                                                 Objective 3.7 – A
                                                                      Objective 4.6- A
                                                 Objective 3.8 – PA
                                                 Objective 3.9 – NA
                                                 Objective 3.10–NA


                             EVALUATION OF THE CPS OUTCOMES


9.     Pillar 1 - Enhancing Public Sector Effectiveness (unsatisfactory). This pillar focused
on improved data on poverty, improved public financial management, better monitoring and
evaluation in Government programs, and national statistical capacity. Little progress was made in
improving capacity to compile, analyze and disseminate poverty related statistical data and the
outcome indicators were not achieved. The training of statisticians and the dissemination of the
Core Welfare Indicators did not take place. Survey was delayed three years beyond target date and
more generally timeliness of key statistical analysis remains a problem.

10.     Some progress was made in public expenditure management outcome of the pillar with the
completion of a Public Expenditure Review and an update to the 2007 PEFA indicators, financed
by the EU in 2013. The Government formulated and initiated a PFM strategy and action plan under
the leadership of the MFDP in 2010 and this work is progressing. The PEFA update found that
Botswana had some elements of a medium term expenditure framework (MTEF) and Performance
Based Budgeting (PBB) in place. MFDP uses macro-economic modeling to make MTFF. The EU
is providing a MTEF advisor and the current plan is to roll out the MTEF in time for NDP11
(2016). The Government is also gradually shifting from Cash Accounting to Accrual Accounting.
The note by the Bank on accrual accounting prepared in FY11 complemented work by the IMF.
Overall the three outcome indicators for public expenditure management were mostly achieved.

11.        Outcomes for introducing monitoring and evaluation systems in key ministries was not
achieved. The IDF grant for monitoring and evaluation work was cancelled. Some monitoring and
evaluation work is being carried out as part of the RAS.

12.     The World Bank assessment of statistics capacity was completed but follow-up was
limited. The planned technical assistance through the TFSCB Grant for Capacity Building and
Poverty Analysis was not utilized. The outcome was not achieved. Continued work on statistics
capacity is underway as part of PREM work program for 2014.



                                                 45
13.    Pillar 2 - Fighting HIV/AIDS and Improving Education Outcomes (moderately
unsatisfactory). The National HIV/AIDs Prevention Support Project, which focuses on
prevention of new HIV infections, is making progress. Data on the changes in behavior measured
by outcome indicators (BAIS IV Survey) suggest some progress in meeting outcome objectives
though the challenge of changing behaviors is indeed daunting. It appears that knowledge of what
causes HIV has improved and more people have access to testing services. Also the number of
circumcisions is about 80 percent of the target. Less progress has been made on indicators for
condom use and multiple concurrent partners.

14.     An innovative feature of project design was the buy down of interest payments by the EU.
The EU had established triggers to be reached before payment would be made. The triggers were
all achieved and EU paid the US$20 million buy down to the Government. Another success was a
program of independent verification of grants, which showed that self-reporting of results by
grantees was accurate. Recently the project was adapted to include prevention of non-
communicable diseases namely HPV vaccinations in schools. The project’s closing date has been
extended from September 2014 to March 2015 and the Government is exploring options for
continued Bank support in the sector.

15.    The Project suffered initially from considerable implementation delays. The main problem
was finding and retaining project staff with adequate skills in procurement and financial
management. Considerable staff turnover occurred before an adequate skills mix was achieved.
The Bank intensified implementation support in FY13, following the securing of trust fund
resources, which helped speed implementation especially for the grants to community based
organizations undertaking HIV/AIDS prevention interventions. Overall disbursement has
accelerated significantly over the past 24 months increasing from 26 percent to 92 percent by
August 2014. Overall, indicators are rated as partially achieved.

16.      For education the outcome was defined as: “Skills gap is identified and policy options to
fill the gap agreed.” The Bank in FY13 completed the skills gap analysis, and dissemination and
discussion with Government took place in December, 2014. This activity was moved to Pillar 3 at
the mid-term review as it more closely fit with the objectives of making the labor force more
productive. This activity was partly achieved, as the paper was produced and discussed. However
policy options to close the gap were never agreed.

17.    Pillar 3 - Increased Competition - Infrastructure and the Climate for Investment and
Growth (moderately satisfactory). This pillar covered five areas of activities. These included
improved investment climate, completion of financial sector development strategy, strengthened
accounting profession, improved national transportation capacity, and improved energy security.

18.     Improved Investment Climate indicators were Doing Business (DB) rankings and
identification of key remaining bottlenecks to greater foreign and domestic investment. At the
beginning of the CPS period in 2009 the DB ranking in Botswana was 38. Rather than improving
during CPS period, Botswana’s ranking was 74 in the 2015 ranking. Overall, implementation of
Doing DB reforms did not match expectations in the CPS and the indicator was not achieved.

19.      Identification of key bottlenecks to foreign and domestic investments – The Bank did quite
a bit of work during the CPS including follow up to the 2007 Investment Climate Assessment that
was completed in 2012 and a Development Policy Review that was completed in 2013. These
reports helped identify the key bottlenecks and enriched the ongoing dialogue between the Bank

                                                46
and the Government and were well received by the Government. This indicator was achieved.

20.     As a result of the dialogue with the Government on economic diversification started in
2011 and the discussions around the Development Policy Review in November 2011, the
Government requested in 2012 RAS that focused on five areas including the business environment,
trade and industry policy, infrastructure services, access to finance, and innovation and skills
development. The Economic Diversification Competitiveness RAS was signed in February 2013
and is currently underway. Fourteen pieces of work in the five areas are underway with three pieces
already completed. The five areas include: business registration, licensing and permit issuance;
risk based Environmental Impact Assessments; a Doing Business reform roadmap; a credit
information system; and e-Government policies and standards. Of particular note is the work on
the Doing Business Reforms, which has been enthusiastically received by Government that plans
to implement many of the identified reforms. Thus, while improvement in the Doing Business
ranking did not materialize as envisaged in the CPS, Botswana’s ranking should improve as a
result of the RAS.

21.     For the RAS, IFC played an important role as part of the Bank Group’s RAS team
responsible for the Doing Business road map. IFC was also active in two other areas identified in
the CPS. Under the Africa MSME finance program IFC from 2012 to 2014 provided support to
enable Bank ABC in Botswana to strengthen its small and medium enterprise banking operations.
IFC had also been appointed a transactions advisor to the Government a public-private partnership
for the new Botswana International University of Science and Technology (BIUST) and on the
privatization of the Botswana Telecommunications Corporation (BTC). However, due to lack of
progress from Government, both projects were subsequently dropped. In particular, IFC's advisory
agreement on BIUST was terminated in May 2011. IFC's Privatization Advisory Mandate was also
terminated following the government’s decision to offer 49% shares in the state-owned BTC to
Botswana citizens via an Initial public offering (IPO), contrary to IFC recommendations to sell to
a strategic equity partner before an IPO.

22.      Government Financial Sector Development Strategy - an outcome indicator related to
financial sector strengthening, was added to the results matrix in the CPS progress report to reflect
work funded at the request of the Government under the Financial Sector Reform and
Strengthening Trust Fund (First). The selected outcome indicator was adoption of a financial sector
strategy with action plan to address identified constraints. The First report identified four strategic
pillars including: maintaining a robust framework for financial sector stability; promoting
competitive and cost-effective access to finance; promoting financial access for the underserved
and low income, non-salaried cohorts; and deepening financial markets and supporting
intermediation of long-term financing. The report included 27 recommendations across the four
pillars. Work on the recommendations is well underway including completion of all the milestones
and intermediate indicators in CPS Progress Report matrix (see annex one). Implementation of
one of the recommendations (credit information system) is supported by the RAS.13 This outcome
indicator was achieved.

23. For the accountancy profession capacity was improved in the Botswana Institute of
Accountants (BIA) to serve as a professional accountancy body and to better comply with the
International Federation of Accountants (IFAC). The Accountancy Act and the Financial
13
  Among the recommendations under implantation are amendments of the Banking Act, promulgation of a
securities bill, merger of the Botswana Saving Bank (BSB) and Botswana Postal Services (BPS), privatization of the
National Development Bank, and development of the Government and Corporate Bond Market

                                                       47
Reporting Act became effective in April 2011. The Bank support for accountancy was facilitated
by an IDF grant and by FIRST. Overall the indicators were achieved.

24.     The Integrated Transport Project is the main vehicle for achieving the outcome indicators
for improved capacity in transport management. The project includes financing for road asset
preservation through Output and Performance Based Roads Contracts (OPRC) for 820 km of
roads, upgrades to traffic signaling and traffic control and upgrade of urban transport
infrastructure. The project also supports the development of a national multi-modal transport
master plan, a regional transport integration study, and technical assistance and training for the
Ministry of Transport and Communication. Project implementation covers ten-years largely
because of the long-term nature of OPRC contracts.

25.      The two outcome indicators for transport in the CPS progress report were the number of
kilometers under OPRC contracts (at least 250 km) by 2014 and reduction in average vehicle
operating costs of 8 percent on OPRC roads also by 2014. The indicator for kilometers under
OPRC contracts by 2014 reflected the year delay in contracting that had already been incurred by
the time of the progress report. Curiously the indicator for vehicle lower operating cost was also
to be achieved by 2014, apparently without taking into account time needed to implement the
contracts. The first outcome was achieved on time with the signing of the OPRC contracts on 19
February 2014. The contractor is on site and the second indicator should be achieved more
realistically during 2016 when all the roads under contract would be improved as originally
planned.

26. By the time the bid documents finalized in January 2013 the estimated cost of OPRC
contracts had ballooned to US$440 million for the 820 kilometers. To accommodate available
financing from the project the Bank agreed to finance two lots covering 335 km at a total cost of
US$228 million. With the OPRC contracts finally signed and good progress being made on the
other components the project will eventually meet its objectives though outcome indicators will
need to be adjusted at the mid-term review to reflect the reduced kilometers under OPRC.
Disbursement rates for this project are still languishing at around 10 percent though this should
change now that the contracts are signed. Overall, the indicators are rated as partially achieved.

27. At the beginning of the CPS period Botswana was almost totally dependent on South Africa
for its power supply. Due to rapidly growing demand that threatened to outstrip supply, the South
African power company, ESKOM, announced in 2009 that it would phase out power exports,
including to Botswana, by 2013. Thus Botswana needed to find alternative energy supplies or face
significant impacts to its aspirations to diversify the economy, create jobs and eliminate poverty.

28.     Two possible investments were identified for World Bank involvement: the first was a
publicly financed project where BPC had contracted a Chinese company under an EPC contract to
build a 600 MW, 4 unit coal fired power plant (Morupule B) that would meet Botswana’s supply
requirements by 2013. The second was a privately led initiative to build another coal-fired plant
for the export of power to South Africa once domestic needs were met through construction of the
Morupule B. This project has not begun due to difficulties in structuring the marketing
arrangements with ESKOM. Its future remains uncertain. The CPS progress report discussed this
issue and the outcome indicator was dropped from the revised matrix.

29.   The Moropule B Project included a Partial Credit Guarantee (PCG) and an IBRD loan. The
PCG extended the maturity and lowered the debt service on an export finance loan to the Botswana

                                                48
Power Company to finance the plant construction. The IBRD loan financed associated power
transmission lines, substations and transformers and equipment. The project also included
financing for developing an alternative energy strategy and undertaking feasibility studies of
alternative energy supplies (concentrated solar power, and coal based methane and carbon capture
and storage). Moreover, the project supported institutional strengthening including the
establishment of a power regulatory agency.

30.     Work on the transmission lines went smoothly and with considerable cost savings. Work
on the power plant proved to be more problematic. At first construction appeared to progress
without problems and all components of the project were rated as satisfactory through mid-2012.
Safeguard issues surfaced in 2011 when two workers died in construction accidents. After these
deaths the Bank mounted missions to review safety practices and recommend remedial measures
to be taken by the contractor and BPC. Worker safety remained a serious concern throughout
construction and into the operation of the plant with several subsequent incidents, including the
death of a worker during operation. One of the safeguard missions sent in October 2012 in response
to the ongoing safety issues also alerted Bank management to what they felt were important
technical and quality problems with the construction of the plant.

31.     This mission represented a turning point in the Bank’s implementation support for the
project. The team was strengthened and budget resources were more than doubled (expenditures
in FY13 increased to US$962,000). A technical mission was launched that confirmed problems
with construction quality and well as possible design issues. Subsequent to the mission, the Bank
hired an independent engineering company to augment its supervision efforts. Based on the
findings of the independent engineers, the Bank launched two additional missions in November
and December of 2012 that resulted in recommendations to address the problems with health,
safety, and environmental mitigation measures, strengthen project management and to address the
technical problems (including an in-depth root cause analysis).

32.     The construction and design problems became more apparent as the units were being
commissioned. Through November 2013 the four units were operating at an average of 53 percent
of design capacity, though recent data shows that the situation has improved, with the plant
operating at about 66% load factor during April-July 2014. Some of the issues (for example, related
to the quality of welding) are likely to be systemic to all four units of the plant and will only be
resolved over the life of the plant. The root cause analysis still underway will be key to developing
an immediate- and medium-term strategy to address these issues and will help to determine which
design flaws and/or construction issues need to be addressed. It will also aim to clarify other issues
related to high noise levels and air duct cracking.

33.          The outcome indicator for energy self-sufficiency by FY13 (domestic generation
capacity as a percentage of peak demand increases from 18% to 102% by FY13) was not achieved
and is at risk of not being achieved in the near future if at all. While the plant has now been handed
over to BPC, the contractor is obligated to complete repairs under the defects and liability period
though serious contractual discussions between the contractor and BPC are likely about acceptance
of responsibility for various defects. Critically, BPC has contracted a reputable international firm
to undertake operation and maintenance of the plant. The contract is providing a competent and
experienced operator at the plant during the 18 months repair and defect remedy period followed
by a 36-month performance based operation and maintenance period. It is hoped that with these
                                                 49
measures the outcome indicator will eventually be achieved.

34.         Other outcomes in the CPS for the energy sector were measures to address social issues
and demand management implemented. These outcomes were achieved. Government adopted a
tariff policy that balanced BPC’s financial viability with provisions aimed at making energy
affordable for the poor. Demand dampening measures were also implemented including
installation of more energy efficient lighting and better metering of energy. The Government also
completed work on establishing an energy utility regulatory body with legislation establishing the
agency awaiting Parliamentary approval this year. Also the MMEWR decided that BPC will now
be subject to a three year management contract to enable it to transition from a power retailer to
an electricity generator with a higher asset base. Given the problems with the transport and power
projects, pillar three was partially achieved.

35.      Pillar 4 – The Environment (moderately unsatisfactory). This pillar has eight outcomes
listed for human-wildlife conflict, low carbon growth strategy, groundwater management, climate
variability and water conservation and management. For reduced human-wildlife conflict (HWC),
GEF funded project is under way in targeted areas of high incidence of wildlife human conflict at
a number of sites in Botswana. The project provides materials and extension for farmers to build
deterrent barriers around their fields to keep out elephants and livestock kraals to protect livestock
from attacks by lions. It also seeks to create alternative employment opportunities in the tourism
area by providing training in lodge management, guest services, and wild game guides.

36.      Two outcome indicators were included for this project – number of wildlife conflict
incidents in targeted hotspot areas reduced by 33 percent and the number of people employed in
eco-tourism increases by 75. The project was originally scheduled to close on January 31, 2015
and by the mid-term review it had become clear that both outcomes would not be achieved. Human
wildlife conflicts increased throughout the life of the project largely because the fence between the
park and the surrounding areas is damaged in many places allowing livestock to enter the park and
wildlife to move freely between the park and surrounding areas. Also, uptake of the deterrent
measures in the project has been slower than anticipated. For eco-tourism employment, training
activities were delayed and the first round of training is only now underway. Overall about 170
people will be trained but so far no one has completed training and found employment.

37.     After the mid-term review for the project the Government requested that the outcome
indicators be revised because the original indicators were overly optimistic. They also asked that
the project be extended for a year. This request was approved on April 14, 2014. The indicator for
incidences of human/wildlife conflict was revised from a reduction of 33 percent to a reduction of
10 percent and the indicator for increase in employment was revised from 75 to 50.

38.     For low carbon growth, a feasibility study on a concentrated solar power (CSP) plant was
completed with financing from the African Development Bank (AfDB). Candidates for a Public
Private Partnership are being sought for constructing the plant. Work is ongoing on the feasibility
of a coal based methane (CBM) project and on a Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS) project.
Botswana remains interested in developing its low carbon energy resources, though it is taking
steps to exploit its abundant coal – in addition to the 600MW Morupule B plant, the country is
rehabilitating Morupule A (130MW), and developing an additional 600MW of installed capacity
through coal fired power plants. Overall, the outcome indicators were achieved.

                                                 50
39.   The Climate variability outcome was partially achieved with climate change modeling
completed and a climate change policy note completed. Policy options were never developed
however, and the Climate Adaptation Fee Based Service was never undertaken.

40.    For improved water conservation and management both outcomes were achieved. WUC
took over nationwide management of water delivery. Both the Water Resource Council and the
regulator were established. A National Water and Waste Water Policy was also approved by
Cabinet in 2012 and will be submitted to Parliament for approval this year.

41.     Across all four pillars this CPSCR rates overall program performance as Moderately
Unsatisfactory as most of the outcome indicators were only partially achieved. Outcome indicators
were overly ambitious, particularly given that by the time they were added in the progress report
the Bank was well aware of wide spread capacity constraints that were delaying implementation.
Concerted effort by the Government and the Bank, starting in FY13 began to correct the situation
and improve chances that the outcome indicators will eventually be achieved, particularly for the
transport and HIV/Aids project and perhaps even for the power project. Moreover, strong
analytical work, particularly in the financial sector, accountancy, the business environment and the
development policy review has built a reputation for the Bank as a strong development partner for
the Government and lead to additional work, particularly the RAS. A strong Bank presence on the
ground is also key in building a close working relationship with the Government.


                 REVIEW OF WORLD BANK GROUP PERFORMANCE

42.    The review of Bank performance examines both the design of the CPS program and the
support for implementation of the strategy. Possible ratings for Bank performance are Superior,
Good, Fair and Poor.

Design of the Program

43.     In looking at the design of the program six areas were evaluated including: the relevance
of the CPS objectives and alignment with country development priorities; the design of the World
Bank interventions for achieving CPS objectives; the balance and consistency between analytical
and advisory work and investment operations; the tradeoff between risk and development impact;
the quality of the results framework; and the identification of implementation risks and mitigation
measures.

44.     The Strategy was well aligned with the Government’s own strategic vision, Vision 2016,
and the NDP10 aimed at realizing the vision. The four pillars were well chosen and focused on
areas of high priority for the Government. The strategy represented a major reengagement by the
Bank in Botswana after a 15 year hiatus in lending. The strategy responded to the Government’s
desire to tap Bank resources and expertise in support of its development agenda, particularly in the
infrastructure sectors (power and transport), in the ongoing fight against HIV/AIDS, the
environment and improving the business environment to stimulate investment, foster growth and
accelerate job creation. The Government welcomed the four pillars in the CPS and reconfirmed at
the time of the progress report that the four pillars remained relevant and appropriate.


                                                51
45.     One area where the CPS could have been better aligned with the Government’s
development priorities was poverty. The only directly poverty related activity was the work on
poverty related statistics. The interventions in this area failed to materialize and the results
Household Income and Expenditure Survey only became available three years late. The Social
Protection Assessment based on the survey results identified a number of weaknesses in the
Government social protection programs that could have addressed at the mid-term review if the
survey work had been disseminated earlier. The new Country Partnership Framework provides an
opportunity to respond to the shortcomings in social protection in Botswana and provide a better
balance between infrastructure and poverty related interventions in line with the presidential
flagship program on poverty.

46.     Design of the World Bank interventions for achieving CPS objectives was adequate. The
areas of engagement were well selected and consistent with the Bank’s comparative advantage
especially for HIV/AIDS and transport. The choice of instruments had some innovative features.
The EU buy down of interest payments in the BNAPS significantly decreased the cost of
borrowing for the Government. Building on the dialogue with the government and ASA the Bank
was undertaking in these areas, the economic diversification and competitiveness RAS was added
after the CPS progress report. Moreover the Bank’s work in the water sector, led to a Government
request in 2011 that Botswana become one of the pilot countries in the WAVES Program. On the
other hand the choice of Project Investment Finance for the transport project might have been
premature. Given a tight timetable for project preparation much of the feasibility work was delayed
until project implementation began. An alternative approach might have been to start with a TA
project or to use a project preparation facility to undertake feasibility studies and proceed with
contracting prior to the project going to the board.

47. The balance and consistency between ASA and Investment Project Financing was good.
Investments were targeted mainly at infrastructure and in programs where the policy framework
was sound and well developed for example the BPNAPS. Also, both the power and transport
projects financed a number of studies that are contributing to policy planning. Though the IFC had
limited engagement in Botswana it proved crucial in building Government commitment to DB
reforms. Finally the Bank worked well with other development partners. Both the transport and
power projects were co-funded by the OPEC Fund for International Development (OFID) and the
AfDB respectively and the Bank worked closely with USAID and the Gates Foundation in
BNAPS.

48. The tradeoff between risk and development impact was about right. The decision to respond
quickly to the Government’s request for reengagement with the Bank with a full program of
investment lending and analytical work was risky. While many of the development outcomes are
delayed, recent improved implementation particularly of transport project suggests that the
outcomes will soon begin to be achieved. In the case of the power project where there were
considerable reputational and safeguard risks, intensive implementation support by the Bank has
helped the BPC address the environmental and safety issues affecting the project. Also close
support to BPC by the Bank has improved its capacity to deal with the contractor for the power
plant in addressing the structural defects that are limiting plant operation.

49. The CPS outcomes and indicators were poorly articulated. Some of the outcomes were
broadly defined making it hard to determine if Bank programs were contributing to their
                                                52
achievement (for instance, improved statistical capacity). Others were hard to measure (improved
budget processes, and PFM further strengthened in key dimensions). In the CPS, the indicators
were identified but no targets were established due to the Bank’s unfamiliarity with Botswana and
the urgency to get the CPS to the board. Targets were added in the progress report. However, many
of them were overly ambitious. Moreover, in some instances outputs were listed as outcomes
(number of people trained rather than an outcome of the training). In two instances, work by the
Bank was listed as an outcome (agricultural policy note and skills gap analysis). Because of these
problems the quality of the results framework is rated as poor.

50. The CPS adequately identified the implementation risks and adequately discussed mitigation
measures. However, the proposed mitigation measures with regard to implementation risk were
ineffective in practice. Overall, this CPSCR finds that the design of the program was fair.

Implementation of the CPS Program

51.     In evaluating the Bank’s support for implementation of the CPS program this report looked
at five areas: intensity and quality of the Bank’s implementation support for investment projects;
relevance, quality and dissemination of knowledge services; the Bank’s responsiveness to
changing country circumstances; WBG efforts for improving alignment with country systems and
coordination with development partners; and attention to safeguards and fiduciary issues.

52.      Despite implementation risk being highlighted in the CPS, the Bank’s budget for
implementation support in the first two years of project implementation was about at the average
for the African Region as was the frequency of implementation support missions. Moreover when
problems with procurement arose the response by the Bank was tepid. No procurement capacity
assessments were carried out and procurement training was limited.

53.     Development outcomes (DO) and project implementation (IP) ratings were also inflated
particularly for the power project where the project was rated satisfactory for DO and IP until 2012
when the mission to assess safety and environmental issues also discovered issues with quality of
plant construction. It appears the team responsible for supervising the project was not given access
to the plant construction site and may have been confused about the extent of supervision that was
necessary since for that part of the project the Bank’s involvement was limited to the PCG. The
project closed at the end of FY14 with both development outcome and project implementation
rated as unsatisfactory.

54.    Project restructuring was limited. BNAPS went through minor restructuring to clarify the
outcome indicator and extend the closing date. The Human Wildlife Conflict Prevention project
was also restructured in April 2014 to revise project outcome indicators and extend the project
closing date and the Integrated Transport Management project likely will be restructured at the
mid-term review to reflect the reduced project scope due to higher costs for the OPRC contracts.

55.     Beginning in FY13 budget resources for implementation were increased and task teams
were strengthened. Implementation support was intensified and projects implementation picked
up speed, particularly for the BNAPS project. For the roads project close Bank implementation
support helped to get the OPRC component moving which should finally accelerate disbursements.
Intensified implementation support also helped BPC address safety and environmental issues,

                                                53
increased its capacity to handle a difficult relationship with the contractor. The Partial Credit
Guarantee will be in place for another 15 years following project closing for the transmission lines.
During this time the Bank has an obligation to continue its support to BPC as it seeks to resolve
the structural defects and get the power plant operating at somewhere near rated capacity. Given
the Bank’s concerted response to the delays in implementation beginning in FY13, particularly the
increased budgets for implementation support and strengthened Bank teams, this CPSCR rates the
Bank’s performance in the intensity and quality of implementation as good.

56.     The quality of the analytical work was a strong point of the CPS. In particular the work on
public financial management, financial sector reform, economic diversification and
competiveness, the social protection assessment and the water sector studies all contributed
significantly to the policy dialogue and helped shape Government reform efforts. The Government
appreciates the Bank’s analytical services and will likely continue to request Bank assistance with
analytical work.

57.     The Bank’s response to changing country circumstances was quite good. The Economic
Diversification and Competitiveness RAS, the Financial Sector Strategy work, Botswana WAVES
and the Climate Variability work were all added in response to Government requests and all fit
well within the pillars of the CPS. The results matrix in the CPS progress report was modified to
include outcome indicators, move the skills gap analysis from Pillar 2 to Pillar 3, and add the
climate variability and financial sector strategy work (the RAS and Botswana WAVES were
initiated after the Progress report).

58.       Overall, this report ranks Bank performance as Good given the efforts by the Bank since
beginning of FY13 to address implementation problems with substantial budget increases and
strengthened teams. As a result project performance has largely improved. Moreover, the Bank’s
responsiveness to changing circumstances and the overall high quality of its analytical work has
built a solid foundation for continued support by the WBG for Botswana.


Lessons Learned and Key Suggestions for the new Bank Program in Botswana

59.     The CPS covered the Bank’s re-engagement with Botswana after a long hiatus. While the
results were less than anticipated, the Bank has developed a solid partnership with the Government
that bodes well for future Bank assistance to Botswana, particularly in analytical and advisory
work. The experience with the CPS is rich with lessons that can be applied to the Bank’s next
program in Botswana.

60.     Lesson 1 – provide a candid risk assessment to the client’s developmental results and
link risk levels with the intensity of the implementation support. The Bank overestimated
implementation capacity and initially failed to provide effective implementation support. The
Bank was slow to respond to growing implementation problems and for the power project failed
to identify the emerging issues in construction until plant commissioning was underway. The
increased resources following the progress report began to mitigate the problems but it was only
in FY13 when teams for the transport and power projects were strengthened and implementation
support resources were increased further that implementation problems began to be handled
effectively.

                                                 54
61.     Lesson 2 – engage early in the preparation process with full due diligence to inform
client and management decisions, even if the Bank participates with partial obligations. It
appears that when the Bank entered into the PCG for the power plant it was uncertain about the
level of due diligence that was necessary. In hindsight the due diligence was clearly deficient.
Closer scrutiny of the contractors, the plant design, legal agreements, and the capacity of the client
and contract supervision arrangements before approving the PCG might have identified the
problems plaguing the plant today.

62.     Lesson 3 – establish relevant, clear and measurable indicators to ensure an objective
assessment of the performance of the program. The Bank proposed overly ambitious indicators,
thus undermining the realism of the CPS objectives. Sincere explanation of the challenge with
identifying concrete results indicators, including baseline and targets given unfamiliarity with the
country and the early stage of the lending operations would have allowed for later adjustments
with the new data available overtime.

63.     Lesson 4 - a strong program of ASAs and TAs was a key strength of the CPS and
highly valued by the client. Simply put, the Bank’s ASA and TA is appreciated and more
importantly well utilized by the Government. By in large Bank reports are read, discussed, debated
and utilized in the design and implementation of Government programs. They contributed to the
policy dialogue and often yielded follow-up activity such as the ongoing RAS on economic
diversification and competiveness. While the results of the Bank financed investment projects were
mixed, the overall success of its AAA and TA work will likely make it a key component of the
next program of Bank support.

64.     Lesson 5 - representation on the ground provides immediate and prompt response to
client needs and emerging opportunities. The establishment of a Bank Office in Botswana
headed by experienced Bank staff has enhanced the dialogue with the Government, helped to
identify new areas of involvement (the RAS, WAVES) and provided crucial assistance to
implementation support missions.

65.      Lesson 6 – robust monitoring and evaluation systems are essential for assessing the
impact of Government programs. The initial efforts in the CPS to strengthen M&E systems
failed, though work on M&E is now underway in the RAS. The MoFDP in particular is concerned
about its inability to evaluate the impact of programs and policy interventions and to apply lessons
learned to future interventions. The new CPF should build on the work under the RAS to assure
that adequate M&E systems are in place.

Alignment with Corporate Goals

66.    The CPS was produced before the WBG adopted the twin goals. Still, the CPS was broader
aligned with eliminating severe poverty and sharing prosperity. In particular:

a. The Public Sector Effectiveness pillar sought to support the GoB efforts to manage the fallout
   from the global economic crisis. The bulk of Bank support in this area focused on greater
   understanding of how Botswana could effectively use all its assets for better development
   outcomes, in particular reduction of poverty and inequality. Support to the Statistics Office

                                                 55
   sought to increase the capacity to compile, analyze and disseminate poverty related statistical
   information.

b. The HIV/AIDS and Education pillar aimed at helping Botswana through its HIV/AIDS crisis
   through seeking the way to increase the effectiveness of the respective expenditures, and
   enhance overall program efficiency and prevention. It also envisaged analytical work in the
   education sector, focusing on enhancing education outcomes. This pillar came in response to
   Government’s recognition of the importance of human capital for competitiveness. Addressing
   health barriers to skills acquisition and labor market participation was identified by the SCD
   as a major pathway to enhanced equality.

c. The Increase Competitiveness pillar aspired to help Botswana develop an economy that can
   compete globally, create jobs and reduce dependency on diamonds. Diversified economy and
   competitive, export oriented private sector were viewed as an important precondition for
   employment creation – a pathway leading to elimination of extreme poverty. Financing critical
   infrastructure investments in electricity sector aimed at securing supply of power, without
   which Botswana risked not meeting is competitiveness goal. Moreover, failure to replace
   power imports from South Africa by 2013 supply would lead to a further economic contraction,
   with significant economic and social consequences, including deepening poverty and
   inequality.

d. Engagement under the Environment sought to assist the Government with managing pressing
   environmental issues and maximize the economic benefit of its natural endowments. Support
   was provided to implementation of a water sector reform to improve water service delivery
   throughout the country, as negative consequences of persistent water shortages
   disproportionally impact the poor. The pillar also sought assistance to strengthening
   conservation, promoting sustainable use of wildlife and biodiversity resources, and tapping
   into nature-base tourism. These interventions were to especially benefit the northern regions
   of the country, the geographic area with the highest pockets of poverty. 




                                               56
                                  Annex: CPS 2009-2013 Results Matrix

                      SUMMARY OF CPS PROGRAM SELF-EVALUATION
    CPS Outcomes               Status of     Lending and Non-   Lessons for the New CPS
and Outcome Indicators     CPS Outcomes and  lending Activities
                          Evaluation Summary that Contributed
                                                to Outcomes
                            CPS Pillar 1: Enhancing Public Sector Effectiveness
Objective 1.1 Improved capacity to compile, analyze, and disseminate poverty-related statistical information (not
achieved)
x Poverty related            x Not Achieved                  TFSCB Grant for       Once the data were finally
    household data         Core welfare Indicator            Capacity Building     published the Bank was able
    documented,            Survey was conducted in           and Poverty           to complete an assessment
    disseminated and       2009/2010 but the data was        Analysis, FY09        of the social protection
    archived by 2010       not disseminated until 2013.      (was never utilized)  system, which is now
                                                                                   driving discussions on
x At least 5 statisticians   x Not Achieved                                        reforms in the system and
    trained in poverty     No statisticians were trained.                          possible Bank assistance in
    analysis of household                                                          this area.
    survey data by 2010
Objective 1.2 Improved public expenditure management (mostly achieved)
x   Improved capacity to      x Mostly achieved               PER delivered in      Anticipated Bank Financed
    analyze and forecast     Some elements of                 FY10                  TA was replaced by EU
    fiscal variables;        macroeconomic modeling is                              funding of a PFM
    Macro Economic           used in producing Medium         Macro-modeling        consultant and a MTEF
    model in use at          Term Fiscal Forecasts.           (FY10)                expert to assist with
    MFDP.                                                                           implementation of the
x   Strengthened budget        x Mostly achieved             Issues Note on         MTEF
    process: greater         There are some improvements Accrual Accounting
    coordination between     in national budgeting process delivered.
    various elements of      due to ongoing PFM reforms
    budgeting – recurrent    by MFDP, including the work
    and capital budgets      plans in macro-fiscal policy &
    and personnel            planning, national budgeting,
    management.              accounting and reporting,
                             strategic planning, legal &
                             institutional      framework
                             national debt, liabilities and
                             guarantee management.
x PFM system further         x Mostly Achieved
    strengthened in key      Government adopted a PFM
    dimensions, including strategy in 2010 and
    openness and             implementation is underway.
    accountability in        Full roll out of MTEF is
    public procurement.      expected in 2016.
                             Government is gradually
                             introducing accrual
                             accounting.
Objective 1.3 Enhanced Capacity of Government to adopt evidence-based management through increased
application of monitoring and evaluation information (not achieved)




                                                      57
 x  At least 15 ministries  x Not Achieved                    IDF Grant to              Despite the failure of the
    have functional results                                   Strengthen M&E            IDF grant, Bank dialogue
    based M & E systems                                       capacity of the           with the Government on M
    in place by 2011.                                         Vision 2016               & E continued and work on
 x At least 60 percent of   x Not Achieved                    Council and the           establishing an M & E
    trained CSO (Civil                                        Government                system was initiated as part
    Society                                                   Implementation            of the Economic
    Organizations) are                                        Coordination Office       Diversification and
    using scorecards to                                       was cancelled             Competiveness RAS.
    assess the
    effectiveness of
    service delivery by
    2011.
 Objective 1.4 Improved National Statistical Capacity (not achieved)
                            x Not Achieved                    Bank report on            Despite the lack of progress
                                                              “Strengthening            following dissemination of
                                                              National Statistical      the Bank report, the Bank
                                                              Capacity and              continued to discuss with
                                                              Policy” was               Government the need to
                                                              completed but             improve statistical capacity.
                                                              follow-up was             Further work on this issue
                                                              limited.                  is now being undertaken as
                                                                                        part of PREM’s FY14 work
                                                                                        program.
                      Pillar 2 – Fighting HIV/AIDS and Improving Education Outcomes 14
 Objective 2.1 Increased effectiveness of HIV/AIDS prevention efforts (partially achieved)
 x Increased proportion       x Not Achieved                HIV/AIDS                Implementation was slow to
    of youth reporting no     Data from BAIS IV Survey      Prevention Support get underway but intensive
    sexual activity. (Age     suggested changing behaviors Project (FY09) is        implementation support,
    15 – 19: from 78.4%       has proven difficult.         under                   particularly beginning in
    to 85% by 2013; age                                     implementation and July 2012 sped up project
    20-24: from 30.8%to                                     is likely to be         delivery and impact. The
    50% by 2013).                                           extended.               project will likely be
                                                                                    extended to bridge into the
 x Proportion of youth        x Partially Achieved                                  next program of assistance.
    aged 15-19 and 20-24 Preliminary BAIS IV data           Southern   Africa       Discussions are underway
    reporting condom use show condom usage during           Regional                about the possibility of
    during the last sexual    last sexual encounter for     HIV/AIDS strategy additional financing for the
    encounter with a non- people aged 15 – 49 was only was completed in             next program period.
    regular partner in past 79.5. Uncertain whether         FY10.
    12 months (age 15-19: increases for ages 15 -19 and
    from 89% to 95% by        20 – 24 were actually         Poverty and Social
    2013; age 20-24: from achieved.                         Impact Analysis
    85% to 95% by 2013).                                    was completed in
 x Number (cumulative)        x Mostly Achieved             (FY11).
    of male circumcisions Total cumulative male
    increases from 52,000 circumcisions reached
    (2008) to 262,000 by      202,808 by December 2013.
    2013.




14
  The Outcome for education was a skills gap analysis. In the progress report this was moved to pillar 3 as it relates
to job creation and the labor market.

                                                         58
     Pillar 3 – Increased Competiveness - Infrastructure and the Climate for Investment and Growth
Objective 3.1 Improved Investment Climate (mostly achieved)
x Improved Doing           x Not Achieved                 A follow-up report  The Bank’s work on
   Business (DB)           DB Rankings were 38 in         to the 2007         economic diversification
   Rankings                2009 and 74 in the 2015        Investment Climate  started in 2011 and
                           report.                        report in 2012 and adiscussions around the
                                                          Development         development policy review
x Identification of key    x Achieved                     Policy Review in    led to a request by
   remaining bottlenecks Dissemination and discussion 2013                    Government in 2012 for a
   to greater foreign and  analytical work by the Bank                        RAS focused on Economic
   domestic investment.    helped identify the remaining                      Diversification and
                           bottlenecks.                                       Competitiveness. The RAS
                                                                              includes development of a
                                                                              roadmap for Doing
                                                                              Business reforms
Objective 3.2 Skills Mismatch between Education Outcomes and Labor Market Needs (partially achieved)
x Skills Gap Identified     x Partially Achieved          Skills Gap Analysis
    is identified and       The Bank completed the        – FY13.
    policy options to fill  skills gap analysis in FY14
    the gap agreed.         and the report was presented
                            to Government in December
                            2014. Policy options have not
                            yet been agreed.
Objective 3.3 Government Financial Sector Development Strategy (achieved)
x Adoption of a financial   x Achieved.                   FIRST funded        FIRST Funded activities
  sector strategy with      Strategy was developed with   Strategy Document have been key in helping
  action plan to address    Bank Assistance and the       was disseminated to Government revise: pension
  identified constraints    Government and the Bank of    the Bank of         and insurance laws and
                            Botswana are implementing     Botswana in 2012    regulations; the investment
                            many of the                                       and securities regulatory
                            recommendations.                                  environment, and the
x New pension and           x Achieved.                   FIRST: Enhancing    Collective Investment
  insurance regulations     Training on the regulations   Supervision of      Undertakings Act.
  developed                 and prudential rules provided Capital Markets
                            to NBFIRA 2012. The           completed 2013
                            revised Botswana pension
                            and insurance laws were
                            approved in 2014 by the
                            Parliament. Pension and
                            Provident Act endorsed under
                            new name of Retirement Act.
                            A Diagnostic Report on Cell
                            Captive Insurance delivered
                            in 2012.
x Investment and            x Achieved.
  securities regulatory     The Non-Bank Financial
  regime revised            Institutions Regulatory
                            Authority (NBFIRA) revised
                            the investment and securities
                            markets regulatory regime
                            and amended the Botswana
                            Collective Investment
                            Undertakings Act.



                                                    59
 x Collective Investment          x Achieved.
   Undertaking (CIU) Act     The Non-Bank Financial
   revised                   Institutions Regulatory
                             Authority (NBFIRA) revised
                             the investment and securities
                             markets regulatory regime
                             and amended the Botswana
                             Collective Investment
                             Undertakings Act.
 Objective 3.4 Increased capacity of the Botswana Institute of Accountants (BIA) to carry out its functions as a
 professional accountancy body (achieved)
 x National                       x Achieved.                  IDF Grant for
     qualifications                                            Strengthening the
     developed and at least                                    Institute of
     50 nationals passed                                       Accountants
     Part-1 (intermediate                                      (FY10)
     level) examinations
     by June 2011.

 x   At least 5 Continuing         x   Achieved.
     Professional
     Development Courses
     are developed.

Objective 3.5 Improved Compliance with the International Federation of Accountants (achieved)
  x Enactment of                 x Achieved.                FIRST support for
       Accountancy                                          Updating
       Profession                                           Accounting and
       Legislation                                          Auditing
                                                            Legislation
 Objective 3.6 Improved National Capacity in transport management (partially achieved)
 x At least 250 km of       x Achieved.                                            The Bank overestimated
   roads under long-term    Despite a substantial delay in                         implementation capacity
   output and               procurement, contract for 335                          initially and appears not to
   performance based        km was signed in March of                              have paid adequate
   road contracts (OPRC) 2014. However, due to price                               attention particularly to
   for rehabilitation and   increases during the delay,                            procurement capacity.
   maintenance by 2014.     overall km under OPRC                                  Adding to the delay was the
                            contracts financed by Bank                             failure of an OPRC
                            has been reduced from over                             consultant to perform.
                            800km to 335 km.                                       Moves to strengthen the
 x Average Vehicle          x Not Achieved.                                        team and provide more
    Operating cost per      Delay in contracting.                                  resources for
    vehicle km on OPRC                                                             implementation support at
    roads falls by 8                                                               the beginning of FY13
    Percent by 2014.                                                               helped finally to accelerate
                                                                                   project implementation.

 Objective 3.7 Improve Regional Trade (achieved)**
 x Regional Investment      x Achieved                         Investment Climate
    Climate Assessment      The business environment in        Assessment (ICA)
    completed**             Southern Africa completed in
                            December 2012 by World
                            Bank.



                                                        60
x   Southern Africa        x Achieved
    Regional Trade and     Transformation Ready:
    Integration Study **   Regional Trade and
                           Integration Sector Study by
                           African Development Bank,
                           World Bank, and African
                           Union completed in
                           December, 2011. Regional
                           Infrastructure Development
                           Master Plan-Transport Sector
                           (SADC) completed in
                           August, 2013.
Objective 3.8 Improved Energy Security (partially achieved)
x Domestic Energy          x Not Achieved.                                               The decision to offer a
   Generation Capacity     By FY13 the outcome was                                       partial credit guarantee for
   as a Percent of Peak    not achieved due to                                           the construction of the
   Demand Increases        construction delays.                                          power plant was taken
   from 18% to 102% by Technical issues identified                                       without adequate due
   FY13.                   late in construction make risk                                diligence of the contractor
                           high that the development                                     and the contract itself.
                           objective will never be                                       Implementation support
                           achieved.                                                     failed to identify technical
x Measures to address      x Mostly Achieved.                                            issues with the construction
   social issues and       The Government adopted a                                      of the plant until late in the
   demand management       tariff policy aimed at making                                 construction process. Since
   implemented             energy affordable for the                                     the problems have emerged
                           poor. Demand dampening                                        the Bank deployed a new
                           measures were also widely                                     team and dramatically
                           adopted.                                                      increased resources for
                                                                                         implementation support.
Objective 3.9 Improved broadband access (not achieved)
x Broadband strategy          x Not Achieved                   South
    developed and             The TA was dropped due to        Africa/Botswana
    adopted                   lack of progress when            Regional
                              government was re-               Broadband TA
                              structuring of Botswana          (with PPIAF)
                              Telecommunications               (FY12)**
                              Authority.
Objective 3.10 Selected strategic challenges in agriculture and nature-based tourism identified and policy options
presented to the government (not achieved)
                                          Pillar IV – The Environment
   Objective 4.1 Reduced human-wildlife conflict (HWC) in targeted hotspot areas in Northern Botswana (not
                                                    achieved)
x Number of wildlife          x Not Achieved                                          Setting outcome indicators
    conflict incidents in     For Elephants incidents                                 that are realist is difficult. It
    targeted hotspot areas increased from a baseline of                               became clear early on that
    reduced by 33%.           99 in 2009 to 315 by June 30,                           the indicators for this
                              2013. For lions incidents                               project were overly
                              increased from 84 to 162 for                            optimistic and at the mid-
                              the same period.                                        term review the
                                                                                      Government asked that they
x Number of people            x Achieved                                              be revised. New indicators
    employed in eco-          Training was delayed until                              with more modest goals
    tourism increases by      2013. Training now                                      were approved and the
    75.                       underway and it is hoped by                             project extended by one

                                                          61
                             project close that 175 people                          year in April of this year
                             will be trained. So far no one                         and it is hoped that the
                             has been employed.                                     project can achieve these
                                                                                    revised goals by the time of
                                                                                    project closes.
 Objective 4.2 Low Carbon Growth Strategy Under Implementation (achieved)
 x At least one low-       x Achieved.
    carbon (CBM) reserve A feasibility study for CSP
    or no carbon (CSP)     plant was completed. Studies
    energy alternative has of both a CBM and a CCS
    been identified, or a  pilot are underway though the
    CCS pilot project has  CBM study is considerably
    been identified.       delayed.

 Objective 4.3 Enhanced Capacity to Participate in Global Carbon Market (not achieved)
x Number of new Carbon x Not Achieved.
   Programs Identified.     No information available.

 Objective 4.4 Improved ground water management (regional project)** (mostly achieved)
 x Number of key              x Mostly Achieved               GEF Groundwater
     technical officers and   Project closed with all major   and Drought
     policy makers aware      contracts being                 Management in
     of groundwater           completed. SADC Water           SADC Project
     management and its       Division was to continue to     from 2005-2011.
     importance over total    use the products to raise
     number questioned.       awareness within the SADC
                              Member States and direct
                              outreach to the Member
                              States and leverage the
                              application of these in
                              member countries.
 Objective 4.5 Increased Understanding of Implications of Increased Climate Variability for Botswana with
 Appropriate Policy Options for adaptation Developed (partially achieved)
                              x Partially Achieved
                              Increased Understanding of
                              Implications of Increased
                              Climate Variability for
                              Botswana with Appropriate
                              Policy Options for adaptation
                              Developed
 Objective 4.6 Improved Water Conservation and Management. Water and wastewater sector reform option
 implemented (achieved)
 x WUC assumes water          x Achieved
     delivery nationwide
 x Water Resources            x Achieved
     Council and Regulator
     Established.




** Regional Programs




                                                       62
Annex 5. Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
                      As of September 23, 2015




                                63
                           Annex 6. Operations Portfolio (IBRD and Grants)


                                                     Lending Portfolio
                                                  As of September 23, 2015


                                                                                                                               Tot
                                                                    Proj                 Net                Tot
                                          Date,                                                  Tot                         Undisb
                                                      Rev           Age    Lst   Lst   Comm               Undisb       %
Proj ID         Project Name              Board                                                 Disb                         Begin
                                                     Closing         in    DO    IP     Amt                 Bal       Disb
                                          App *                                                 ($m)                         FY16
                                                                    Yrs                 ($m)               ($m)
                                                                                                                              ($m)

          Human Wildlife
P095617                                  11/19/2009 01/31/2016      5.8    S     S       5.50     5.04        0.46   91.6%      1.06
          Coexistence Project
P102368   Integrated Transport SIL       05/28/2009 01/31/2020      6.3    S     MS    186.00    19.70    166.30     10.6%    166.30

Total                                2                                                 191.50   24.73    166.77      12.9%   167.36




                                           Knowledge and Advisory Activities

                                 PROJECT                                                                 FY
Private Sector
    • Economic Diversification RAS                                                                 FY13-16
    • Mobile Banking                                                                               FY15-16
    • Regional Financial Inclusion                                                                 FY15-17
    • Botswana Trade Facilitation                                                                  FY15-16
    • Global Value Chain Analysis                                                                  FY15-16
Human Development
    • Botswana Poverty Assessment                                                                  FY15-16
    • Regional Demographic Study                                                                   FY15-17
    • Health and HIV/AIDS Fiscal Space Analysis                                                    FY15-16
    • Programmatic Poverty Work                                                                    FY15-17
Sustainable Development
    • WAVES                                                                                        FY13-16
    • Renewable Energy Strategy                                                                    FY15-16
    • Lesotho Highlands-Botswana Water Transfer Study                                              FY15-16
    • Regional Water-Energy Nexus Study                                                            FY15-17
    • CCARDESA                                                                                     FY15-18
    • Regional Disaster Risk Management                                                            FY17
Gender                                                                                             FY17
StAR                                                                                               FY15-16
Botswana AML/CFT National Risk Assessment                                                          FY15-16




                                                               64
Annex 7. Statement of IFC’s Held and Disbursed Portfolio




                          65
                       Annex 8. Summary of Stakeholder Consultations


The WBG conducted the first round of in-country CPF consultations with stakeholders in March,
2015. Three sessions were organized respectively with government counterparts, representatives
from civil society, and representatives from the private sector. Development partners and the
World Bank team made presentations on developmental challenges and proposed elements of a
partnership framework to assist Botswana to address the challenges. The stakeholders were invited
to offer input on (i) the proposed focus areas and objectives of WBG interventions, selectivity, and
gaps; and (ii) additional opportunities for partnerships. The second round of consultations was
organized in September 2015 after the second corporate review draft of the CPF document was
shared with government counterparts for feedback and endorsement.

Proposed framework. Overall, the stakeholders agreed that the three focus areas present a
comprehensive approach to the development challenges identified. It was noted that these areas
are well aligned with the government’s priorities. The comments and feedback on the formulation
of the CPF objectives were positive. Questions were raised regarding the larger role of the ICT
sector in the CPF and for the success of the proposed interventions. Stakeholders observed that
that the country is not fully utilizing its developmental potential for information technologies.

Opportunities for partnership. Possible areas of collaboration were discussed with the development
partners. These included support to private sector, education, health, social protection, and
sustainable development. It was agreed with the EU Delegation to further explore the avenues for
closer partnership in the education sector and assist the government with the implementation the
Botswana's new education sector strategy. The UNDP has been providing contribution to the
country’s sustainable development and poverty eradication agenda. UNICEF has been supporting
a social policy and protection program for children. The WBG will continue to coordinate closely
with these agencies and the wider community of development partners and stakeholders at the
implementation stage of the CPF.




                                                66
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  IBRD 33376
  20∞E                                                                                                                               25∞E




                                                                                                                                                                   To
                                                                                                                            ZAMBIA                               Lusaka


                                                                                                                                                                                        BOTSWANA
                 ANGOLA

                                                                                                                                   Kasane
    To
 Menongue                                                                                               i
                                                                                                     nt




                                                                                                ya
                                                      Ok




                                                                                             Lin
                                                                                                                     CHOBE
                                                       av
                                 Ngamas
                                       eri

                                                           an
                                                             og
                                     Xaud
                                          um



                                                                   NGAMILAND
                                                                                                                                                                                                  ZIMBABWE
NAMIBIA                                           Nokeneng
                                                                       Okavango
                                                                        Swamps
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       To
                                                                                 Maun                                                                                                                                                 Gweru
20∞S                                                                                                                                                   Nata                                                                              20∞S
                                                                        Tsau
                                        eb
                                     Eis
                                                              Sehithwa
                                                            Lake
                                                           Ngami                                                                             Makgadikgadi
                                                                                                                                               Salt Pans                                NORTH-
                                                                                                            Rakops    Bote
                                                                                                                          ti
                                                                                                                                                                                         EAST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         To
                                                                                                                                          Orapa                             Francistown                                                Messina
                                                                                                                     Lake
                                                                                                                     Xau                  Letlhakane
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Shashe
                                                                                                                                                                                            Mo
                                                  Ghanzi
                                                                                                                                                  C E N T R A L                               tlo
                                                                                                                                                                                                  u   tse
                                                                                                                                                                               Seruli                   Selebi-Phikwe
                                                                       GHANZI
                                                                               Okwa                                                                                                                         Sefophe
            Mamuno
                                                                                                                                                               Serowe            Palapye                                      p




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Limpo
                                                                                                                                                                    Lotsane

                                                                         K      a        l    a             h a                r         i
                                                                                                                                                               Mahalapye



                                                                                D e s e r                                      t
                                                                       Kang
                                                                                                      KWENENG
                                             Tshane
                                                                                                                                                        KGATLENG
                                                                                                                                                              Mochudi
                                                                                                                                    Molepolole                                        SOUTH AFRICA
                         KGALAGADI                                                                               Jwaneng
                                                                                                                                                        GABORONE
                                                                                             Khakhea           SOUTHERN
25∞S                                                                                                                                 Kanye              SOUTH-                                                                           25∞S
                 No




                                                                               Werda                                                         Lobatse     EAST
                    ss
                     ob




                                                                                                                                          be
                                                                                                                                    Mosele                                   To
                                                                                                                                                                           Pretoria
                                                                                                                                    po
                                                                                                                               Molo

                                                      Tshabong

                                                                  po                                                                                                                  BOTS WAN A
                                                             lo
                                                           Mo




                                                                                                                        To                                                                       DISTRICT CAPITALS*
                                                                                                                     Kimberley
                          Bokspits
                                                                                                                                                                                                 NATIONAL CAPITAL

                                                                                                                                                                                                 RIVERS

                                                                                                                                                                                                 MAIN ROADS
                                 0             50          100          150 Kilometers
                                                                                                                                                                                                 RAILROADS
                                 0           25       50          75     100 Miles                                                                                                               DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
                            This map was produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.                                                                                                      INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES
                            The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information
                            shown on this map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank                                                                                             * The town councils of Francistown,
                            Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
                            endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.
                                                                                                                                                                                      Gaborone, Lobatse, and Selebi-Pikwe
                                                                                                                                                                                      have status equal to Districts.
         20∞E                                                                                                                      25∞E

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SEPTEMBER 2004
