March 2016




         Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime:
         Investing in Public Safety, the Rule of Law
         and Local Development in Poor Neighborhoods

         PART 2: OPTIONS FOR WORLD BANK
                 	
                 ENGAGEMENT WITH POLICE


                                                     Governance Global Practice




2              Heike P. Gramckow, Jack Greene, Ineke Marshall & Lisa Barão




                                PART 2: Options for World Bank Engagement with Police
© 2016 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org



Disclaimer

This work is a product of external consultants and staff of the World Bank. The findings,
interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views
of the World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the governments they represent. The
World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries,
colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply
any judgment on the part of the World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

Rights and Permissions

The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because the World Bank encourages
dissemination of its knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for
noncommercial purposes as long as full attribution is given. For permission to reproduce any
part of this work for commercial purposes, please send a request with complete information to
the Copyright Clearance Center Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA; telephone:
978-750-8400; fax: 978-750-4470; Internet: www.copyright.com. All other queries on rights
and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher,
The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2422; e-mail:
pubrights@worldbank.org.




Cover Photo: Heike Gramckow




Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime:
Investing in Public Safety, the Rule of Law
and Local Development in Poor Neighborhoods




 2
PART        OPTIONS FOR WORLD BANK
            ENGAGEMENT WITH POLICE
            Heike P. Gramckow, Jack Greene, Ineke Marshall & Lisa Barão
Table of Contents




Foreword and Acknowledgements	                                                        IV
About the Authors	                                                                    VI

1.	 Investing in Police Reforms: A Link to Successful Development	                     1
   1.1 LAW ENFORCEMENT: A CRITICAL PIECE	                                              2
   1.2 REFORMING POLICE SERVICES: OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES	                        3

2.	 Developing the Foundation for Effective Changes	                                   6
3.	 Practical Elements of Police Reform	                                              11
   3.1 LEVELS OF INTERVENTION AND OUTCOME MEASURES	                                   11   III
   3.2 PREPARING FOR INVESTMENTS	                                                     15
   3.3 INITIAL ENGAGEMENT OPTIONS TO PREPARE FOR LONGER-TERM ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE	   16
   3.4 THE VALUE OF A PILOT PROGRAM 	                                                 20
   3.5 INVESTMENTS IN SUSTAINABLE POLICE TRAINING AND EDUCATION FOR THE LONG TERM 	   21
   3.6 INVESTMENTS FOR DEVELOPING POLICE PERFORMANCE METRICS AND MEASURING
      PROGRESS AND SUSTAINABLE SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT FOR THE LONG TERM 	                 23

4.	 Conclusion: Promoting Organizational Change	                                      24

References	29
     Foreword and Acknowledgements



                                          Justice is central to the World Bank’s core agenda of reducing poverty and boosting
                                          shared prosperity. It is an intrinsic goal of development overall and influences
                                          the achievement of many specific development outcomes. Well-functioning and
                                          inclusive justice institutions prevent and mitigate conflict, crime, and violence;
                                          ensure executive accountability and people’s meaningful access to services;
                                          give people legal identity and voice to protect their rights; enable investment
                                          and private sector growth; and promote equitable and inclusive development
                                          outcomes.

                                          The Bank’s 2011 World Development Report demonstrated that conflict, crime,
                                          and violence are major barriers to development, with direct economic costs that
                                          can add up to substantial proportions of GDP.1 Of the various dimensions of the
                                          rule of law, the basic control of violence has the strongest correlation to economic
                                          growth in developing countries. Moreover, crime and violence especially affect
IV
                                          the poor. High levels of criminality and widespread violence create fear that
                                          constrains mobility, erodes trust between people and communities and their trust
                                          in institutions, and reinforces stigmas toward and the exclusion of certain groups
                                          perceived to be dangerous, all of which impede long-term development. Effective
                                          and well-functioning justice systems can provide the critical legitimate processes
                                          that are needed for the resolution of grievances that might otherwise lead to
                                          conflict, crime, and violence.

                                          Implementing holistic approaches to violence, crime, and insecurity has become
                                          a part of the Bank’s work. These engagements have thus far been limited and
                                          led chiefly by two Global Practices (GPs), primarily in Latin America and the
                                          Caribbean. The Urban and Social Development GP focuses on urban design
                                          and social approaches to violence prevention,2 and the Governance GP’s justice
                                          team is collaborating with them on analytical work, operational design, and initial
                                          implementation and on initial engagements with ministries of justice to support
                                          police and other criminal justice sector agencies, especially in Latin America.
                                          Citizen security and violence prevention are currently a small area of the Bank’s
                                          work, but they have significant growth potential, primarily in Latin America and
                                          the Caribbean, though demand also exists in the Middle East and North Africa,
                                          Europe and Central Asia, and various fragile and conflict-affected states.




     1	 In El Salvador, for example, the value of lives lost due to death and disability reached approximately US$271 million, nearly 2 percent of
        GDP, in 2010. See World Bank, “Crime and Violence in Central America:
        A Development Challenge (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2011a). In Guatemala, violence cost the country roughly US$2.4 billion, or 7.3
        percent of GDP in 2005. See UNDP, “El Costo Economico de la Violencia en Guatemala” (New York: UNDP: 2006).
     2	 In the area of violence prevention and citizen security, there are six Development Policy Loans (DPLs) worth US$2.7 billion in Brazil, Colom-
        bia, and Honduras. In addition, the Bank’s portfolio includes 53 projects aimed at violence prevention (20 investments, two Institutional
        Development Funds (IDFs), 16 analyses, and nine technical assistance operations). Roughly 60 percent of violence-related investments are
        located in Latin America and the Caribbean, with the remaining 40 percent divided between East Asia and Africa.




     Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
This document was developed as a result of a request from World Bank President
Jim Yong Kim to the Governance GP for more information on the link between
crime and poverty and the Bank’s current and potential engagement to support
client countries in their efforts to counter crime in their communities. The resulting
review of the evidence base and the Bank’s response to date pointed to the need
to highlight the importance of law enforcement to counter crime as part of a holistic
approach, especially in poor communities, which not only suffer from economic
and social ills but also rarely have access to the government services needed to
address these problems. Effective policing services are also lacking, leading to a
serious enforcement gap in many poor communities that requires attention and
investment to allow these neighborhoods to recover and eventually prosper.

The authors would like to thank the World Bank’s internal and external reviewers
of an earlier concept note and a draft of this document: Rodrigo Serrano-Berthet
                                                                                                                V
(Lead Social Development Specialist, Social, Urban, Rural, Resilience Global
Practice [GSURR]), David Hawkes (Lead Specialist, Integrity Vice Presidency,
Directorate of Operations [INTOP]), Jorge Luis Silva (Public Sector Specialist,
Governance Global Practice [GGODR]), Joan Hofman Serrano (Senior Social
Development Specialist, GSURR), Jimena Garotte (Senior Counsel, Legal Vice
Presidency), and Holly Burkhalter (International Justice Mission). Input was also
provided by Alexander Berg, Deborah Isser, Doug Porter, Jared Schott, and Nicolas
Menzies (GGODR). Their feedback and comments have helped shape this paper
into what we hope will be a useful contribution to the growing literature on crime,
poverty, and development and ways to address police reform in challenging
circumstances. We also thank Patricia Carley for her excellent and skilled editing.




                                                        PART 2: Options for World Bank Engagement with Police
     About the Authors



                               Dr. Heike Gramckow is a Lead Counsel with the Justice and Rule of Law Group
                               in the Governance Global Practice of the World Bank in Washington, DC, where
                               she advises on justice reform issues and conducts related research. She has been
                               working on justice sector reform issues for nearly 30 years. Before joining the
                               Bank, she was Deputy Director of the International Division of the National Center
                               for State Courts and served as Director for Research and Development for the
                               American Prosecutors Research Institute. Dr. Gramckow has worked with courts,
                               prosecutors, and police in the United States and throughout the world, especially
                               on justice system management and reform. She has directed justice reform
                               programs and assessments and provided advice to the governments of numerous
                               countries, including Argentina, Bosnia, Bulgaria, Egypt, Germany, Haiti, Hungary,
                               Indonesia, Japan, Kenya, Mali, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Nepal, Nigeria, Papua
                               New Guinea, Qatar, Romania, Saudi Arabia, Serbia, Slovenia, Syria, Thailand, the
                               United Arab Emirates, and the United States. In her career, Dr. Gramckow has
VI
                               worked with common law, civil law, Shari’a-based, and customary justice systems.
                               She has trained judges, prosecutors, and court personnel on management,
                               budget and strategic planning, reengineering, and other substantive issues, such
                               as victim assistance, drug case management, juvenile offenders, and domestic
                               violence. She has also provided advice on establishing sustainable mechanisms
                               for continuing education, introducing effective information and communications
                               technology (ICT) solutions and designing good governance structures that
                               support democratic and accountable agencies. Dr. Gramckow holds a law degree
                               and a doctorate in law from the University of Hamburg, Germany. She has taught
                               undergraduate and graduate courses on international criminal justice systems and
                               juvenile justice at American University and the George Washington University in
                               Washington, DC, and is widely published in the United States and internationally.

                               Dr. Jack R. Greene is professor at the School of Criminology and Criminal Justice
                               at Northeastern University in Boston, MA, where he studies the police. Recognized
                               as one of the leading scholars in the United States in the field of policing,
                               Dr. Greene has published six books, a two-volume Encyclopedia of Police Science,
                               and over 150 research articles, book chapters, research reports, and policy papers
                               on matters of policing in the United States and internationally. He has consulted
                               for various U.S. agencies and organizations, including the Philadelphia and Los
                               Angeles Police Departments, the U.S. Justice Department, the National Institute
                               of Justice, the Urban Institute, the Rand Corporation, and the U.S. Department
                               of State, and currently serves on the Research Advisory Committee of the
                               International Association of Chiefs of Police. He is also a former Commissioner on
                               the Commission for Accreditation of Law Enforcement and a former member of
                               the Research Committee of the Police Foundation. Dr. Greene has written widely
                               on matters of police service delivery, community approaches to policing, crime
                               prevention, and police management.




     Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
Dr. Ineke Haen Marshall has earned degrees in Sociology from Tilburg University
(the Netherlands), the College of William and Mary (the United States), and
Bowling Green State University (the United States) and is currently professor of
sociology at the School of Criminology and Criminal Justice at Northeastern
University (Boston, MA). She has published several books and many articles on
comparative criminology, juvenile delinquency, homicide, criminal careers, and
international crime trends. Professor Marshall is chair of the International Self-
Report Study of Delinquency (ISRD), a large international collaborative study
of juvenile delinquency and victimization with 35 participating countries across
the globe. She has worked as an expert with the European Institute for Crime
Prevention and Control (HEUNI) and the United Nations Office for Drugs and
Crime (UNODC), and was the American Society of Criminology (ASC) Main Liaison
to the United Nations Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) between 2005
and 2011.
                                                                                                              VII

Lisa Barão is a doctoral student at Northeastern University in Boston, MA, earning
her degree in Criminology and Justice Policy. She obtained her bachelor’s degree
in criminal justice from the University of Massachusetts Amherst and her master’s
degree in criminal justice from the University of Massachusetts Lowell. Her research
interests are centered on police-community relations, organizational policies, and
law enforcement recruitment and selection processes.




                                                      PART 2: Options for World Bank Engagement with Police
VIII




       Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
1.	Investing in Police Reforms:
   A Link to Successful Development

  The first volume of this report examined the implications of socially disorganized
  communities on the continued spread of violence and crime, as well as the ways
  that police services can become engaged to rebuild their legitimacy, improve
  community safety, and restore support for the law. Criminologists have long
  recognized a connection between crime, violence, and social disorder on the one
  hand and marginalization on the other, whether of communities or individuals.
  Environmental theories of crime suggest that people who live in socially
  disorganized communities, where local informal social control has become frayed
  and the community is unable to effectively supervise individual behavior, are less
  able to address crime and disorder problems and must rely instead on the formal
  apparatus of the state, including the police and the wider justice system, to help
  protect community safety. Absent a constructive police response, however, these
  communities often spiral downward into more disorder and crime, sometimes
  leaving them controlled or overseen by criminal organizations or gangs and thus
  further undermining inclusive development and the rule of law.
                                                                                                                                                   1
  Research on police practices in these communities suggests that the police can
  exacerbate community problems by failing to support legitimate community
  leaders. They can also impede community building efforts by demonstrating
  indifference to community problems and/or participating in corrupt practices.
  Moreover, it is clear worldwide that poor communities in particular feel the brunt of
  crime and violence (Haugen and Boutros 2014) and that their vulnerability to crime
  and violence inhibits the very measures that would help pull these communities
  out of their desperate situation. Without safety and security interventions in
  violence-prone communities, other development assistance in sectors such as
  education, public health, and so forth are blunted by the all-consuming insecurity
  and fear of victimization that crime and violence cause.

  Recognizing the critical link between security and the ability to achieve its twin
  goals of eradicating extreme poverty and contributing to shared prosperity,
  the World Bank has increased efforts to support programs that aim to prevent
  violence and promote citizen safety.3 The 2011 World Development Report (WDR)
  already positioned security as a critical development issue, with a corresponding
  operationalization plan. Other corporate measures have included guidance
  for staff on the Bank’s engagement in criminal justice activities;4 the creation of
  a Criminal Justice Resource Group (CJRG) that spans several Global Practices;



  3	 Violence is recognized as a chief impediment to the realization of all of the United Nations’ Millennium Development Goals and is an
     important part of the discourse on the post-2015 agenda for global development.
  4	 The “Legal Note on Bank Involvement in the Criminal Justice Sector,” which clarifies the legal mandate of the Bank in the area of criminal
     justice reform, was updated in 2012 and led to a “Staff Guidance Note: World Bank Support for Criminal Justice Activities,” providing guid-
     ance on managing the legal, reputational, and operational risks of Bank engagement in the criminal justice sector. See A-M Leroy, “Legal
     Note on Bank Involvement in the Criminal Justice Sector” (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2012); and Justice Reform Unit, “Staff Guidance
     Note: World Bank Support for Criminal Justice Activities” (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2012). The launch of these two documents was fol-
     lowed by the creation of the Bank-wide Criminal Justice Resource Group (CJRG), which aims to support Bank teams and client governments
     in the assessment, design, implementation, monitoring, and evaluation of criminal justice programs.




                                                                      PART 2: Options for World Bank Engagement with Police
                                        and the generation of knowledge on various aspects of violence prevention and
                                        criminal justice reform. The extent of crime, violence, and corruption, as well as
                                        governments’ capacities and efforts to deal with these issues, are all elements
                                        of the Bank’s Country Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA) for International
                                        Development Association (IDA) countries, and the cost of crime to the business
                                        community is weighed in the Bank’s World Development Indicators.

                                        With an increasing focus on urbanization, and urban upgrading in particular, the
                                        World Bank’s clients are demanding greater investment in violence prevention,
                                        urban safety, and citizen security. Not surprisingly, the Systematic Country
                                        Diagnostics (SCDs) of a number of Central American and other countries, including
                                        Liberia, Madagascar, and Papua New Guinea, have recognized the substantial
                                        impediment to development that crime and violence represent. According
                                        to an informal 2013 portfolio review, the Bank’s lending, technical assistance,
                                        and analytical services in citizen security and interpersonal violence prevention
                                        amounted to approximately US$276 million in that year. This spans activities
                                        ranging from violence monitoring and municipal planning to implement citizen
                                        security strategies, to crime prevention through urban upgrading, school-based
                                        violence prevention, and support for criminal justice reform. Added to this are
                                        the Development Policy Loans (DPLs) of US$2.7 billion that contain violence
                                        prevention and citizen security prior actions or policy pillars in Brazil, Colombia,
                                        and Honduras.
2
                                        This increasing demand, together with the restructuring of the World Bank into
                                        14 Global Practices, provides an unprecedented opportunity to consolidate
                                        programming that addresses violence and citizen security into integrated strategic
                                        solutions rather than through sector-specific interventions. The 2012 legal opinion
                                        clarifying the scope of the Bank’s criminal justice work in a development context
                                        has also created the necessary space for the Bank to engage in a wide range
                                        of interventions, with only a few exceptions, if the appropriate risk management
                                        approach is part of the design, that is, if one recognizes that sometimes the option
                                        not to engage can be even more harmful to the client country.5 Crime prevention
                                        activities, especially as part of broader sector work in urban planning and social
                                        development, have gained traction in the Bank’s lending portfolio. The piece that
                                        is most often missing, however, is support for reform of policing efforts in crime-
                                        ridden neighborhoods.


                                        1.1 LAW ENFORCEMENT: A CRITICAL PIECE
                                        As outlined in detail in part 1, using a community or problem-oriented policing
                                        approach coupled with restorative justice practices has been shown to be more
                                        effective in achieving sustainable changes in neighborhoods and police agencies
                                        than employing less holistic approaches or maintaining traditional police reform
                                        activities. Developing these alternative methods based on solid problem
                                        assessments and building the needed community and other agency support
                                        also allows for the effective sequencing of engagement options and offers risk
                                        management frameworks that are a natural part of the design of how citizens and
                                        police engage. Assessment, data collection and stakeholder consultations are
                                        already required parts of the Bank’s project design and implementation process.



    5	 The opinion is summarized in the Bank’s “Staff Guidance Note,” which provides further guidance to staff on assessing related risks and on
       fostering a meaningful and feasible risk management approach to development. It also led to the creation of the Bank-wide CJRG.




    Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
Time and resource limitations (and data scarcity) during design often limit the
depth of these necessary elements. Especially for effective police reform they
are, however, more than bureaucratic World Bank (and other donor) requirements
but part of the needed building blocks for community, problem oriented and
restorative justice approaches. Solid problem assessment, data development
and engagement of other agencies and the community often also inform the
development of a practical risk management framework that is built into the
operations of the police agency instead of a process that still viewed by clients
and task teams as a cumbersome add-on to comply with Bank requirements. For
example, creating citizen review boards as part of the police agency’s governance
structure provides for one important risk management tool, a range of other
examples can be found in the above mentioned Staff Guidance Note.

A design that links community and problem-oriented policing with restorative
justice processes has the strong potential to improve the quality of justice in
community settings, most particularly communities that have historically been
marginalized and isolated. The changes needed in these communities, as well as
in the police and other government agencies that should be providing vital public
services, require close consideration of the philosophical, structural, and functional
capacities of each law enforcement and government entity, especially the police
and local justice decision makers. Reforms sought through the introduction of
community and problem-oriented policing as well as restorative justice processes
flow from lessons learned, especially from other efforts to successfully implement
                                                                                                                3
community policing (Greene 2000), and also from scientific reviews of community
leadership and engagement in other government reforms as well as evaluations of
neighborhood-level restorative justice programs. The combined evidence shows
that changes have to occur at, and need to be designed for, a variety of levels,
including the community, organization, work group (i.e., neighborhood police
station, unit, or division), and individual levels, within each entity, particularly
the police.

Police are often the one agency that poor and marginalized communities equate
most with inefficient, corrupt, and abusive government operations. Police are also
often the only agency actually visible in these neighborhoods—if any government
entity is ever present at all. This is a challenge but also an opportunity, because
if the police are better able to respond to community needs, communities can
develop greater trust in their services and connect with them to develop community
and government service networks that together can turn a neighborhood around
and provide an environment for lasting change, both at the community and
government agency levels.


1.2 REFORMING POLICE SERVICES: OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES
Figure 1 traces the opportunities and challenges in improving local police services
in marginalized urban communities. These opportunities and challenges were
discussed in part 1 of this publication, and reviewing each is helpful in deciding on
and planning for engagement options.

Opportunities include police improvements in crime control, public safety, and
community social development through the use of community and problem-
oriented policing and police involvement in restorative justice practices. Such
improvements strengthen community-police relations and public trust in the police,
while at the same time help to stabilize neighborhoods, increase neighborhood



                                                        PART 2: Options for World Bank Engagement with Police
                               bonds, and strengthen social cohesion and civic integration, leading to more
                               effective and lawful policing while also strengthening neighborhood informal
                               social control.

                               Challenges include corruption (in all its variants, such as bribery, abuse of office,
                               political influence, crime), the routine use of excessive force, over- and under-
                               policing, police inefficiencies and indifference, the lack of trust in and fear of the
                               police, and a shortage of resources for the police service to professionalize. All of
                               these factors inhibit the capacity of police systems to make the kinds of changes
                               envisioned here. Addressing these challenges within the context of a different
                               community, problem-oriented, and restorative justice philosophy is as important
                               as embracing the opportunities.




    FIGURE 1.	 Opportunities and Challenges for Improving Local Police Services in Marginalized
                 Communities in Developing Countries




4                                                                                     -	More Efficient &
                              Crime Control                                             Effective Crime Control
                                                            Trust in Police           -	More Normative Compliance
                                    &
                                                           Police Legitimacy            with the Law
                              Public Safety
                                                                                      -	More Adherence to Rule of Law &
                                                                                        Human Rights
          OPPORTUNITIES
                                                     -	Stabilize Neighborhoods
                                Community            -	Increase Neighborhoods Bonds    -	Stronger Informal Control
                               Development           -	Strengthen Social Cohesion      -	Less social Disorganization
                                                     -	Increase Civic Integration      -	Less Fear, More Public Safety
                                                                                       -	More Community Development


       Police
      Services



                                              -	Corruption
                                              -	Excessive Force (Abuse, Killings)
                                              -	Over- & Underpolicing
           CHALLENGES
                                              -	Inefficient, Ineffective Policing
                                              -	High Fear, Lack of Trust
                                              -	Lack of Resources




    Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
As surprising as it may sound, the police have been the conduit of change not
just for greater community safety but for better government service delivery in
many places. The most heavily documented examples come from the United
States, Australia, and the United Kingdom, but there are examples from Brazil,
Mongolia, and South Africa also. At the same time, strict and seemingly heavy-
handed law enforcement may sometimes be the needed first step toward
creating space for other government agencies to work in community settings and
also for communities to come together and work with service providers to develop
delivery structures that address community needs. Practically speaking, in very
desolate, crime-ridden communities, aggressive police action is often the only
realistic step that can be taken to contain and take charge of an out-of-control
environment in which local community members have become the pawns of
gangs, organized crime, and corrupt government agents.

Taken together, the changes need to redress the relationship between the
police and the public; open police organizations to civic input, transparency,
and accountability; ensure adherence to the rule of law; restructure the internal
workings of police organizations to facilitate a new external focus; broaden the
role and function of the police, particularly in community settings; and create
assessment systems that include community support dimensions. These measures
offer framework and sequencing options for Bank programming against crime and
violence that include a solid police component. Without a doubt, law enforcement
is essential to reducing crime in any country or neighborhood, but this is especially
                                                                                                               5
so in poor communities that do not have the resources to buy private security
and have limited—and often questionable—means to organize or “hire” their own
militia to keep the peace and allow neighborhoods to function.

If crime and insecurity are a problem in cities or other parts of a client country,
confronting the issue of law enforcement is unavoidable. The question, then, is how
the Bank can better engage in these dynamics. For the Bank, this “how” question
begins first with a consideration of more effective frameworks for reforming the
police as elaborated in this publication, which is grounded in an understanding of
what would be the most meaningful, politically acceptable, and portfolio-relevant
approach for the Bank within a particular country. This paper does not exhaustively
address this issue, but it does outline options to consider within a context that
emphasizes that non-engagement in communities that are plagued by crime and
violence threatens all other development investments.




                                                       PART 2: Options for World Bank Engagement with Police
    2.	Developing the Foundation for Effective Changes


                                Depending on the country context and building on Bank and other donor and
                                international financial institution (IFI) activities, engagement options for improving
                                police capacities will vary and should be coordinated with the Bank’s overall
                                portfolio and assessment process.

                                Step 1: Understand the impact of crime and violence on country development
                                and the Bank’s portfolio and assess crime trends in country context, along with
                                government responses and capacities, as well as other donor engagement
                                activities.

                                Having sufficient information to gauge the impact of crime and violence on
                                development in general, and on the poor specifically, is the first step. Country
                                Management Units (CMUs) have a range of options for building the needed
                                evidence base over time, even when resources are limited. Some data and
                                information can be collected as part of other regular Bank activities, and other
                                organizations and donors often have already compiled a range of reports that can
6
                                be utilized.

                                CPIA. As mentioned above, for IDA countries, CPIA Section 12 requires an
                                assessment of crime and corruption trends, the capacities of the government to
                                respond, and impacts on development overall, and also information on gender
                                issues and particular sectors, if it is readily available. Not all CPIAs address this
                                outside the corruption piece, and this is an area on which CMUs can insist on
                                getting more detailed information. The CMU in Mongolia has paid particular
                                attention to this information for several years, and its CPIA provides a good
                                example that others can build on.

                                Systematic Country Diagnoses (SCDs) and Country Partnership Frameworks
                                (CPFs). The SCDs and CPFs of some of the most crime-impacted countries,
                                especially in Central America, already review the crime and development
                                connection to the extent possible. In other countries, even those that have long
                                been plagued by these ills such as Haiti, understanding and documenting crime
                                and its impact on overall and sector development, the government’s response
                                capacity, and other donor engagement have received less attention. This may be
                                because other actors are already active in this regard, creating the impression that
                                there is little need to reflect on related work in the Bank’s portfolio. Nonetheless,
                                it would still be valuable to have a better understanding of the impact of crime
                                and violence on development and on the Bank’s work in a particular country to
                                better comprehend where the Bank could improve in either linking to other donor
                                work or building crime prevention and law enforcement components into Bank
                                programs, thereby addressing enforcement gaps.

                                Crime trends. It is important to track crime trends and government responses
                                to inform ongoing and evolving Bank programs. Even if there is no request from
                                the client to address crime and work with police, CMUs in countries where the
                                CPIA or SCD indicates that crime is a problem should ensure that appropriate



      Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
police responses track the impact of crime on development and programming to
better understand any impediments to program development objectives and to
inform future investments. Most often, the CMU does not have sufficient funds to
compile or support a good assessment of crime trends, government response
capacities, and development impact beyond what is done as part of regular
Bank activities. CMUs in high-crime countries interested in having a better under-
standing of crime’s effect on development and of police and other justice sector
agency performance can often draw on data collected by other development
partners operating in the country. Their own activities may also provide for a
range of alternative programming options, including early collaboration on
Trust Fund applications for more solid data collection and assessment schemes,
as well as DPL and Program for Results (PforR) options that also reflect other
donor programs.

Step 2: Develop programming to build crime and performance data collection
capacities and policy dialogue support in the client country.

If there is a request from the client for help in addressing serious crime and
insecurity issues in the country, a good initial entry point is to support the
development of local crime data collection and analysis capacities and to
begin developing an evidence-based scheme to define and track enforcement
agency performance. Such data are vital for the government in its effort to
develop a clear and valid response to crime and violence and in informing
                                                                                                                  7
potential Bank investments in a range of sectors that are impacted by crime as
well as any potential investments in broader crime prevention and enforcement
programs. The Bank has a good track record in supporting the development
and strengthening of Crime Observatories in Latin American countries; it also
has a particular competitive edge when it comes to conducting sector-wide
expenditure reviews (see Gramckow and Fernandez-Monge 2014) and community
and agency diagnostics to assess community crime and violence issues, as
well as the capacities and readiness of both communities and the police for
sequenced changes.

Even when other donors are already providing assistance to law enforcement,
areas such as expenditure reviews, data collection capacity building and political
economy analysis, are frequently not at the center of their work yet can provide
a helpful contribution to a country’s efforts to counter crime and violence. Such
activities, possibly as part of an ASA, also tend to carry a relatively low political and
reputational risk and are important precursors to development policy support and
results-oriented programming.

Political economy analysis, a particular Bank forte, represents another early
engagement and preparation option. Reform of police systems in some countries
has become more rhetorical than substantive in the absence of a clear and
visible commitment from policy makers and justice officials (Brodgen 1999).
Moreover, there are a number of factors that appear to weaken reform efforts
in police services across the world, including the broader cultural acceptance of
police use of violence, such as in Brazil (Chevigny 1996, 23–36) and even recently
in the United States. Consequently, such factors highlight the difficulties of
restructuring policing efforts toward the rule of law, particularly in post-
conflict countries such as in El Salvador (Stanley 1996, 37–78), and the complexity
in reforming the police in countries where such reform may challenge the repressive
capacity of the government and the police (Bayley 2006).



                                                          PART 2: Options for World Bank Engagement with Police
                              The police also possess or are part of strong political power structures in many
                              developing countries, the result of colonization through para-military policing with
                              the objective of pacification (Cole 1999). Police agencies in the Western world
                              too have had considerable capacity to blunt reform efforts. Simply put, police
                              organizations across the world exercise considerable power. They were often
                              created as a domestic version of the military and as a consequence, a militarized
                              police in parts of Asia and Latin America, Russia, South Africa, and elsewhere have
                              ruled civil populations with an iron fist, leading to widespread and excessive use of
                              force by the police (Mars 2002). Much of this resulted from the tensions between
                              the legacy of colonialism and post-colonial conditions (for a review, see Pino and
                              Wiatrowski 2006, 11– 42), and in many client countries, police structures have not
                              significantly changed in decades.

                              Reforming police and other justice system agencies and practices is a complex
                              and time-consuming administrative and operational process. It involves first and
                              foremost the dedication of senior police agency officials to support, implement,
                              nurture, and monitor the changes, often over many years. This kind of reform has
                              been likened to turning a large cargo ship in the ocean; it must be incremental
                              and well thought out to ensure that the actual objective is achieved. Justice
                              agencies are like these large seagoing vessels. They have long-standing structures
                              and routines that will resist change if it comes too quickly, yet they will need to
                              be reformed if community and problem-oriented policing and restorative justice
                              practices are to be implemented. This does not differ much from attempts to
8
                              reform other government agencies, but the scope is often much larger. The
                              national police agencies found in many of the Bank’s client countries can include
                              thousands of officers dispersed across a country, larger groups concentrated in
                              cities and operating within various municipal power structures, and others located
                              in sometimes very remote places, often operating alone and with little support,
                              few resources, and weak management and supervision structures. Change
                              requirements will need to be well understood, well sequenced, and given the time
                              needed to mature. The more encompassing and fundamental the change, the
                              longer it will take to become institutionalized.

                              In Mongolia, World Bank investments over two decades, together with several
                              other donor programs in justice reform, illustrate the complexity of these reform
                              efforts (Gramckow and Allen 2011). Many attempts have been made to assist
                              in the country’s movement toward judicial independence and accountability.
                              Courts in Mongolia have witnessed significant changes in the number of judges,
                              the number, type and complexity of cases they receive and adjudicate, and the
                              internal capacity and infrastructure of the judicial system over this period. At the
                              same time, surveys since 2001 suggest that the public is less supportive of the
                              courts than previously, viewing them as bureaucratic, corrupt, answerable to the
                              wealthy, and unequal in the application of the law (Gramckow and Allen 2011,
                              14–16). Such findings suggest that implementing reform in major legal and justice
                              institutions is difficult, requiring considerable time and commitment. This is
                              especially the case in countries or regions where the justice apparatus, especially
                              the police, has been seen to make community problems worse, not better. As
                              the 2011 WDR suggests, 40 years is not an unrealistic time frame for significant
                              governance changes to take hold, but when citizens, governments, and donors
                              are eager to see changes materialize, such cautious and lengthy time frames may
                              not be well received. That is why smaller, targeted pilot activities in neighborhoods
                              ready to embrace a different police approach, with local police leaders ready
                              to commit to changes, are good places to begin reform efforts. First amending



    Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
the mentalities, attitudes, and behaviors of a few key players and strategically
communicating the results are sound, realistic first steps toward longer-term
changes.

The implementation of community, problem-oriented, and restorative philo-
sophies and practices in local justice system agencies, especially the police,
requires commitment to the rule of law and open and transparent government
procedures. Absent such commitments, these changes can be seen as the
“velvet glove” encircling the “iron fist,” that is, the concealment of state power
and coercion in the wrappings of a more open and justice legal system (see
Bayley 2006). Building an understanding of and commitment to the rule of
law is essential, as is building confidence and competence in the judiciary and
prosecution services.

The Bank’s unique position and convening power open opportunities for
policy dialogue support by using data-driven evidence for early stakeholder
consultations and citizen engagement activities. An increased interest in and focus
on agency social accountability mechanisms for governments in many countries
provides another option for early knowledge exchanges.

Step 3: Build crime prevention and enforcement components into sector work.

Considering that serious crime and violence impact all aspects of development,
                                                                                                               9
the options for building crime prevention programs and even selecting police
capacity strengthening components into other Bank projects are broad. Urban
planning programs have included crime prevention and community policing
activities in Latin America, social and community development programs offer
a range of interventions to monitor crime and strengthen community cohesion
and capacities to counter crime, and environmental and wildlife management
programs increasingly consider community capacities to protect these resources,
to mention a few options.

Naturally, when a community-oriented policing component is to be included,
sufficient diagnostic work has to be conducted to inform the design and
engagement. This should include a good risk assessment and management
component, just as would be done for engagement with any government agency.
In some contexts, another donor may be better positioned to support this
diagnostic work, while in other instances, a program component, particularly one
focusing on a target neighborhood, would be a good pilot for broader engagement
with police in the future.

Step 4: Improve comprehensive crime prevention and enforcement
programming.

Serious crime and violence problems require serious investment to address
them. As outlined in detail in part 1, ample scientific evidence has shown that
building more cohesive communities that have the capacity to resist crime requires
long-term investments in many sectors, including in trusted, professional police
services. A programmatic approach that builds on existing activities in other
sectors and other donor activities and focuses on improved governance and
service delivery systems is often what is ultimately needed to help a country turn
its cities and communities around. If this is not a financially or politically viable
option, having locally targeted crime prevention and enforcement components in



                                                       PART 2: Options for World Bank Engagement with Police
                                        other Bank projects, ideally with a strong governance program that includes a
                                        police reform component or project, may be a more realistic choice.

                                        Figure 2 below provides a snapshot of the range of engagement options the Bank
                                        can offer its client countries to address crime and violence in a comprehensive
                                        manner.




     FIGURE 2.	 Engagement Options for Crime Prevention and Enforcement




                                                                WORLD BANK
                                                                 SERVICES
         (1) Convene Key                                                                                   (4) Capture
        Stakeholders for                                                                                  Knowledge &
       Policy Dialogue and                                                                                Build Capacity
          Consultations
                                                                        (3) Finance Multi-Sector
                                           (2) Analytical Work          Investments, DPLs, RAS,
10                                                                         Grants at Different
                                                                          Government Levels



                                                                                                              Violence
                                                                                                         Prevention Toolkits
           Government:                                                                                   Building National,
                                    Diagnostics of Crime                         Country
             National                                                                                   Regional, Municipal,
                                     & Violence Drivers                          Society &
            Regional                                                                                    Agency & Community
                                         Costs of Violence                        Sector
              Local                                                                                           Capacity
           Community                       Expenditure                                                       ICT-Enabled
         Representatives                Reviews of Justice &                                             Data-Gathering &
                                        Security Institutions                                           Citizen Engagement
        Other Stakeholders                                           Family &            Municipality         Solutions
                                              Policy
            Academia                     & Organizational           Individual           & Community
                                                                                                            Knowledge
                                             Reviews                                                        Exchanges
              Donors




     Source: Harborne and Bisca 2013.




     Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
3.	Practical Elements of Police Reform


  Whether community or problem-oriented policing will increase police efficiency,
  effectiveness, and lawfulness depends on many factors. The philosophies,
  strategies, programs, and tactics that have emerged in modern-day policing over
  the past 25 years and that are tied to the community policing movement suggest
  some common dimensions.

  The core elements of community policing programs include:

  •	   a redefinition of the police role;

  •	   greater reciprocity in police and community relations;

  •	   area decentralization of police services and command; and

  •	   some form of civilianization6 (Skolnick and Bayley 1986).
                                                                                                                                                       11
  Each of these changes is viewed as a necessary condition to realizing greater police
  accountability and adherence to the rule of law. At the same time, these efforts
  suggest that if adopted, the police can become more effective in addressing
  persistent crime and social disorder problems that continue to destabilize
  communities.

  Problem-solving and restorative justice practices align with community policing
  well. Both seek to resolve community tensions and problems analytically, with
  targeted interventions and community reparation and reconciliation as central
  features. In both problem-oriented and restorative justice practices, reducing
  community harm and restoring community social cohesion are important goals.


  3.1 LEVELS OF INTERVENTION AND OUTCOME MEASURES
  To better understand how these new approaches are improving policing in
  communities, it is important to see them as a series of interventions occurring
  on several levels. They are expected to have an impact on communities and on
  the police role and structure, including police officer attachment to community
  and crime prevention values and to a broader set of community service ideals.
  The levels of intervention and change should be clear and explicit, including the
  anticipated outcomes. In this way, the outlines of a program evolve that include
  agency development, community engagement, and a monitoring and evaluation
  system to assess the implementation and results. Community and problem-
  oriented policing as well as restorative justice practices seek to change the



  6	 Civilianization” of the police refers to the process of carving out any number of roles and functions within police services that can be ac-
     complished by civilians who are trained for these positions but who do not carry the legal authorities of the police. In introducing civilians
     into police organizations it is anticipated that 1) costs for police services may be reduced in non-field-based activities, and 2) a sufficient
     number of civilians in police services helps to mediate strong police cultures.




                                                                        PART 2: Options for World Bank Engagement with Police
                               “technology of policing”—that is, how the police do business, with the specific
                               intent of improving community safety and security as well as public respect for the
                               law and the officers who are supposed to enforce it.

                               If these new models of policing are to be embraced and become a sustained
                               strategic intervention, they will need to confront several organizational change
                               issues in order to replace or modify the structure and culture of traditional policing.
                               Figure 3 examines the necessary changes involved. Four major levels of change
                               are anticipated: community, organizational, work group (i.e., police unit, division),
                               and individual police officer. Through these overlapping levels, the anticipated
                               changes impact differing aspects of the community and the police organization,
                               as well as how groups and individual officers go about their work.

                               At the community level, the interventions seek to engage the community with
                               the police in a public safety co-production relationship. Such programs aim at
                               stabilizing neighborhoods, increasing neighborhood bonds and communication,
                               increasing the capacity of the neighborhood to mediate in conflict situations, and
                               ultimately strengthening neighborhood social cohesion and collective efficacy. The
                               development of these activities is supported by scientific evidence indicating that
                               cohesive neighborhoods are more crime resistant. If properly implemented, the
                               measures should reduce fear of crime, increase community use of public spaces,
                               reduce neighborhood disorder, and ultimately decrease crime and victimization.
                               At the same time, they are expected to improve police and community interactions
12
                               and increase the legitimacy of the law and the police in the community’s eyes.

                               At the police organizational level, the interventions must address several issues.
                               First, they must confront the police agency’s philosophy, structure, policies,
                               and processes, as well as how the police conduct themselves, what is valued,
                               commitment to the rule of law, and a service identity with processes that support
                               communities, all of which contribute to increasing community social cohesion.
                               This includes how (or if) the department defines its constituents, how it defines
                               and solves problems, and how it values, measures, and rewards what it produces.
                               The interventions must also consider the department’s structure, or the way the
                               organization divides labor and differentiates its parts, and how (or if) that structure
                               supports community-based initiatives.

                               These interventions must additionally address the organization’s culture, or the
                               values, beliefs, symbols, and assumptions that undergird organizational life, as well
                               as the department’s mechanisms for selecting, training and rewarding personnel
                               and socializing them toward community, problem-solving, and restorative justice
                               objectives. This is an important and substantial undertaking that requires strategic
                               planning and a thoughtful consideration of the “business as usual” practices of the
                               police agency, how work is defined, how orders are given and reviewed, and the
                               ways in which the internal police culture either supports or subverts community
                               connections. Finally, these interventions must also address the police agency’s
                               effectiveness assessment processes, referring to the systems internal to the police
                               that gather, evaluate, and disseminate information about what and how the
                               organization is doing.




     Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
FIGURE 3.	 Change Requirements for Community Policing, Problem Solving, and Restorative Justice
              Practices (adapted from Greene 2000)



Level of Intervention              Change Issues Confronted                    Anticipated Community
                                                                               Policing Outcomes

Community                          •	 Linkage with External                    •	 Reduced Crime/Fear
                                      Organizations and Groups                 •	 More Cohesive Neighborhoods
                                   •	 Political and Economic                   •	 Increased Public Safety
                                      Support                                  •	 Greater Public Support
                                   •	 Community Engagement                        and Legitimacy
                                                                               •	 Reduced Harm/Violence
                                                                               •	 Community Problems Solved
                                                                               •	 Communities Restored


Organization                       •	   Technology                             •	   Change in Information Flow
                                   •	   Structure                              •	   Decision Making (strategic)
                                   •	   Culture                                •	   Decision Making (tactical)
                                   •	   Human Resources                        •	   Improved Training
                                   •	   Effectiveness                          •	   Changing Culture               13
                                   •	   Assessment                             •	   Improved Communications
                                   •	   Accountability                         •	   Revised Performance Measures
                                                                               •	   Decentralization
                                                                               •	   Role Generalization
                                                                               •	   Improved Analysis
                                                                               •	   Reduced Corruption



Work Group/Unit                    •	   Performance Norms                      •	   Team Cohesiveness
                                   •	   Group Composition                      •	   Task Consensus
                                   •	   Interpersonal Relations                •	   Quality Decisions
                                   •	   Task Definition                        •	   Group Effectiveness



 Individual                        •	   Task Identity                          •	   Increased Police Officer
                                   •	   Autonomy                               •	   Effectiveness
                                   •	   Feedback                               •	   Increased Performance
                                   •	   Skill(s)                               •	   Increased Job Satisfaction
                                                                               •	   Broadened Role Definition
                                                                               •	   Greater Job Attachment/
                                                                                    Investment




                                                        PART 2: Options for World Bank Engagement with Police
                               At the work group/unit level, the interventions must confront several issues within
                               the police system, including the establishment, definition, and communication of
                               group performance norms consistent with new and revised outcomes that must
                               include programs to reduce corruption and strengthen police commitment to the
                               rule of law. In addition, the police agency must specify the parameters of the
                               knowledge, skills, and functions of police groups operating within community
                               settings. The agency will especially need to improve interpersonal communications
                               and information-sharing capacities and systems, especially across work groups.
                               Finally, if these changes are to become fully realized, role and task definitions,
                               including those of investigators, other specialists, and managers, will need to be
                               redefined and clarified. It is not just the officer on the street who has to operate
                               differently but the entire organization.

                               At the individual level, changes in police officer attitudes, behaviors, and
                               effectiveness are required, primarily through the mechanism of problem solving.
                               Police officer performance, job satisfaction, and job attachment are anticipated
                               to increase as officers have greater community connections and are valued for
                               their work. Police officer role definitions are expected to broaden under these
                               approaches as well as individual officer task identity (and consensus) among
                               officers; there is also expected to be greater officer autonomy in decision
                               making, job enrichment, and job enlargement; more positive feedback to officers
                               regarding their community, problem-focused, and restorative activities; and
                               increases in the depth and range of skills officers are trained for and employ as
14
                               part of their community policing methodology. Among the resources necessary
                               to professionalize the police are appropriate salaries and equipment, which are
                               particularly significant, as in many places, poor police salaries and support result in
                               high police turnover and/or rampant corruption.

                               Figure 3 also provides generalized ideas about the outcomes associated with
                               these changes.

                               At the community level, measurements are taken for communities, organizations,
                               and aggregates of “customers,” such as businesses, schools, youth, and so on.
                               For communities, the focus is on such issues as cohesion, neighborliness, stability,
                               and the mediation of conflict, as well as traditional measures of outcomes,
                               including reduced disorder, crime, and fear. For community organizations, issues
                               surrounding the creation and sustenance of inter-organizational networks focused
                               on public safety, joint programming, and information sharing come to the forefront
                               of evaluation concerns. For customers, measuring patterns in the use of public
                               space, satisfaction with services received, and the extent of problems ameliorated
                               is a reasonable starting point for assessment.

                               At the police organizational level, outcome measures across a wide array of
                               internal police agency dynamics include the quality, flow, and use of information
                               within the organization and by organizational members; the level of decision
                               making and available resources to support that decision making; the structure
                               of the organization, including concerns about hierarchy and specialization;
                               the values of the organization that compete with or support community-based
                               interventions; human resource development procedures that support or detract
                               from these objectives (including formal and informal sanctioning systems, formal
                               and informal socialization, and the modeling of appropriate behavior); and the
                               range of services and activities produced and valued by the organization. The units
                               of analysis in these assessments include the structure, operations, culture, human



     Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
resources, and outputs of the agency in question. These factors all have an impact
on the police organization; change here is change in the police system, not the
wider environment. In some ways, they are associated with process assessment,
for example, whether or not the program was implemented.

At the group level, changes require different measures to capture the dynamics,
interactions, decisions, and outputs of work groups. Here, the concern is with team
cohesion, information sharing, group problem solving, and group values, among
other issues. Much of traditional policing has focused on the behavior of individual
officers; in contrast, community and problem-solving policing as well as restorative
justice practices tend to stress the importance of groups. As a result, measures of
group, not just individual, performance will need to be used in the assessment of
these newer approaches to policing.

At the individual level, implementation assessments need to concentrate on job
knowledge and performance, as well as the attitudes and sentiments of police
officers. It is thus critically important that community-oriented job behaviors are
made explicit, measurable, and regularly assessed. In terms of attitudes and
sentiments, building a better understanding of the rule of law and of government
interactions with communities is an important starting point for implementation
and ongoing assessment efforts, including the impact of anti-corruption policies.

The World Bank can take a role in these efforts to (re)build closer ties between
                                                                                                               15
the police and the public in its client countries. To do so, several foci will be
needed, including 1) longer-term organizational change, 2) capacity-building and
short-term interventions to pilot new approaches in targeted neighborhoods, 3)
sustainable long-term investments in training and education, and 4) investments
to develop metrics for understanding progress.


3.2 PREPARING FOR INVESTMENTS
A range of gradual engagement options that build on the Bank’s strength and
other ongoing work were outlined above. It is also important to understand
the political economy within and around police operations before investment
decisions are made. Although it should perhaps go without saying, political and
administrative commitment to the broad contours of community and problem-
oriented policing and restorative justice processes are essential for any substantive
changes in policing to occur and be sustained. Given that commitment, there are
a number of practices that can shape some early police interventions in distressed
and marginalized communities and a number of building blocks that may advance
these ideas in selected police services, particularly in the developing world (see
box below). Investments in these building blocks can go a long way in testing
the promise of community and problem-oriented policing as well as restorative
justice. Along with the above-outlined preparatory data collection and assessment
activities, initial support can include a range of activities as part of Economic and
Sector Work (ESW) and other Advisory Services and Analytics (ASA) activities or as
part of project preparation work.

1.	 Support internal dialogues within the police agency, including in-depth
    briefing and experience exchanges with peer agencies, about the
    cornerstones and building blocks of community and problem-oriented
    policing and restorative justice. This should initially focus on policy and
    justice system decision makers to outline and discuss the rationale for



                                                       PART 2: Options for World Bank Engagement with Police
                                   adopting the new approaches, programs, and practices within the context of
                                   the target agency. This is an important cornerstone for planning the reforms
                                   and identifying the requirements needed. It cannot be overstated, however,
                                   that without strong and visible political and administrative support for such
                                   efforts, the impact of community and problem-oriented policing as well as
                                   restorative justice will be superficial, consisting largely of rhetoric and with
                                   little in the way of action on the ground to move police toward improving a
                                   community through violence and crime reduction and building community
                                   support.

                               2.	 Begin restorative justice discussions. Dialogue is needed with the local
                                   judiciary and prosecution services as well as with social service, health care,
                                   and other nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) that assist victims of crime
                                   to help create a restorative justice emphasis locally. These discussions should
                                   also include police and civic leadership.

                               Of course the approaches briefly described above should be incorporated into the
                               larger set of ideas about modeling community and problem-oriented policing as
                               well as restorative justice practices. Often the police will have to take a followership
                               role. Each step will require clear agreement at the highest levels in the police
                               service; it will also require considerable organizational training initially and then
                               structural change to sustain these efforts over time. The discussions are offered as
                               potential first steps in making these interventions part of the new police service in
16
                               countries where they are needed.

                               3.3 INITIAL ENGAGEMENT OPTIONS TO PREPARE FOR LONGER-TERM
                               ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE
                               As noted above, improvements to law enforcement through community and
                               problem-oriented policing as well as restorative justice practices require
                               considerable attention to philosophies, strategies, structures, tactics, and cultures
                               within police agencies. They also require more of the police and their institutional
                               apparatus then the traditional law and order approach. Opening police agencies
                               to public input and review and increased transparency requires very different
                               administrative and political commitments, since many of these changes challenge
                               prevailing police cultures.

                               These are not insurmountable obstacles, however. Any police organization’s values,
                               goals, strategies, and so forth are not fixed in stone; they can be amended over
                               time to become more inclusive and less distrustful of outside influence, though in
                               doing so, the police can open themselves to criticisms of favoritism and possible
                               corruption of a different type. Moving the police closer to their constituents
                               while assuring that they are procedurally fair and committed to the rule of law
                               is a delicate balance. If they exist, citizen-led anti-corruption movements can be
                               critical to potentially improving police services as well as trust in government, and
                               they are therefore an important risk-mitigation element for programming (Landell-
                               Mills 2013).

                               Engagement Option # 1: Connecting programs for police improvement with
                               ongoing efforts in other sectors to strengthen governance, adopt the rule of
                               law, and address government corruption.

                               This could include measures in public finance, procurement and civil service
                               reform, support for building external complaint procedures in ombudsman offices



     Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
The Building Blocks of Community and Problem-Oriented Policing

•	   Develop consistent beat assignment. Officers can be assigned to geographic beats for extended
     periods of time instead of being rotated. This increases police-public interaction while providing
     officers with “ownership” of the communities they police. Such practices also create a “known”
     police presence in the community.

•	   Localize area commanders. Supervisors and middle-level managers can also be given respon-
     sibility for geographic areas consisting of several beats, thereby increasing accountability and
     supervision in the selected communities.

•	   Create community mini-stations. Each beat or combination of beats can have its own facility,
     substation, or storefront located in the community to increase police identification with the com-
     munity and community access to the police.

•	   Increase positive police community interaction. Police must make decisions that may be seen
     as negative by the community—arrests, citations, stops for suspicion, and so forth—yet balancing
     these with positive police-community interactions can happen on a number of levels.

•	   Focus on crime and fear reduction. Attempt to reduce fear of crime through public education,
     high interaction patrol, and problem solving.

•	   Address important community crime concerns, such as domestic violence. Domestic violence
                                                                                                                            17
     and violence against women and girls are major issues in many communities, and assisting victims
     and communities to take a stand helps many.

•	   Build partnerships. Community policing stresses the importance of active partnerships between
     the police, other agencies, and citizens, in which all parties really work together to identify and
     solve problems.

•	   Model and introduce problem solving. Although emergency calls must still be quickly addressed,
     where time permits, officers should search for the underlying conditions of crime and distur-
     bances. When the conditions are identified, officers should try to address them together with the
     community and other agencies in an effort to not just control but to prevent them in the future.

•	   Start to build a SARA* process for problem solving. The SARA model is useful as a guide to the
     problem-solving process for all kinds of crime and non-crime problems.

•	   Conduct regular beat meetings with neighborhood residents. These meetings should also be
     conducted with beat officers to identify problems, analyze them, and offer areas.

•	   Identify hot spots. Analyze and identify locations that have disproportionate numbers of calls
     and then use problem solving to try to address the problems in those locations.

•	   Develop multi-agency teams. Begin to create problem-solving teams that include police and
     representatives of other agencies (health, education, public works, sanitation, and so on) so that
     an array of information from different sources can come together.


Source: Adopted from Cordner 1996.
*SARA refers to scanning, analysis, response, and assessment as described in part 1.




                                                                    PART 2: Options for World Bank Engagement with Police
                               or administrative courts, and improved public review and feedback processes, such
                               as citizen score cards and similar activities. Applying these efforts also to police
                               institutions can assist the police in understanding what and how certain parts of
                               their organization can be restructured in a manner that does not single them out
                               and allows them to develop and learn along with other government entities.

                               Engagement Option #2: Supporting knowledge products for capacity
                               development for relevant (municipal) government and police leadership
                               and managers.

                               A helpful early intervention is the development of a briefing package and
                               accompanying program for socializing senior-level political and police administrative
                               leaders on the overarching goals of the newer law enforcement approaches. Most
                               of this material is already available from various resources but has to be adjusted to
                               the local context. It has to be culturally sensitive as well as sensitive to the nature
                               of the local police system, the history of police-public interaction, and the status
                               of the adoption of rule of law practices in the target location as well as the within
                               the police agency.

                               Engagement Option # 3: Supporting community engagement and joint
                               planning.

                               Announcing a community, problem-oriented, or restorative justice program absent
18
                               the participation of government, community, or private leadership is shortsighted
                               and likely counterproductive. If the goal is to build trust and capacity among
                               stakeholders in the community, taking time to effectively build the coalition
                               through meetings to air past grievances and envision future needs is essential.
                               Once a coalition for these justice improvements has been created, a joint
                               announcement with all participants fully visible is important to assure those who
                               might be skeptical that comprehensive involvement has been integral to the
                               reform effort.

                               At the same time, communities in distress and/or marginalized over time are
                               often without the capacity to work with the police on improving community
                               safety, reducing violence and crime, and improving community social cohesion.
                               Developing linkages with NGOs in these communities and taking steps to engage
                               the community and its leadership will be a complex process for the community as
                               well as for the police.

                               An important consideration here is the need to assess a community’s capacity
                               to work with the police, if these new policing methods (i.e. community and
                               problem oriented and restorative justice) are to become part of the fabric of local
                               law enforcement efforts. Community capacity has been defined as “the extent
                               to which members of a community can work together effectively, including their
                               abilities to develop and sustain strong relationships, solve problems and make
                               group decisions, and collaborate effectively to identify goals and get work done”
                               (Mattessich and Monsey 1997, 61). Conducting this assessment provides an
                               understanding of community capacity, and where appropriate, can identify ways
                               that the police and other government, NGO, and private sector agencies can help
                               to improve this capacity to work with the police and others. At the same time,
                               creating a baseline for community capacity to receive the interventions suggested
                               here provides a way of measuring the community-building effects of police
                               engagement once implemented (Duffee et al. 2006).



     Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
Where there is deep, longstanding distrust toward law enforcement and citizens
are more reluctant to cooperate, community partnerships can assist local residents
in learning to develop confidence in the police. Even when minority groups are
abused or treated unfairly by the police, it is sometimes found that they are
willing and eager to work together with law enforcement to implement reforms
throughout the justice and security sector (Ben-Porat, Yuval, and Mizrahi 2012).
When reliable local leaders and business owners work together with the police,
citizens are more likely to trust in the justice process, as their local leaders are likely
to provide a check on official police abuse.

Engagement Option #4: Promoting community capacity building.

Capacity building for the police is largely a matter of organizational change.
Capacity building for the community is fundamentally about the ability of the
community and its leaders to work with the police toward the goal of reduced
crime, violence, and disorder, provided under the umbrella of community respect
and adherence to the rule of law. Both are delicate matters, as both require
changing the nature of the relationship between the police and the public, which
in many places has been frayed and distrustful.

One caveat is offered here. To reiterate from our earlier discussion on adopting
a community and problem-oriented policing and restorative justice strategy, the
police cannot abandon their role in making communities safe and secure, nor
                                                                                                                   19
do communities expect less of them. So although the police and the community
develop their respective and joint capacities for addressing community
development issues, crime (as indicated previously) must remain a core function of
the police, and in exercising that function, the police must first protect and secure
communities. This will require that throughout the reform process, the police
must maintain a clear focus on controlling and responding to crime and violence,
and in doing so adhere to the rule of law and community expectations regarding
procedural justice (Haugen and Boutros 2014).

Short-term interventions are also necessary in the capacity-building process.
They create some degree of competence and confidence that shifting toward
new law enforcement and justice practices can actually help the police deal with
violence and crime and improve community perceptions about the law and its
enforcement. Most police on the ground are pragmatic in the ways they approach
matters of crime and violence. Oftentimes, having no “model” to test in a field
leaves line-level police officers uncertain and insecure about what actions to take
under these new policing methods. At the same time, those who would continue
to violate their commitment to just enforcement of the law can generally ignore
these interventions, as they are not well specified and/or implemented. Ramping
up some pilot programs to begin to field test community and problem-oriented
policing and restorative justice practices can help to overcome organizational
resistance to such efforts stemming from uncertainty or antipathy.

Engagement Option #5: Designing strategic planning processes for
understanding community and problem-oriented policing and restorative
justice practices.

Community and problem-oriented policing and restorative justice practices often
represent a strategic challenge for many police agencies. Frequently grounded
in militaristic approaches to crime control, these new emphases challenge police



                                                           PART 2: Options for World Bank Engagement with Police
                               agencies and their leaders to rethink aspects of the institutional mission. New and
                               specific policing approaches must be developed with the local context and traditional
                               models of justice in mind. These efforts are worthwhile, as the incorporation of the
                               core tenets of the new models does result in positive outcomes when they are
                               applied strategically. For example, in a review of evidence-based crime prevention
                               approaches in developing countries, researchers found that community-based
                               programs were generally found to be successful in reducing rates of criminal activity
                               (Bowles, Akpokodje, and Tigere 2005). Difficulties with implementing these types
                               of police interventions have often been rooted in inadequate strategic planning
                               and management. If properly implemented, when the new models have emerged,
                               political, administrative, civic, and private leadership will have supported them first
                               at the strategic level and then operationally.

                               3.4 THE VALUE OF A PILOT PROGRAM
                               It is perhaps a truism that police agencies do not come to the ideas of community
                               and problem oriented policing and restorative justice practices easily or directly.
                               History demonstrates that the structure and function of the police in most parts
                               of the world have their roots in military practices, a crime fighting emphasis,
                               and centralized command and control. Consequently, the internal capacity of
                               police systems will likely be challenged in the implementation of some of these
                               innovations. The ability to incorporate these changes must therefore become a
                               primary focus, and it will be important to conduct a thorough assessment of the
                               policies, practices, administrative structure, and service delivery system of the
20
                               police agencies to determine their current capacities.

                               Engagement Option #6: Supporting the piloting of a community, problem-
                               oriented, and restorative justice approach in a target neighborhood.

                               The old adage that application is the best test of a theory applies to the
                               implementation of new policing and restorative justice practices by the police.
                               Oftentimes, modeling aspects of these programs in selected police agencies
                               can go a long way in demonstrating “proof of concept” to police officials and
                               community members who may be skeptical of such efforts. Modeling is important for
                               several reasons: 1) it assures the police service in question that others (particularly
                               other police) are attempting similar changes, 2) it provides insight into how those
                               efforts were implemented and with what success, 3) it builds confidence and
                               capacity for change within the selected police service, and 4) it helps to create
                               comparative metrics by which to assess the changes sought in the selected
                               police service. Sensitivity toward individual community experiences is crucial to
                               successfully carrying out the new policing strategies.

                               Reform efforts in Brazil, for example, have focused more heavily on both commu-
                               nity and problem-oriented policing strategies in order to address severe distrust
                               toward a previously corrupt police force, as well as widespread drug trade crimes
                               and drug-related violence. Political leaders implemented a carefully developed
                               combination of targeted programs in select neighborhoods to increase police
                               accountability and reduce the excessive use of force, increase officer deployment
                               to drive drug dealing out of communities, and build relationships between
                               officers and community members. The implementation of these programs is seen
                               to have increased public confidence and trust in the police. Without seeking to
                               understand the experiences and problems faced by favela residents and without
                               a comprehensive police reform strategy, police reform efforts likely would have
                               been unsuccessful (Da Silva and Cano 2007).



     Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
Engagement Option #7: Investing in projects that work with host police
agency(ies) in conducting internal audits of policies, procedures, internal
structures, communications, specializations, and other organizational
capacities to assess the readiness for change.

“Readiness for change” is an organizational change management concept that
emphasizes the current capacity or readiness of organizations to undertake
significant change. Readiness for change is influenced by many factors, including
beliefs among organizational members that 1) they are capable of implementing
the proposed change, 2) the proposed change is appropriate for the organization,
3) the leaders are committed to the proposed change, 4) the proposed change
will benefit the organization and its members, 5) the organization has the
structures and processes in place that can support the change (or the capacity
to develop them), and 6) there is agreement that changing the organization is
warranted (Cinite, Duxbury, and Higgins 2008; Holt et al. 2007). The introduction
of community policing in several countries has revealed concerns with regard to
police institutional readiness for change (for example, see Nalla and Newman
2013).

For example, although Cambodia has experienced success in its post-conflict
police reform, this success has been limited by the police agency’s lack of
resources. Without sufficient equipment and personnel, law enforcement officials
are unable to consistently provide high-quality police services that can build public
                                                                                                               21
confidence (Broadhurst and Bouhours 2009). Thus, financial and other resources
are just as important a factor in an organization’s “readiness for change” as are
attitudes of officers and leaders.

An examination of police forces in Trinidad and Tobago revealed that officers
there were not ready for reform, as they did not fully support community policing
strategies and held many negative attitudes toward civilians as well as their own
internal leadership. Without internal cooperation, team solidarity, and a willingness
to work together with citizens, community policing measures are unlikely to
succeed (Deosaran 2002). Reform efforts in the favelas of Brazil would likely have
been unsuccessful were it not for the dedicated leadership of the Grupamento
Policial em Areas Especiais (Special Area Policing Group). A high-ranking Brazilian
police official spent time visiting community members and offering assistance to
demonstrate to citizens and his officers that he was committed to making a change
and was willing to take any steps necessary to achieve success (Da Silva and Cano
2007).

3.5 INVESTMENTS IN SUSTAINABLE POLICE TRAINING AND EDUCATION
FOR THE LONG TERM
Providing support for personnel at all levels of decision making within police
agencies is a fundamental process in building community and problem-oriented
policing and for increasing police involvement in restorative justice practices.
Although police are often trained in field tactics related to crime and violence,
they sometimes lack preparation for the expanded role that will be needed for the
new policing methods. Training curricula should pay attention to local community
contexts, tailoring community and problem-oriented policing strategies to local
customs and problems. In Germany, for example, police training efforts that did
not consider the needs of disadvantaged and marginalized communities did
not alleviate the distrust between these neighborhoods and the police, as the
training provided had failed to foster officer investment in and understanding of



                                                       PART 2: Options for World Bank Engagement with Police
                               the communities they served (Feltes 2002). Similarly, efforts to professionalize
                               the Amazonas military police in Brazil through university training are considered
                               a failure because they do not prepare officers for the realities, customs, values,
                               and specific problems of the communities they will police (Riccio, de Miranda, and
                               Muller 2013). 	

                               Training at all levels of the police organizational hierarchy is necessary to better
                               unify policy and street-level decisions and actions taken. This training and education
                               is likely a gradual process, beginning with orientations and overviews and then
                               integrating the philosophies and practices of community and problem-oriented
                               policing and restorative justice practices for each rank in the police service. This
                               will require a review and assessment of existing training regimes and the tailoring
                               of the new practices to ongoing routines.

                               Engagement Option #8: Although police training and capacity building are
                               frequently part of reform efforts, the development of sustainable training
                               capacities, including affordable mobile facilities to reach different communities
                               and remote areas, receives less attention. It is important to invest in country or
                               regional assessments of all police training, not just with the goal of incorporating
                               community and problem-oriented police training and restorative justice practices
                               in all modalities of training and education where appropriate, but also to assess
                               capacities to provide and continuously adjust training over time. This is one of the
                               potential gap areas the Bank can focus on in countries where other donors are
22
                               already heavily invested in most of the basic police reform activities.

                               Engagement Option # 9: Investing in country or regional reviews of current
                               police training for its adherence to open governance, rule of law, and anti-
                               corruption activities as currently undertaken in several World Bank initiatives, and
                               seeking to revise such training where appropriate, is another natural area for the
                               Bank to support.

                               Engagement Option # 10: Training regimes provide the foundation for updating
                               information and role expectations for the police. Their effective application,
                               however, requires field supervision that observes and ensures that the police are
                               complying with the training and expectations announced by the police service.
                               To accomplish this, supervisory practices also have to be adjusted and regularly
                               assessed. Developing regular supervisor training and reliable assessment systems
                               is thus another important investment element.

                               Engagement Option #11: Performance management and review systems have
                               to be updated for all levels of policing. Reflecting the tenants of the new policing
                               models, such systems need to especially integrate group, agency, and individual
                               officer performance into these contexts. Community feedback is one element of
                               this process. Using examples from other countries and building on Bank experience
                               with community feedback mechanisms, especially electronic feedback, different
                               options can be tested in select communities and then systems developed and
                               rolled out through the specified country.

                               Training, occupational socialization, supervision, and reward are the major
                               mechanisms by which organizations, including the police, ensure some consistency
                               in the services they provide, which are typically delivered in decentralized field
                               settings. Linking these processes to formalized training will be a major aspect of
                               repositioning the police toward new policing methods.



     Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
3.6 INVESTMENTS FOR DEVELOPING POLICE PERFORMANCE METRICS AND
MEASURING PROGRESS AND SUSTAINABLE SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT FOR
THE LONG TERM
It is critical that the police measure what really matters to a functioning law
enforcement agency if they are to move away from a purely crime attack policing
model to one emphasizing community and problem-oriented policing and
restorative justice goals. Consistent with the new intervention models, Langworthy
(1999, 3) identified at least four broad police measurement domains that matter
for policing, including:

•	   the impact domain, or measures of what the police are to affect (e.g., crime,
     fear of crime, and disorder);

•	   the organizational health domain, focused on the volume of police business,
     levels of community support, and officer job knowledge and satisfaction;

•	   the process domain, dealing with fairness, civility, equitable service, and
     ethical service; and

•	   the community assessment domain, dealing with police abilities and ethical
     behavior.

While these domains are rather broad, they include most of what the police
                                                                                                              23
traditionally do (e.g., reduce violence, crime, and disorder) and also incorporate
many of the underlying aspects of community and problem-oriented policing and
restorative justice practice (e.g., community support, civility, fairness, equitable
and ethical service) that need to be reflected in any new performance system.

Engagement Option # 12: Meetings between police, other government agencies,
and civic and private sector leaders in the selected community/city should be held
regularly to discuss how police activities should be assessed, how should police
work in the future, and how they and others can contribute to reducing violence,
crime and disorder while also improving community social cohesion and respect
for the law. Since policing in general, but especially community and problem-
oriented policing, does not happen in a vacuum and has to rely on cooperation
from others, including the community, regular meetings are essential not only
to address concerns, issues, and improvement options but also to develop
performance systems that are interconnected. This is a long-term intervention
that requires the maturity of a collaborative community crime prevention and
enforcement approach.

These kinds of discussions can lead to a template for assessing the police in their
repositioned institutional arrangement. At the same time, a meeting can create
a coalition to support police reform within the selected community, which has
proven to be particularly important in places where the police are seen negatively.




                                                      PART 2: Options for World Bank Engagement with Police
     4.	Conclusion: Promoting Organizational Change


                                 Having laid the foundation for refocusing local law enforcement and justice
                                 system philosophies, policies, and practices toward new methods of policing, the
                                 levels of intervention presented, including community, organization, work group,
                                 and individual, become targets for implementation. The change must be both
                                 planned as well as organic, meaning that implementing new methods of law
                                 enforcement cannot be solely a top-down process. Imposing these changes on
                                 an existing system more often than not engenders resistance. Creating an internal
                                 planning process and coupling that process with organic changes coming from
                                 field operations are essential steps and are more likely to be a successful route
                                 to actually implementing and sustaining the types of reform envisioned here. The
                                 primary difficulty in implementing community and problem-oriented policing and
                                 restorative justice practice is in ensuring that the on-the-ground behaviors of the
                                 police actually change and that the new policing models actually are adopted
                                 across the police organization.

                                 There is also the all-important element of “community,” which itself changes over
24
                                 time as does crime and violence, underscoring the need for police organizations
                                 to be flexible and adaptable to changing conditions in changing places. To that
                                 end, the reforms suggested in the above recommendations will require continual
                                 review and consistent attention.

                                 Police organizations steeped in traditional and/or inappropriate ways of conducting
                                 their affairs are most likely to be resistant to change. Despite such resistance,
                                 modern policing systems have changed over time, and generally for the better.
                                 It is important to note that over the long arch of police history in the developed
                                 world, the policing systems required considerable reform over the years (see
                                 Haugen and Boutros 2014, particularly chapter 10). In some ways, policing as an
                                 institution is a relatively new phenomenon, actually created in the 19th century and
                                 existing in a state of continuous reform since then. At the same time, the police
                                 are imbedded in larger government and political systems that themselves must
                                 undergo reform in order for police to be successful.

                                 In many of the Bank’s client countries, police systems are even newer and bear a
                                 colonial legacy, or serve as the civilian version of the military. Nevertheless, police
                                 reform is still possible, though it is likely to be gradual with sporadic bursts of
                                 change. In the West, changes in police systems were invariably accompanied
                                 by improvements in professional standards for the police, including selection,
                                 training, education, salary, and organizational support, as well as the creation of
                                 oversight commissions and a cadre of professional police leaders. Similar changes
                                 will need to undergird police institutional change in the developed world as well.

                                 Moreover, in the developing world, policing and creation of public order occur
                                 at the intersection of state-level and local-level actors (Albrecht and Kyed 2015),
                                 where local order is often negotiated between the formal state policing institution
                                 and a variety of local policing groups. Building coalitions between the police and
                                 others who interact in the policing world locally will be essential. Although there



       Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
is considerable variation in how state police function with local security-minded
groups, a series of anthropological studies from the Philippines, Indonesia, Ghana,
South Africa, Mexico, Bolivia, and Sierra Leone (Albrecht and Kyed 2015) suggest
that the local policing and security leadership has been incorporated into many
policing systems in developing nations, sometimes at the behest of the police
and at other times begrudgingly so and with mixed results. Nonetheless, it is clear
that policing in these countries is certainly a plural exercise, and reforms to the
institution will have to take these other non-state actors into consideration.

The anticipated outcomes of community and problem-oriented policing as well
as restorative justice practices include reduced crime and fear of crime, increased
neighborhood cohesion and public safety, and reduced hazard and harm. In
addition, there will be clear evidence that community problems are being
addressed, mitigated, or solved and community harms from violence, crime, and
disorder repaired. But these outcomes will require changes to police philosophies
and strategies, including how the police conduct their work; the structure, culture,
and human resources of the organization; and how the organization measures
effectiveness and assesses its operations and their impact. Although this may seem
like a daunting task, some of the needed changes are well within the grasp of the
police and their constituencies, including in many developing countries, and can be
accomplished with modifications to existing training regimes. It will be important
to develop a consistent message throughout the training and incremental change
process to ensure that officers are supported in their new or expanded roles
                                                                                                                 25
under these programs. Basic, roll-call, and promotional training should be
examined to also ensure that they are consistent with the values and philosophies
of these new policing styles.

Importantly, officers must receive training in areas where they are least likely to have
historically done so. These include conflict resolution, community engagement,
and communication with the public, for example. There are any number of model
curricula for community and problem-oriented policing, and several international
programs, including handbooks, concerning restorative justice practice (Nalla and
Newman 2013; Weitekamp and Kerner 2003).

In addition to the initial and subsequent training of police officers and police
leaders, police organizations will need to examine existing structural assignments
and current operating procedures to assess the extent to which they support or
detract from these efforts. As these structures, policies, and procedures were likely
created under a different model of policing, it will be essential to remove any
structural and policy barriers to the adoption of the new regimes (Sparrow 1988).

A recognized deficiency in many police services in the developed world is poor
working conditions, meager pay, and inadequate equipment. Improving these
conditions in and of themselves will not lead to the adoption of new policing
methods, but in the absence of a sufficient resource foundation, it will be difficult to
overcome issues of corruption, neglect of duty, and oft-expressed hostility toward
marginalized communities. Striking a balance between promoting a change in
direction in policing in these countries with providing appropriate support and
human development will be a necessary condition of realizing police services
capable of protecting and serving their communities.




                                                         PART 2: Options for World Bank Engagement with Police
                               Longer-term issues, such as assessing the backgrounds and qualities of new police
                               recruits as well as changes to police cultures, will require a systematic review of
                               the existing recruitment and selection criteria and the cultural attributes of the
                               police agency. The latter also includes a consideration of how the police review
                               and oversee police officer integrity. These are likely to be slow moving changes.
                               Moreover, how people self-select for police work differs across the world, and
                               understanding how this selection interacts with cultural definitions of the role
                               and function of the police is important in determining what messages the police
                               organization sends to prospective police officers. If the message is “business as
                               usual,” reforming the police institutionally will be further delayed.

                               Lastly, what a police organization values is likely measured by internal assessment
                               systems. Shifting from a crime attack to a more community, problem-oriented, and
                               restorative approach will require realigning internal measurement and assessment
                               systems to capture a wider array of information on what officers are doing and to
                               what effect. Police agencies moving toward more modern systems must clearly
                               announce and then consistently measure the behaviors expected of the police.
                               Without this practice, the accountability of officers and the entire police service
                               will be diminished.

                               Ultimately, for community and problem-oriented policing and restorative justice
                               practices to be realized, criminal justice personnel, and especially the police, must
26
                               incorporate these ideas and practices into their daily work. This will require that
                               police work groups and individual officers see the value of these practices in their
                               work and in the resolution of community conflict, crime, violence, and disorder. It
                               is encouraging to note that policing practices in the developed world have largely
                               been refocused over the years from exclusively fighting violence and crime to
                               reducing harm more broadly. A similar renaissance in thinking about the police in
                               the developing world, coupled with the determined and consistent implementation
                               of community and problem-oriented policing and restorative justice practices, is
                               clearly warranted. Such efforts will help improve the environment for social and
                               economic development in developing countries consistent with the mission of
                               the World Bank, especially in its efforts to improve open governance, increase
                               inclusiveness, reduce corruption, and enhance local justice through adherence to
                               the rule of law. Reforming police services is therefore an essential ingredient in
                               improving the implementation and effect of development efforts in developing
                               countries, and hence is a significant and worthwhile focus for World Bank and
                               other donor engagement.




     Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
                                                        27




PART 2: Options for World Bank Engagement with Police
28




     Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
References


Albrecht, P., and H. M. Kyed, eds. 2015. Policing and the Politics of Order-Making. New York: Routledge.

Bayley, D. H. 2006. Changing the Guard: Developing Democratic Police Abroad. New York: Oxford
        University Press.

Ben-Porat, G., F. Yuval, and S. Mizrahi. 2012. “The Challenge of Diversity Management: Police Reform and the
       Arab Minority in Israel.” Policy Science 45 (3): 243–63.

Bhalla, A., and F. Lapeyre. 2004. Poverty and Exclusion in a Global World. New York: Palgrave.

Bowles, R., J. Akpokodje, and E. Tigere. 2005. “Evidence-Based Approaches to Crime Prevention in
        Developing Countries.” European Journal on Criminal Policy and Research 11 (3): 347–77.

Broadhurst, R., and T. Bouhours. 2009. “Policing in Cambodia: Legitimacy in the Making?” Policing and
       Society: An International Journal of Research and Policy 19 (2): 174–90.
                                                                                                                 29

Brodgen, M. 1999. “Community Policing as Cherry Pie.” In Policing across the World: Issues for the Twenty-
       First Century, ed. R. I. Mawby. London: University College London Press.

Chevigny, P. 1996. “Changing Control of Police Violence in Rio de Janeiro and Sao Paulo, Brazil.” In Policing
       Change, Changing Police: International Perspectives. Current Issues in Criminal Justice, vol. 14, ed.
       O. Marenin, 23–36. New York: Garland Publishing.

Cinite, I., L. Duxbury, and C. Higgins. 2008. “Measurement of Perceived Organizational Readiness for Change
          in the Public Sector.” British Journal of Management 20 (2): 265–77.

Cole, B. 1999. “Post-Colonial Systems.” In Policing across the World: Issues for the Twenty-First Century, ed.
         R. I. Mawby. London: University College London Press.

Cordner, G. W. 1996. “Community Policing: Principles and Elements.” National Institute of Justice,
        Washington, DC.

Da Silva, G., and I. Cano. 2007. “Between Damage Reduction and Community Policing: The Case of Pavão-
         Pavãozinho-Catagalo in Rio de Janeiro’s Favelas.” In Legitimacy and Criminal Justice: International
         Perspectives, ed. T. Tyler, 186–214. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Deosaran, R. 2002. “Community Policing in the Caribbean: Context, Community and Police Capability.”
       Policing: An International Journal of Police Strategies & Management 25 (1): 125–46.

Duffee, D., B. Renauer, J. Scott, S. Chermak, and E. McGarrell. 2006. “Community Building Measures: How
        Police and Neighborhood Groups Can Measure their Collaboration.” U.S. Department of Justice,
        Washington, DC.

Feltes, T. 2002. “Community-Oriented Policing in Germany: Training and Education.” Policing: An
         International Journal of Police Strategies & Management 25 (1): 48–59.



                                                     PART 2: Options for World Bank Engagement with Police
     Gramckow, H., and F. Allen. 2011. “Justice Sector Reform in Mongolia: Looking Back, Looking Forward.”
            Justice Reform Practices Group, World Bank, Washington, DC.

     Gramckow, H., and F. Fernandez-Monge. 2014. “Public Expenditure Reviews of Justice Sector Institutions:
            One Size Does Not Fit All.” Just Development 5, World Bank, Washington, DC.

     Greene, J. R. 2000. “Community Policing in America: Changing the Nature, Structure, and Function of the
             Police.” In Criminal Justice 2000: Policies, Processes, and Decisions of the Criminal Justice System,
             vol. 3. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Justice, Office of Justice Programs.

     Harborne, B., and P. Bisca. 2013. “Capturing the Security-Development Nexus in the World Bank’s Security
            Sector Portfolio.” World Bank, Washington (Unpublished).

     Haugen, G. A., and V. Boutros. 2014. The Locust Effect. New York: Oxford University Press.

     Holt, D. T., A. A. Armenakis, H.S. Field, and S.G. Harris. 2007. Readiness for Organizational Change: The
              Systematic Development of a Scale, Journal of Applied Behavioral Science, 43, 2: 232-255.

     Kirke, P. 2010. “Culture-Based Justice Architecture: Building Community Wellbeing through Deeper Cultural
               Engagement.” Justice and Development Working Paper Series 10/2010, World Bank, Washington, DC.

     Landell-Mills, P. 2013. Citizens against Corruption: Report from the Front Line. Leicester, UK: Troubador
             Publishing.
30

     Langworthy, R., ed. 1999. “Measuring What Matters. Proceedings from the Policing Research Institute
            Meetings.” National Institute of Justice, U.S. Department of Justice, Washington, DC.

     Mars, J. R. 2002. Deadly Force, Colonialism, and the Rule of Law: Police Violence in Guyana. Westport, CT:
              Greenwood Press.

     Mattessich, P., and B. Monsey. 1997. Community Building: What Makes it Work: A Review of Factors
            Influencing Successful Community Building. Saint Paul, MN: Wilder Publishing Center.

     Nalla, M., and G. Newman. 2013. Community Policing in Indigenous Communities. Boca Raton, FL: CRC
             Press.

     Pino, N., and M. D. Wiatrowski (Eds). 2006. Democratic Policing in Transition and Developing Countries.
              Aldershot, UK: Ashgate.

     Riccio, V., M. R. de Miranda, and A. Muller. 2013. “Professionalizing the Amazonas Military Police through
              Training.” Police Practice and Research: An International Journal 14 (4): 295–307.

     Skolnick, J., and D. Bayley. 1986. The New Blue Line. New York: The Free Press.

     Sparrow, M. E. 1988. “Implementing Community Policing.” Perspectives on Policing 9, U.S. Department of
             Justice, Washington, DC.

     Stanley, W. 1996. “International Tutelage and Domestic Political Will: Building a New Civilian Police Force in El
              Salvador.” In Policing Change, Changing Police: International Perspectives. Current Issues in Criminal
              Justice, vol. 14, ed. O. Marenin, 37–78. New York: Garland Publishing.

     Transparency International. 2013. “Corruption Perceptions Index.” Transparency International, Berlin.




     Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
Weitekamp, E. G., and H. J. Kerner, eds. 2003. Restorative Justice in Context: International Practice and
       Directions. London: Willan Publishing.

World Justice Project. 2015. Rule of Law Index. Washington, DC: World Justice Project.




                                                                                                             31




                                                     PART 2: Options for World Bank Engagement with Police
PART 2: OPTIONS FOR BANK ENGAGEMENT AND DESIGN OF SUCCESSFUL CHANGE PROGRAMS
     1818 H Street, NW
     Washington,
Addressing                  USA
                  DC 20433,Gap
           the Enforcement     to Counter Crime
