    EAST AFRICA PUBLIC HEALTH
LABORATORY NETWORKING PROJECT:
EVALUATION OF PERFORMANCE-BASED
   FINANCING FOR PUBLIC HEALTH
     LABORATORIES IN RWANDA
 DISCUSSION PAPER       APRIL 2016




 Meghan Kumar
 Joel Lehmann
 Aniceth Rucogoza
 Claver Kayobotsi
 Ashis Das
 Miriam Schneidman
  EAST AFRICA PUBLIC HEALTH LABORATORY
          NETWORKING PROJECT:




Evaluation of Performance-based Financing for Public
           Health Laboratories in Rwanda




                  Meghan Kumar
                   Joel Lehmann
                Aniceth Rucogoza
                 Claver Kayobotsi
                     Ashis Das
                Miriam Schneidman




                     April 2016
        Health, Nutrition and Population (HNP) Discussion Paper
This series is produced by the Health, Nutrition, and Population Global Practice of the
World Bank. The papers in this series aim to provide a vehicle for publishing preliminary
results on HNP topics to encourage discussion and debate. The findings,
interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those of the authors
and should not be attributed in any manner to the World Bank, to its affiliated
organizations or to members of its Board of Executive Directors or the countries they
represent. Citation and the use of material presented in this series should take into
account this provisional character.

The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The
boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this
work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal
status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

For information regarding the HNP Discussion Paper Series, please contact the Editor,
Martin Lutalo at mlutalo@worldbank.org or Erika Yanick at eyanick@worldbank.org.




© 2016 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development /The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW Washington, DC 20433
All rights reserved.




                                            ii
     Health, Nutrition and Population (HNP) Discussion Paper

           East Africa Public Health Laboratory Networking Project:
                 Evaluation of Performance-based Financing
                   for Public Health Laboratories in Rwanda

Meghan Kumara Joel Lehmannb Aniceth Rucogozac Claver Kayobotsid Ashis Dase Miriam
                                 Schneidmanf

a
  Health Policy and Financing Consultant, Health-E-Net, Ltd., Nairobi, Kenya
b
  Health Sector Research Consultant, Infospective, Ltd., Nairobi, Kenya
c Director, Microbiology Unit, National Reference Laboratory, Rwanda Biomedical Center,

Kigali, Rwanda
d EAPHLN Project Officer, Rwanda Ministry of Health, Kigali, Rwanda
e Health Specialist, The World Bank, Washington, DC, USA
f Lead Health Specialist, The World Bank, Washington, DC, USA



 This paper was prepared with funding from the Health Results Innovation Trust Fund
       (HRITF) which aims to support results based financing approaches in the health
sector. HRITF is managed by the World Bank and is supported by the Governments of
Norway through Norad and the United Kingdom through the Department of International
                                   Development.


Abstract: This report summarizes the main findings from the application of performance
based incentives linked to progress on a standardized, globally recognized metric-- the
Stepwise Laboratory Improvement Process towards Accreditation (SLIPTA) checklist--
under the East Africa Public Health Laboratory Networking Project (EAPHLNP) in
Rwanda. The full report is available on the EAPHLNP Web Portal (http://www.eaphln-
ecsahc.org/newwebportal).

The lab Performance-based Financing (PBF) pilot was introduced in the context of a
well-established national PBF program dating back to the early 2000s. The flexible
nature of the EAPHLNP and the favorable context in Rwanda provided an ideal
backdrop to introduce PBF incentive payments to accelerate progress of five project-
supported labs towards accreditation.

The evaluation found improved laboratory performance at all project-supported
laboratories in Rwanda as measured by the SLIPTA scores. For the first time,
laboratories were bringing in PBF revenues, instilling a culture of continuous quality
improvements, and focusing management attention on accreditation. PBF appears to
have contributed to an accelerated change, with PBF laboratories experiencing an
overall greater increase in SLIPTA scores compared to project-supported laboratories in
the other countries. No clear patterns were found in terms of improved test volumes or
test accuracy, which were not part of the pilot scheme.


While it was difficult to disentangle the effects of different interventions, the evaluation
found a system-strengthening value to combining investments in modernizing



                                            iii
laboratories, and strengthening human resources with PBF. Relationships between
laboratory staff and clinicians improved, with laboratory managers having a greater
voice in hospital management and lab staff increasingly valued and respected by
clinicians. A spirit of teamwork prevailed at participating sites.

Other countries considering PBF mechanisms for public health laboratories need to take
into account lessons learned and assess the features which may be relevant to their
own contexts. PBF schemes for laboratories need to be viewed as an integral part of a
package of interventions that contribute to enhanced performance.

Keywords: Public health laboratories, performance-based financing, laboratory
improvement process towards accreditation, enhanced accountability and performance.

Disclaimer: The findings, interpretations and conclusions expressed in the paper are
entirely those of the authors, and do not represent the views of the World Bank, its
Executive Directors, or the countries they represent.

Correspondence Details: Joel Lehmann, Infospective, Ltd., Nairobi, Kenya, Email:
joel.lehmann@gmail.com




                                          iv
                                                   Table of Contents

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS ................................................................................. VII

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ...................................................................................................... VIII

I. INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................... 11
   BACKGROUND............................................................................................................................ 11
   THE EAST AFRICA PUBLIC HEALTH LABORATORY NETWORKING PROJECT ............................. 12
   THE RWANDAN CONTEXT .......................................................................................................... 16
   RWANDAN EAPHLNP-SUPPORTED LABORATORIES ................................................................. 18
II. METHODOLOGY ................................................................................................................. 20
   RESEARCH QUESTIONS .............................................................................................................. 20
   CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK....................................................................................................... 20
   QUALITATIVE RESEARCH .......................................................................................................... 21
   QUANTITATIVE RESEARCH ........................................................................................................ 21
   LIMITATIONS.............................................................................................................................. 24
III. PBF AS AN APPROACH TO IMPROVE LABORATORY PERFORMANCE ........... 25
   IMPLEMENTATION OF PBF FOR PUBLIC HEALTH LABORATORIES IN RWANDA .......................... 25
   PBF IMPLEMENTATION .............................................................................................................. 29
   IMPACT OF PBF ON LABORATORY PERFORMANCE AND HOSPITAL PERFORMANCE ................... 32
   MOTIVATION, RELATIONSHIPS, AND THE IMPROVEMENT PROCESS ........................................... 36
IV. FINDINGS RELATED TO THE EAPHLN PROJECT ................................................... 42
   IMPLEMENTATION OF EAPHLNP INTERVENTIONS ................................................................... 42
   EFFECT OF EAPHLNP INTERVENTIONS ON SLIPTA PERFORMANCE ....................................... 44
   EFFECT OF EAPHLNP INTERVENTION ON RANGE OF TESTS AVAILABLE .................................. 46
   EFFECT OF EAPHLNP INTERVENTIONS ON TEST VOLUMES...................................................... 47
   EFFECT OF EAPHLNP INTERVENTIONS ON TEST ACCURACY ................................................... 49
   QUALITATIVE ASSESSMENT OF THE IMPORTANCE OF DIFFERENT INTERVENTION ELEMENTS ... 49
V. DISCUSSION OF FINDINGS AND LESSONS LEARNED FOR THE
INTRODUCTION OF LABORATORY PBF IN OTHER COUNTRIES............................. 52
   SUMMARY OF FINDINGS ............................................................................................................ 52
   VALIDITY OF THE CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK........................................................................... 53
   V. LESSONS LEARNED FOR OTHER IMPLEMENTERS OF LABORATORY PBF ............................... 54
REFERENCES ............................................................................................................................ 57

APPENDICES ............................................................................................................................. 58
   APPENDIX 1: TERMS OF REFERENCE FOR THE LEAD CONSULTANT (ABRIDGED)...................... 58
   APPENDIX 2: FINAL QUALITATIVE SAMPLE .............................................................................. 61
   APPENDIX 3: SAMPLE QUALITATIVE DISCUSSION GUIDE (ENGLISH VERSION) ........................ 62
   APPENDIX 4: QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS TABLES ...................................................................... 65




                                                                      v
                              ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors would like to thank Kelly Silva for technical backing and critical independent
views, Martin Matu for his facilitation with the formal authorization, review of the findings
and for sending invaluable datasets, and all the interview participants who are not
named for purpose of confidentiality.

We also are very grateful for the support extended by Dr. Daniel Ngamije, Manager of
the Single Projects Coordination Unit (SPIU) and EAPHLNP Project Coordinator in
Rwanda; Emil Ivan, Director of the National Reference Laboratory; Emmanuel
Nkuranga, Chief Accountant (SPIU); Gilbert Biraro, Disease Programme Manager
(SPIU); Dr. Edouard Ntagwabira, Director of the Laboratory Network Unit (Rwanda
Biomedical Center, NRL Division); Dr. Habimana-Mucyo, Director of MDR-TB Unit
(Rwanda Biomedical Center, TB Division); Dr. Michel Gasana, TB Program Manager;
and all other managerial and technical staff in the Ministry of Health and at the National
Reference Laboratory.

We also thank the hospital directors and laboratory managers and staff at the
EAPHLNP satellite laboratories, as well as other colleagues in Rwanda who helped to
make this evaluation possible. The authors wish to acknowledge the helpful
contributions from peer reviewers, Gyorgi Fritsche, Senior Health Specialist, World
Bank, G.N.V. Ramana, Program Leader, World Bank, and Alaine Nyaruhirira, Senior
Technical Adviser for Laboratory Services, Management Sciences for Health. Finally,
our thanks go to Dr. Wei Han for her support with the statistical analysis.

Without all these contributions, this report would not have been possible.


The authors are grateful to the Ministry of Health in Rwanda for its leadership on this
initiative and to the World Bank for republishing this report as an HNP Discussion Paper.




                                             vi
                  ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
ASLM       African Society for Laboratory Medicine
FBC        Full Blood Count (laboratory test)
           Test counting the T-cells in blood sample to assess the immune system
CD4
           (laboratory test)
EAPHLNP East Africa Public Health Laboratory Networking Project
ECSA-HC    East Central and Southern Africa Health Community
EQA        External Quality Assessment
HFU        Health Financing Unit
MoH        Ministry of Health
NRL        National Reference Laboratory
OECD       Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development
PBF        Performance-based Financing
PT         Proficiency Testing (laboratory test performance)
SLIPTA     Stepwise Laboratory Quality Improvement Process Towards Accreditation
SLMTA      Stepwise Laboratory Management Towards Accreditation
SOP        Standard Operating Procedure
SPIU       Special Projects Implementation Unit in the Rwandan MoH
TAT        Turn-around Time
TB         Tuberculosis
WB         World Bank
WHO        World Health Organization




                                       vii
                            EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The East Africa Public Health Laboratory Networking Project (EAPHLNP) addresses the
historical neglect of public health laboratories and explores strategies for improving the
effectiveness of laboratories and the performance of laboratory workers. Laboratory
services are fundamental to appropriate diagnosis and treatment of diseases, as well as
early detection and management of disease outbreaks. Laboratories have historically
been one of the weakest areas in health systems, and laboratory workers are among
the neglected cadres of healthcare workers.

The Bank-funded EAPHLNP, launched in 2010, aims to establish a network of efficient,
high quality, accessible public health laboratories (Burundi, Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania
and Uganda). The project upgraded, supported and networked up to six district hospital
laboratories in each country, and one or two referral laboratories that act as national
hubs. In addition, the project supports innovations in service delivery and uses a learn-
by-doing approach. Each country serves as a center of excellence in a thematic area:
Kenya (operational research, disease surveillance); Uganda (lab networking and
accreditation); Tanzania (training and capacity building); Rwanda (PBF, ICT MDR-TB);
and Burundi (PBF), piloting innovations, and sharing lessons and good practices with
the other countries. The East, Central and Southern Africa Health Community (ECSA-
HC) facilitates knowledge sharing across countries and shares policy implications with
health authorities in member states.

Rwanda led the piloting of Performance-Based Financing (PBF) for laboratories. This
report reviews and evaluates the application of performance based incentives linked to
progress on quality improvements towards laboratory accreditation in Rwanda. The
PBF pilot is discussed in the context of a broader assessment of the impact of
EAPHLNP-supported interventions with a view to identifying lessons learned which may
be of interest to other countries and stakeholders.

The lab PBF pilot was introduced in the context of a well-established national PBF
program dating back to the early 2000s. The flexible nature of the EAPHLNP and the
favorable context in Rwanda provided an ideal backdrop to experimentally introduce a
modified version of PBF financing to help accelerate progress of five project-supported
labs towards accreditation. While in the past laboratories were evaluated as part of the
broader hospital PBF reviews, the main difference introduced was linking incentive
payments to progress on a standardized, globally recognized metric---the Stepwise
Laboratory Improvement Process towards Accreditation (SLIPTA) checklist. For the first
time, laboratories were bringing in PBF revenues, instilling a culture of continuous
quality improvements, and helping to focus management attention on accreditation.

In line with the learn-by-doing approach, an appropriate methodology was adopted for a
retrospective evaluation, identifying comparator sites with similar characteristics. The
performance of the five intervention laboratories in Rwanda was compared both to other
district hospital laboratories in the country which operated in a similar regulatory and
institutional framework, and to EAPHLNP laboratories which benefitted from a similar
package of interventions under the project and non-EAPHLNP sites in the other
participating countries. All comparator sites were enrolled in the Stepwise Laboratory
Management Training towards Accreditation (SLMTA) program, the gold standard task-
based training and mentoring program preparing sites for accreditation based on


                                           viii
international clinical lab standards. A heuristic framework was developed to better
understand how the package of interventions (including PBF) might have contributed to
performance improvements. Qualitative and quantitative research methods were
combined in a mixed-methods design. The qualitative part consisted of in-depth expert
interviews with key informants to better understand, contextualize and explain
quantitative findings. The quantitative part included analysis of secondary data and
collection of structured primary data from intervention and non-intervention sites in
Rwanda. While performance was measured and financially incentivized only in terms of
the SLIPTA scores, data on service volumes and test accuracy were also collected to
ascertain the potential broader impact of project interventions. The main limitations of
the study relate to the: limited availability of some data; small sample size for the
intervention group; and potential biases from selection of comparator sites and from
respondent interviews. Likewise, it remains unclear to what extent the findings from
Rwanda can be generalized to other countries which do not have a similar enabling
environment.

The evaluation found improved laboratory performance at all five project-supported
laboratories in Rwanda as measured by the SLIPTA scores. No clear patterns were
found in terms of improved test volumes or test accuracy, which were not part of the
pilot scheme. PBF appears to have contributed to an accelerated change where it was
implemented, with PBF laboratories experiencing an overall greater increase in SLIPTA
scores compared to project-supported laboratories in the other countries. In terms of
the overall project impact, since the different EAPHLNP interventions were delivered
almost homogeneously in Rwanda, it was not possible to isolate the impact of the
individual interventions. Both EAPHLNP intervention groups (with and without PBF) out-
performed the comparator laboratories. These generally positive trends need to be
viewed cautiously given the potential biases noted above.

Despite the limitations of the study, the evaluation found a system-strengthening value
to introducing a package of interventions, including modernizing laboratories and
strengthening human resources, in combination with PBF. While it is difficult to
disentangle the effects of these interventions, as shown in other studies, PBF works
best when a criticality of initial investments are in place. The evaluation found that
motivation of laboratory personnel was positively affected both through the improved
work environment, and training and mentoring opportunities as well as through the PBF
scheme. Relationships between laboratory staff and clinicians improved over the project
period, reflecting a combination of factors, including recognition of enhanced laboratory
performance and increased capacity of laboratories to bring in PBF money. Laboratory
managers had a greater voice in hospital management and lab staff felt increasingly
valued and respected by clinicians. The quarterly PBF assessments were viewed to be
time consuming but beneficial in enhancing accountability, maintaining the focus on the
quality improvement process towards accreditation, and possibly speeding up the
measurement-improvement cycle. A spirit of teamwork prevailed at participating sites,
contributing to successful implementation.

Other countries considering the application of PBF mechanisms for public health
laboratories need to take into account lessons learned and assess the features which
may be relevant to their own contexts. There are four broad lessons worth noting:




                                           ix
    PBF schemes for laboratories have the potential to instill a results-focused
     culture, foster accountability, and promote teamwork. As in other PBF schemes,
     providing incentives to facilities makes laboratory staff and management
     accountable for the results being incentivized.          Likewise, accountability
     mechanisms are reinforced. The relationship between clinicians and laboratory
     personnel may improve as laboratories become more performant and clinicians
     have greater confidence in the results. As laboratories bring in PBF money, they
     get a seat at the table, and a greater voice in hospital management.          PBF
     schemes also require and engender team spirit which is critical to quality
     laboratory work.
    PBF schemes for laboratories need to be viewed as an integral part of a
     package of interventions that contribute to enhanced performance. PBF
     schemes do not operate in isolation and are not a magical bullet. They appear
     to work best in an environment where minimal investments in modern
     infrastructure and human resources are in place. PBF may trigger more rapid
     progress in the quality improvement process towards accreditation in
     combination with other strategies.
    The design of PBF laboratory schemes needs to be tailored to different contexts.
     In countries with existing PBF programs, it will be easier and less costly to
     introduce a lab PBF scheme. In settings with no PBF national programs, careful
     consideration needs to be given to the types of incentives (facility vs individual)
     to be provided to avoid creating distortions in the system. PBF schemes that
     remunerate facilities or individual departments are more likely to foster teamwork
     and minimize risk of perverse effects. Individual incentives while potentially
     attractive to front line workers may not be easily maintained. In all settings,
     ensuring sustainability remains a challenge. It is critical for governments to
     increasingly assume responsibility for mainstreaming the approach. Likewise,
     linking incentive payments to progress towards accreditation offers new options
     for fostering sustainability, as accredited laboratories will be more performant
     and have the capacity to generate revenues.
The judicious selection of indicators for PBF laboratory schemes is critical to success
along with careful selection of appropriate measures for measuring performance. Use
of SLIPTA composite scores linked to progress towards accreditation was highly
innovative, helping to set the facilities on a path towards accreditation. While important,
SLIPTA scores were not sufficient to capture overall performance. Future schemes need
to consider complementing these scores with other key measures of performance (for
example, test volumes, test accuracy, patient satisfaction). Stakeholders considering
similar approaches need to increasingly rely on laboratory information management
systems for tracking performance, with a view to institutionalizing performance
monitoring. Another factor which needs to be considered is the frequency of
assessments, to strike the right balance between maintaining focus on results and the
additional burden of conducting more frequent audits.




                                            x
                                I. INTRODUCTION
This report presents findings from an application of performance based financing for
public health laboratories under the East Africa Public Health Laboratory Networking
Project (EAPHLNP), which supports innovations to strengthening laboratory systems.
Under this World Bank funded regional project each participating country (Burundi,
Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania and Uganda) serves as a center of excellence in a thematic
area, generating knowledge and sharing experiences and lessons with the other
countries to help inform public policy and programmatic action. This paper describes
Rwanda’s experience with providing performance based incentives to facilities linked to
progress on quality improvements towards laboratory accreditation within the context of
a broader assessment of the impact of the EAPHLNP-supported laboratory
interventions.
The paper is divided into five sections. This section sets the context for the discussion
by providing background information on performance based financing, the regional
project, and the Rwandan context. The second section describes the methodology used
for assessing performance, including the main research questions addressed. The third
section describes the application of PBF for public health laboratories in Rwanda and
discusses its impact. The next one provides an assessment of the overall interventions
supported under the project. The final section summarizes the main findings and
identifies lessons learned which may be of interest to other countries and stakeholders.

                                     BACKGROUND

Performance-based financing (PBF) was first introduced in the health sector through a
primary health care initiative in Zambia in 1990. Most early work on PBF in health was
output-based contracting to expand access to health services (Fritsche et al., 2014). In
the past 15 years, PBF initiatives and pilots have been launched in more than 30
countries, primarily in Asia and Africa. They are growing in number and diversity (see
Figure 1), applying new methods to different subsections of the health sector.

         Figure 1: Rapid expansion of PBF in Africa (Fritsche et al., 2014)




                                           11
PBF is defined as a subset of results-based financing (RBF) that targets health facilities
with a conditional fee-for-service mechanism. RBF, more broadly, can be payments for
countries, healthcare providers or beneficiaries and can involve fee-for-service, other
financing, or even non-monetary rewards (contrary to what the name might suggest).

Results-Based Financing (RBF) has been defined as "a cash payment or non-monetary
transfer made to a national or sub-national government, manager, provider, payer or
consumer of health services after predefined results have been attained and verified.
Payment is conditional on measurable actions being undertaken." (www.rbfhealth.org).

The following definition of PBF was agreed by the African PBF Community of Practice
and posted on its website in August 2010:

    Performance-Based Financing is a health systems approach with an orientation
    on results defined as quantity and quality of service outputs. This approach
    entails making health facilities autonomous agencies that work for the benefit of
    health related goals and their staff. Multiple performance frameworks for the
    regulatory functions, the performance-purchasing agency and community
    empowerment also characterize it. Performance-Based Financing applies market
    forces but seeks to correct market failures to attain health gains. PBF at the
    same time aims at cost-containment and a sustainable mix of revenues from
    cost-recovery, government and international contributions. PBF is a flexible
    approach that continuously seeks to improve through empirical research and
    rigorous impact evaluations, which lead to best practices.

       THE EAST AFRICA PUBLIC HEALTH LABORATORY NETWORKING PROJECT

In 2010, four East African Community (EAC) member states received US$78.7 million
from the World Bank for the EAPHLNP which aimed to establish a network of efficient,
high quality, accessible public health laboratories 1. The project supports 32 laboratories
in the participating countries, the majority located in cross-border areas, to become
Centres of Excellence (CoE) and to increase access to laboratory services for poor and
vulnerable populations. The strengthened laboratories are expected to provide
specialized services to communities in these regions, services that were otherwise
available only at the national reference facilities, resulting in faster turnaround times and
potential reductions in morbidity and mortality due to improved diagnosis and treatment.
In all participating countries, the project upgraded, supported and networked up to six
district hospital laboratories, in addition to one or two national referral laboratories that
act as national hubs.

Role of laboratories in health
The EAPHLNP addresses the historical neglect of public health laboratories and
explores ways to improve laboratory performance. Laboratory services are fundamental
to appropriate diagnosis and treatment of diseases, as well as early detection and
management of outbreaks. Laboratories have historically been one of the weakest
areas in health systems, and laboratory workers are among the neglected cadres of

1   The project started with Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda and Rwanda. In 2012, Burundi joined the
    EAPHLNP. Public health laboratories in Rwanda at the district and provincial level do both public
    health work and provide clinical laboratory services.


                                                12
healthcare workers (Schneidman et al., 2014). Donor funding for health through
infectious disease and primary care lenses has resulted in continued neglect of public
health laboratories. The 2008 Maputo Declaration on Strengthening of Laboratory
Systems has begun to address these issues, but major gaps remain.

Laboratory workers are critical to the performance of laboratories. Training sufficient,
well-qualified laboratory staff, distributing them appropriately based on population and
need, and ensuring they have career development possibilities that keep them engaged
in the system are all challenges facing most countries in the region.

The combination of insufficient numbers, limited training, and skewed distribution of staff
working in poorly equipped facilities results in a vicious cycle of demotivation and
underperformance. Projects like the EAPHLNP have the potential to raise the profile of
laboratory workers and reverse this cycle into what has been termed a virtuous cycle
(Figure 2: Schneidman et al., 2014).

   Figure 2: Virtuous Cycle of Lab Worker Motivation (Schneidman et al., 2014)




Testing Innovations for Public Health Laboratories

A key strategy of the EAPHLNP was to support and assess innovations to improve the
effectiveness of public health laboratories and the performance of laboratory workers.
Each participating country agreed to provide regional leadership in a thematic area,
generating knowledge and sharing experiences and lessons. The East, Central and
Southern Africa Health Community (ECSA-HC) facilitates inter-country learning and
response mechanisms, supports south-south collaboration among the member states.
Kenya is leading on integrated disease surveillance and response and on operational
research; Uganda provides regional support on laboratory networking and accreditation;
Tanzania coordinates regional training and capacity building; and Rwanda leads on



                                            13
information and communication technologies. In addition, Rwanda also took the lead on
PBF and co-chairs a technical working group together with Burundi to explore the
applicability of PBF to public health laboratories, building on its prior successful
experience with the national PBF program. In this context, the Ministry of Health of
Rwanda played a lead role in promoting and sharing the PBF approach. The Rwandese
team decided to use an empirical (action-oriented) research approach to explore the
feasibility of applying PBF to public health laboratories.

The flexible nature of the EAPHLNP and the favorable context in Rwanda provided an
ideal backdrop to experimentally introduce a modified version of PBF financing to help
accelerate the progress of five project-supported laboratories towards readiness for
ISO-accreditation. Rwanda already had considerable experience of implementing PBF
in the health sector, including quality assessments of hospital departments. It was
therefore possible to refine the PBF approach to laboratories by linking incentive
payments to progress on the Stepwise Laboratory Improvement Process towards
Accreditation (SLIPTA) checklist, at a lower cost than would have been the case
elsewhere. Understanding the effectiveness of a PBF application to public health
laboratories is of interest to decision-makers in other EAPHLNP-supported countries, as
well as to other development partners who are considering various interventions to
improve laboratory performance.

One of the key innovations supported under the EAPHNLP in all countries has been a
regional assessment/review mechanism to guide planning for quality improvement
projects (QIPs) and mentorship process to accelerate the laboratory improvement.
Figure 3 below details the approach the regional laboratory accreditation and networking
TWG has developed to support the countries in the region to develop robust quality
management systems in preparation for laboratory accreditation.

    Figure 3: EAPHLNP Approach to Quality Improvement Towards Laboratory
                               Accreditation


                                Planning for                 SLMTA
                                   QIPs                      Trainings
      Peer/SLIPTA
       assessment

                                 Mentorship               Internal audit/
                                and SLMTA                PBF assessment


All five participating countries adopted the WHO-AFRO supported SLIPTA process as
an approach to strengthening laboratory quality management systems of its member
states. They also adopted the Stepwise Laboratory Management Towards Accreditation
(SLMTA) program, the companion ‘gold standard’ task-based training and mentoring
program, which involves classroom and laboratory on-site mentoring to build skills of
laboratory managers and improve quality with the goal to prepare laboratories for
accreditation based on international clinical laboratory standards. The programme is
supported by the African Society for Laboratory Medicine (ASLM), US Center for



                                          14
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), and WHO-AFRO, and has been conducted in
36 countries worldwide, including 18 African countries.

SLIPTA is a laboratory quality improvement process towards accreditation, which uses a
standardized quality checklist with a scoring system in a range of 0 – 100, assessing 12
Quality System Essentials (QSE) of the Laboratory Quality Management System
Guidelines. The SLIPTA composite score is derived from 117 audit questions, mostly
derived from the 12 QSE of the laboratory management requirements to achieve
certification based on the ISO-standard 15189:2012. The SLIPTA scoring system forms
an integral part of the SLMTA approach, but it can also be used independently as a
management quality improvement and monitoring system. Certificates of recognition are
given to laboratories with 1 to 5 stars indicating level of accreditation readiness.
Facilities that score 55-64 percent receive one star, 65-74 percent two stars, 75-84
percent receive three stars, 85-94 percent four stars and those with a score of 95
percent or more on the SLIPTA scale obtain 5 stars, indicating readiness to enroll for an
ISO 15189/17025 certification scheme (see Figure 4). SLIPTA was launched globally in
Kigali in 2009. Further details about the content of the SLIPTA checklist, are provided
under section on performance indicators below.

                Figure 4: SLIPTA Tiers of Laboratory Quality Management




Source: World Health Organization - AFRO




                                           15
For each SLIPTA assessment, auditors review documents and records, observe the
laboratory set-up and specific work processes, and interview laboratory staff according
to a prescribed protocol. Twelve areas are assessed in each laboratory, each of which
can obtain a certain maximum number of points, adding up to a total of 275 maximum
achievable points.

       1.    Documents and records (maximum score: 28)
       2.    Management Reviews (14)
       3.    Organization and Personnel (22)
       4.    Client Management and Customer Service (10)
       5.    Equipment (35)
       6.    Evaluation and Audits (15)
       7.    Purchasing and Inventory (24)
       8.    Process Control (32)
       9.    Information Management (21)
       10.   Identification of Non Conformities, Corrective and Preventive Actions (19)
       11.   Occurrence/Incident Management and Process Improvement (12)
       12.   Facilities and Biosafety (43)


The total score achieved is then normalized, so that 275 constitutes 100 percent 2.

THE RWANDAN CONTEXT

The context in which the EAPHLNP team, with support from the Single Project Implementation
Unit (SPIU) of the Rwandan Ministry of Health (MoH), introduced the PBF pilot, with
implementation support from the Health Financing Unit (HFU), played an important role on how
the pilot was structured, as well as the way it was able to influence laboratory performance, as
discussed below.

The Existing PBF Programme in the Rwandan Health System
The PBF pilot was introduced in a strong enabling environment which benefits from high
level government leadership a strong focus on results and good governance. Health
has a prominent position in the Rwandan government’s budget, with total health
expenditures representing 10.7 percent of GDP (2012), the highest in the region (World
Bank, 2012). The Rwandan health system is known for the mandatory participation of
citizens in health insurance schemes, of which the largest is a community-based
scheme called ‘mutuelles de santé’. Pilot programs experimenting with supply- and
demand side financing initiatives have led to innovative national reforms such as the
adoption of a PBF mechanism for health financing at the primary and secondary care
level. Another approach that is unique to Rwanda is that donor funds for health - an
estimated 47 percent of total health expenditures - are managed centrally by the SPIU in


2   The category names/scores indicated are from the 2015 version of the SLIPTA audit checklist. The full
    SLIPTA instrument, containing a laboratory profile questionnaire, the audit protocol, and the summary
    sheet, can be downloaded from the WHO website (http://www.afro.who.int/en/clusters-a-
    programmes/hss/blood-safety-laboratories-a-health-technology/blt-highlights/3859-who-guide-for-the-
    stepwise-laboratory-improvement-process-towards-accreditation-in-the-african-region-with-
    checklist.html)


                                                  16
the MoH in a coordinated fashion. This results in a sector-wide approach style of
financing, which gives MoH better control and flexibility in the use of donor funds.

Rwanda is known globally as one of the pioneers of PBF for healthcare delivery.
Encouraging results from three pilot programmes in the early 2000s, which focused on
the stimulation of increased uptake of health services, the ‘approche contractuelle’ was
adopted as a national policy in 2005 (Rusa et al, 2009). The nationwide scale-up
entailed standardization, institutionalization and systematic planning through the
development of a standardized set of services, a clear fee structure, and contract
templates for different administrative levels. A composite quality score was introduced,
which modified performance-based payments to facilities by calculating the amounts
disbursed as follows:

       Health center PBF earnings = (fees * service quantity) * (% quality score).

According to the findings of a World Bank impact evaluation (Basinga et al., 2011), the
PBF approach engendered a results-oriented culture that promoted managerial
autonomy and empowered providers to find creative solutions. It also created an
environment in which the government gained the confidence to progressively promote
the autonomy of facilities and to decentralize the recruitment and dismissal of health
professionals to health centers and hospitals.

Hospital management allocated PBF funds in part towards paying a bonus to staff, and
in part for facility improvements in line with annual budgets. The way this was handled
depended on national guidelines and staff levels as well as different hospital
management strategies.

The revenue that was generated through PBF benefitted hospital laboratories to a
variable extent, based on measured performance and on other priorities of the hospital
management. The performance of the laboratories was not assessed systematically
using a rigorous quality checklist. Laboratories were perceived primarily as a cost rather
than a revenue center and given their generally poor and neglected condition, they
rarely brought in their own PBF funding.

The SLMTA Process in Rwanda

The first Rwandan SLMTA cohort of five participating laboratories, including the NRL
and four laboratories housed at referral facilities in Kigali and Butare, participated in the
programme from 2010 – 2011. The five EAPHLNP-supported satellite laboratories
participated in the training programme in 2011-2012. By the time of this assessment in
February 2015, a total of 23 laboratories had completed the SLMTA programme in
Rwanda, and a total of 101 laboratories had completed the programme, including the
final SLIPTA audit, in all the EAPHLNP participating countries. The fact that the
EAPHLNP-supported laboratories and a large number of comparator sites participated
in the same management training and mentoring programme, with associated
standardized measurement of baseline- and exit indicators provided a unique
opportunity for this study to compare pre- and post- SLIPTA scores using a quasi-
experimental study design as discussed below.




                                             17
RWANDAN EAPHLNP-SUPPORTED LABORATORIES
The EAPHLNP supported sites in Rwanda included five district hospital laboratories
(Byumba, Kibungo, Gihundwe, Gisenyi, Nyagatare), referred to as ‘satellite labs’ and the
national reference laboratory (NRL) in Kigali; see Figure 5 for location of these labs. All
the supported hospital laboratories are housed in district hospitals, located 4 – 20 km
from the national border, and between 60 and 230 km from the capital Kigali (Figure 5).
The hospital catchment population ranged from 150,000 to over 600,000 people. The
average number of the catchment population (367,000) was comparable to the average
in the other district hospitals that participated in the SLMTA laboratory programme, the
comparator sites (378,000).
                  Figure 5: Location of Rwandan EAPHLN Satellite Labs




Source: Authors
As in other EAPHLNP-supported countries all satellite laboratories in Rwanda received
the following basic package of interventions aimed at strengthening both the capacity
and efficiency of these facilities:
   •   Upgrading of laboratories (that is, construction or renovation), and provision of
       modern laboratory equipment, and ICT hardware.
   •   Employment or deployment of additional, well-qualified human resources.
   •   Training and capacity building, including enrollment in the Stepwise Laboratory
       Management Towards Accreditation (SLMTA) program.




                                            18
    •   Supportive supervision, and mentorship 3, including mentors as expert advisors,
        coaches and role-models to foster positive change in processes and behavior.
    •   Facility improvement funds to address gaps identified through SLIPTA audits.
    •   Support for the continuous Stepwise Laboratory Improvement Towards
        Accreditation (SLIPTA) quality assurance system.
In Rwanda the EAPHLNP supported laboratories were comparable to other donor-
funded laboratories. With some exceptions, the basic equipment installed in comparator
laboratories was similar with EAPHLNP-supported laboratories in early 2015 (Table 1).
For the more sophisticated equipment such as GeneXpert, there were variations. Almost
all laboratories receive donor funding from various sources, primarily the Global Fund,
the World Bank, CDC, and Partners in Health. Only two of the comparison facilities
(Munini and Ruhango) stated that they received no external funding.
            Table 1: Comparison of EAPHLNP Laboratories with Others 4

                                                       EAPHLNP
                                                                           Other Labs
                                                       Labs
         Facility parameters
         Catchment population                          367,000             378,000
         Driving      distance      from     Kigali
                                                       153 km              92 km
         (mean)
         Number of beds                                246                 252
         Number of lab rooms                           11.8*               7.2
         Lab Staff level            “A0”      (high
                                                       4.4*                1.9
         qualification)
         Staff    level        “A1”      (medium
                                                       4.0                 5.2
         qualification)
         Staff     level         “A2”       (lower
                                                       3.2                 4.3
         qualification)
         Lab staff, all levels combined                11.5                11.6
         Equipment installed (examples)
         Biochemistry Analyzer,            no.    of
                                                       2.4                  2.2
         machines
         Hematology         Analyzer,      no.    of
                                                       2.0                  2.0
         machines
         ELISA Machine installed                       3 / 5 (60%)          3 / 13 (23%)
         GeneXpert available                           5 / 5* (100%)        5 / 13 (38%)

3
    The mentorship programme in Rwanda consisted of three experienced and highly qualified laboratory
    professionals who each spent about three weeks per month on-site in the 5 EAPHLN satellite labs for
    a duration of almost 2 years from 2012 to 2014. The contact time for each laboratory was an average
    of 10 days per month.
4   The mean of indicators marked with * are larger for EAPHLNP-supported laboratories with statistical
    significance at the 95% confidence level.


                                                 19
                               II. METHODOLOGY
                                 RESEARCH QUESTIONS

The PBF pilot in Rwanda was reviewed in the context of a broader assessment of the
impact of EAPHLNP-supported interventions. The performance of the five EAPHLNP-
supported laboratories in Rwanda was compared retrospectively, both to other district
hospital laboratories in the country and to EAPHLNP laboratories in the other
participating countries. The study aimed to assess the implementation of and additional
impact of the PBF incentive payments on top of the EAPHLNP package of interventions
(for Terms of Reference, see Appendix 1).

Four research questions were identified to help achieve the overall objective:

   1. How was the PBF pilot implemented in Rwanda, and what has been the effects
      of PBF incentives on the performance of EAPHLNP-supported laboratories and
      district hospitals in Rwanda?
   2. What was the role of lab worker skills and motivation and if and how the
      relationship between laboratory professionals and clinicians has changed to
      contribute to the improvements in laboratory performance?
   3. What was the impact of EAPHLNP interventions overall on improving laboratory
      performance? What was the role of the individual interventions, including PBF,
      in achieving improvements?
   4. What are the key lessons learned for other countries interested in implementing
      a similar program?

                              CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK
To facilitate the research process, a simple heuristic framework (Figure 6) was
developed. It visualizes the EAPHLNP interventions and likely ways that they might have
brought change in the laboratories; in the Discussion section we will briefly examine the
validity of this framework in light of the findings.
              Figure 6: EAPHLNP Intervention Conceptual Framework




According to this framework, outcome performance indicators beyond the SLIPTA
quality/process indicators (as described in the Introduction) include increase in test
volumes, improved test timeliness (measured as turn-around time), better test accuracy


                                           20
(measured through external quality assessments (EQA) or proficiency testing (PT)), and
patient experience (measured through satisfaction surveys among clients, both health
professionals and patients).       However, only SLIPTA scores were measured
systematically over the project period as performance indicators to determine PBF
payments in the Rwandan EAPHLNP model.

To answer the research questions, qualitative and quantitative research methods were
combined with a mixed-methods design. The qualitative part consisted of in-depth
expert interviews with those involved with or affected by the EAPHLNP, and the
quantitative part included the compilation and secondary analysis of existing financial,
service provision and monitoring data as well as the collection of structured primary data
from intervention and non-intervention sites.

                                  QUALITATIVE RESEARCH
Generally, qualitative expert interviews involve in-depth discussions with knowledgeable
respondents to gather information based on their expertise and experience related to
matters under investigation, as well as their assessment and opinions on a process or
situation. Responses can help to better understand, contextualize and explain
quantitative findings. Conversational-style qualitative interviews are organized with a
discussion guide. Discussion guides specific to different respondent types were
developed by the research team and revised during an inception meeting in Kigali in
early February 2015 5.

In Appendix 2, the completed qualitative sample is described. Qualitative research was
conducted in February 2015, and reflects the views and opinions of those interviewed at
that time. The research team conducted multiple face-to-face qualitative interviews in
two of the five EAPHLNP-supported laboratories and short telephonic discussions with
laboratory managers of two additional project sites. The face-to-face interviews
included laboratory staff as well as other hospital facility staff and management. Expert
interviews were also conducted in Kigali at the National Reference Laboratory, the
Single Project Implementation Unit (SPIU), the MoH, and with EAPHLNP mentors and
Rwanda project coordinator.

Confidentiality was guaranteed to all participants, and they will therefore not be quoted
by name or otherwise identified in this report. The interviews were conducted in English
or French in a private, quiet atmosphere. With a few exceptions, the interviews were
audio-recorded and transcribed for the analysis. Transcripts were analyzed to answer
the research questions.



                                 QUANTITATIVE RESEARCH
Quantitative research can provide an understanding about the relationship between
interventions and the expected outcomes. Statistical analysis can quantify the likelihood
that observed differences between groups that received an intervention and those that
didn’t are ‘real’ and not due to naturally occurring variations. For the quantitative

5   A sample discussion guide is included in Appendix.   The full set of tools can be obtained from
    evaluators or the Rwandan SPIU upon request.


                                              21
research design, the elements in the conceptual framework were translated into a list of
variables: independent variables that might cause a change, confounding variables that
might also affect the process, and dependent (outcome) variables that were expected to
change as a result of the intervention (see Appendix 4 for further detail).

All the analyses were based on a master dataset, aggregating information from several
sources 6. The main outcome variables that were accessible and used to evaluate
laboratory performance are: SLIPTA assessment scores, test volumes (measured by
monthly numbers of four routine tests: full blood count, blood glucose test, tuberculosis
microscopy, and CD4 count), and test accuracy (measured through PT). Baseline data
were taken either from 2011 or from the first quarter of 2012, depending on data
availability. Where baseline data were not available (for the test accuracy) to allow
assessment of change in performance over the lifetime of the project in the two groups,
comparison of end-line performance was done between the EAPHLNP laboratories and
the SLMTA-only laboratories in Rwanda.

    Figure 7: Number of Laboratories Included in the Analysis by Intervention and
                                      Country


                       77
                   Kenya 18


                   Uganda 16


                  Tanzania 26                    18
                                                Kenya 2
                                                Burundi 6                     6
                   Rwanda 17                    Uganda 5
                                                Tanzania 5                 Rwanda
                 SLMTA only                  EAPHLN                       EAPHLN
                                            without PBF                   with PBF

This evaluation involves the following laboratories: SLMTA-trained laboratories not
receiving EAPHLNP support in all five East African countries as comparison (data from
CDC/ECSA-HC), EAPHLNP laboratories outside Rwanda (four countries: Burundi,
Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda) as intervention group one, and EAPHLNP supported
laboratories in Rwanda, all of which received PBF payments, as intervention group two
(Figure 7). The Rwandan NRL was excluded from some of the analyses; it was an
EAPHLNP supported site but received no PBF payments, and it participated in the
SLMTA intervention before the start of the EAPHLNP. Out of the seven interventions
listed in the conceptual framework (Figure 1) all the comparator sites in Rwanda
received the SLMTA capacity building intervention and functioned in comparable

6    The raw master data file and STATA do-file used to create raw master data file and conduct the
     analyses are available upon request from evaluators or from the Rwandan SPIU.


                                                   22
regulatory and institutional environments and thus provided a similar context, which is a
requirement for a quasi-experimental design. It is important to note that some of these
comparator facilities also received support from other donors, notably equipment and
facility improvements from the Global Fund, but it was not feasible to quantify these in
this study.

                  Table 2: Laboratories Included in the Statistical Analyses
                           Country SLMTA only EAPHLN  Total
                           Rwanda     17/17     6/6   23/23
                           Tanzania   26/26     5/6   31/32
                           Uganda     16/16     5/6   21/22
                            Burundi    0/0      6/6    6/6
                            Kenya     18/50     2/7   20/57
                             Total   77/109    24/31 101/140

 presents the number of laboratories that have pre- and post-SLMTA intervention scores
available as assessed by the SLMTA teams, out of those enrolled in the SLMTA
program, by country and by intervention status (i.e. whether labs participated in
EAPHLNP intervention or not). No data were available for non-EAPHLNP supported
laboratories in Burundi, and it was excluded from some of the analyses; Rwanda,
Uganda, and Tanzania had no missing data, whereas approximately two-thirds of the
post-SLMTA scores were missing for Kenya, primarily from non-EAPHLNP sites.
Standardization of data was done as follows:

      •    SLIPTA assessment score: For the comparison of pre- and post-SLMTA
           scores, the CDC assessment data was used. For some of the laboratories, the
           data file did not contain endline data, but it was available in the records of the
           Rwandan NRL and appeared consistent. As part of the EAPHLNP, all
           participating laboratories were also evaluated on the SLIPTA checklist through
           annual peer assessments over the past four years. The resulting data were
           analysed separately from pre- and post-SLMTA scores, because the data
           showed that there was some difference in point levels achieved on assessment
           by the different organizations and therefore constituted a somewhat different
           metric 7.
      •    Test volumes: Raw data available on a monthly basis from national HMIS was
           aggregated to quarters, half-year and annual volumes.
      •    Disbursement and PBF funds: Raw data was available on a quarterly basis on
           overall project disbursements to satellite sites and PBF Payments. We averaged
           quarterly data on an annual basis to address the fact that some quarters had
           missing data and some disbursements may have delayed from one quarter to
           another.




7
    While there was no formal counter verification in the PBF pilot, there were both national and regional
       (peer) assessments conducted during the past few years with the results being generally comparable,
       even though some variation in scores was noted.



                                                     23
    •   Test accuracy: Standardized and comparable raw data was available from One
        World Accuracy 8 in April, July, and November 2014 for chemistry/Immunoassay
        (BCHE) and hematology; April and July 2014 for HIV lymphocyte
        immunophenotyping (QASI) and HIV antibiodies (HIVA) in a report named “EQA
        Performance Overview_2014_RWA”. We use the average achieved percentage
        acceptable for each of these tests in two groups: SLMTA-only labs and EAPHLN
        laboratories in Rwanda.
    •   Confounding variables were extracted from district hospital responses to a
        semi-structured questionnaire (see Appendix 5), and also included government-
        defined district equity score used by MoH.
                                           LIMITATIONS

The major limitation to the measurement of effect of PBF and the wider EAPHLNP effect
were around quantitative data availability, particularly prior to inception of the project.
This is not surprising as one of the major improvements driven by SLMTA and
EAPHLNP more broadly is an increased emphasis on data collection and quality. As
the sample size for the intervention groups was very small, the study therefore doesn’t
have a high statistical power. A larger sample size would have enabled a better
understanding of the generalizability of the observed differences. A second limitation
relates to potential biases in selection of comparator sites and respondent interviews.

The third limitation is that there is no generally accepted standard definition for
‘laboratory performance’. After consultations with stakeholders in Rwanda, performance
was defined as increase in test volumes, improved EQA results, shorter TAT, increased
client satisfaction, and improved SLIPTA scores as shown in the Conceptual Framework
(Figure 1). Possibly, the selection of tests for the assessment of volumes does not fully
or validly represent the overall test volume. Other tests or a broader spectrum of tests
might have led to different results. The inclusion of performance-related variables such
as range of tests available or equipment downtime may have shown differences
between EAPHLNP and comparison labs. Due to time and resource constraints and
other methodological considerations, they were not included.

The major question that limitations might elicit is whether the impact of PBF in Rwanda
is generalizable to other countries, particularly given the fact that the PBF programme is
institutionalized for facilities and individuals in the Rwandan health system. The timeline
from inception to implementation would likely be longer in other countries where the
underlying architecture was not established. Similarly, given the Rwandan decision to
measure SLIPTA scores as the PBF-determining indicator, lack of data on other
performance areas mean that countries selecting a different means of measuring
performance may not be able to predict outcomes based on the findings of this study.




8
    One World Accuracy is a Canada-based international collaboration of laboratory EQAs, which Rwanda
    has joined during the course of the EAPHLN implementation.


                                                24
      III. PBF AS AN APPROACH TO IMPROVE LABORATORY
                        PERFORMANCE

IMPLEMENTATION OF PBF FOR PUBLIC HEALTH LABORATORIES IN RWANDA

The objective of the pilot was to determine the applicability of PBF to public health
laboratories. The Rwandan HFU, with the support of the EAPHLNP, set out to establish
whether – and how - it is feasible to introduce PBF incentive payments linked to
progress towards laboratory accreditation to hospital laboratories, and if the approach is
effective in improving laboratory performance. This improvement in performance could
putatively manifest as an increase in service volume, accountability, efficiency, and a
contribution of the laboratories to overall quality of healthcare services – although the
only measured performance variable was the SLIPTA composite scores. As a key
output of the pilot phase, the team seeks to document lessons and experiences and
share them with other countries in the region and with stakeholders active in
strengthening public laboratories, as well as those in the broader PBF for health
community of practice. These lessons are informing the design of similar PBF programs
for the other EAHPLNP countries in the region.

With these objectives, the PBF pilot was initiated in Rwanda, with the five EAPHLNP
satellite facilities as beneficiaries (excluding the NRL). The laboratory PBF pilot in
Rwanda was fully embedded in the existing national PBF program and had to be
compliant with the related policy.

Key Design Features and Strategies

                                       Performance Indicators
PBF mechanisms are often linked to a combination of quantitative performance
indicators, measuring volume of services delivered (e.g. number of patients served with
a range of different services), and service quality indicators. In the case of laboratories,
the payments could therefore have been linked to indicators such as test volumes,
turnaround times, test accuracy as measured by proficiency testing (EQA), and client
satisfaction to adhere to classical PBF.

Instead, the Rwandan team took the decision to pioneer the use of PBF for laboratories
linked to progress on the SLIPTA scores; for the first time in Rwanda, PBF incentive
payments were therefore linked explicitly to progress towards laboratory accreditation. 9
The mechanism operated without reference to service volume. Instead, performance
was operationalized as a single composite indicator achieved on the SLIPTA audits.

The rationale behind the decision to use the SLIPTA audits score as the performance
indicator was that this would reduce the transaction costs. It was decided that paying
incentives based on the delivery of individual tests would be tedious and time
consuming. The implementation of the stepwise laboratory improvement process
towards accreditation was an integral part of the EAPHLNP and working with it removed

9
    Since Rwanda had a well-established national PBF program, with a mechanism for evaluating quality of hospital
    services (including laboratories), the EAPHLN laboratory pilot was innovative to the extent that it used a
    standardized, regionally recognized quality scorecard that measures progress towards ISO accreditation.


                                                      25
the requirement of incurring costs to collect data on individual test volumes and quality,
while accelerating the speed by which laboratories progressed towards accreditation.
The emphasis on the SLIPTA audits was expected to act as additional impetus for staff
motivation, improving their relationship with the hospital management which increasingly
viewed the laboratories in a positive light.

Data Validation

Data collection and data validation were not separated as they would be in a traditional
PBF design. Instead, the data collection was done in a single step during the quarterly
SLIPTA evaluations that were conducted by a multi-disciplinary “joint team” from the
National Reference Laboratory, together with SPIU and the HFU. There was no
additional or separate validation process. In line with the SLIPTA philosophy, feedback
was then provided to facilities on results, strengths and weaknesses, and the other
interventions of the EAPHLNP provided the laboratories with mentorship support and
facility grants to execute an improvement plan addressing gaps identified in each round
of assessment.

Although initial design was quarterly evaluations using the SLIPTA checklist, human and
financial constraints meant that this design feature was altered. In Table 3, the data
collection activities as recorded by the SPIU are recorded (total of 11 quarters during
2012 - 2014). In 4 out of the 11 quarters, no score was reported, while in 2 of the 11
quarters, the scores were very close to the scores of the EAPHLNP peer assessment,
suggesting that the two exercises might have been combined to leverage synergies.
The remaining 5 quarters had unique scores as obtained by the joint SPIU/NRL
assessment team. For quarters where no score was obtained, the incentive payments
were based on previous scores. As Table 3 shows, the independent assessments were
less regular in the later stage of the pilot. This was made official in mid-2013, when the
assessment frequency was adjusted to biannual to conform with the wider facility
assessments that were ongoing. By leveraging EAHPLNP peer evaluation scores, the
joint team carried out three full evaluations; in 2013 and 2014, the team carried out one
evaluation per year.




                                           26
                  Table 3: Source of Indicator for PBF Payment.
 Derived from a Table Provided by SPIU Indicating PBF Payments and Underlying
                                      Score


                         Evaluation
                          Quarter 10
                                          Data collection/verification
                            (start
                           month)

                          January*        Combined         with      EAPHLNP          peer
                                          evaluation
                 2012




                            April         Joint team

                             July         Joint team

                          October         Joint team

                          January         Joint team

                            April         No score available
                 2013




                             July         No score available

                          October         Combined      with         EAPHLNP          peer
                                                     11
                                          evaluation

                          January         No score available
                 2014




                            April         Joint team

                             July         No score available

Payment Mechanisms and Fund Management

At the inception, district hospitals received the conditional PBF payments for laboratory
performance on a quarterly basis. The score achieved in the assessment determined
the amount they received in the subsequent quarter. Payment amounts were calculated
by multiplying the SLIPTA composite score (shown as a percentage) with the pre-
determined ceiling amount. No PBF allowance was to be paid if a laboratory scored
decreased by more than 3 percentage points on the SLIPTA scale, or the satellite lost a
SLIPTA star (as shown in Table 4) by losing points and falling back under the threshold
level of the previously achieved SLIPTA score. However, this does not appear to have

10   The month indicated marks the quarter in which the data was collected/validated. The indicator score
     thus obtained would have influenced the PBF payment for the subsequent quarter.
11   For the quarter Oct-Dec 2013, the SLIPTA/EAPHLN evaluation determined PBF payment within the
     same quarter, rather than for the subsequent quarter as in other cases. This was due to scheduling
     restrictions on the ground.


                                                   27
   been systematically enforced as several slippages in the SLIPTA quarterly scores did
   not lead to a discontinuation of the incentive payments.

   The theoretical maximum ceilings for the PBF payments if no deductions had been
   made in the SLIPTA assessment are shown in Table 4. This is largely consistent across
   sites, with slight variation in Q3-4 of FY2012-13 at Byumba District Hospital only. The
   standard amounts shown in Rwanda Francs correspond to USD 15,000 in the financial
   year (FY) 2012/13; USD 7,500 in FY 2013/14, and USD 5,000 in FY 2014/15. As the
   project entered the exit phase, the maximum ceilings were progressively decreased.
   The percentages in the table represent the SLIPTA score achieved by each laboratory,
   and proportion of the actual payout.

   Example: in Q4 of the financial year 2011/2012, the ceiling amount for the Nyagatare
   District Hospital Laboratory was 12.2 M Rwandan Franc, of which 48 percent were paid
   out.
     Table 4: Maximum Amount Available (Million RWF) and Percentage Paid Out by
                                        Site

Fiscal year    2011/12                               2012/13                          2013/14      2014/15

   Quarter           Q4            Q1           Q2               Q3           Q4           Q2           Q1
              Max     Paid   Ma     Pai   Ma     Pai       Ma     Pai   Ma     Pai   Ma     Pai   Ma     Pai
                             x       d    x       d        x       d    x       d    x       d    x       d

Nyagatare     12.2    48%    9.3    43%   9.5    77%       9.5    43%   9.6    86%   5.0    72%   3.5    76%
  Byumba      12.2    52%    9.3    45%   9.4    65%       9.0    65%   9.0    80%   5.0    83%   3.5    71%
   Gisenyi    12.2    25%    9.3    48%   9.5    59%       9.5    80%   9.6    81%   5.0    78%   3.5    75%
Gihundwe      12.2    23%    9.3    55%   9.5    74%       9.5    79%   9.6    85%   5.0    87%   3.5    75%
  Kibungo     12.2    28%    9.3    43%   9.5    61%       9.5    73%   9.0    74%   5.0    80%   3.5    79%

   The HFU in the Ministry of Health is responsible for invoicing and payment of all PBF
   funds. All hospital funds that are disbursed as PBF – for laboratory and otherwise - are
   considered income of the district hospital. As such, the hospital management team
   allocates all PBF funds. It was not possible for the district hospitals to quantify specific
   purposes that the laboratory-generated PBF funds were used for, as this money is not
   earmarked but rather is aggregated with all PBF generated by the facility. This is in line
   with the national guidelines for PBF: all PBF income contributes towards a pooled
   hospital fund, the so-called “common basket”; indeed the aggregation of funds reduced
   the likelihood of project-related distortion of income for any specific clinical area. As one
   interview participant explained, the national PBF leadership team told staff that money
   that flows in does not have “a colour,” and it is therefore impossible to identify the
   source of money that is spent towards a set budget. The new ability of laboratories to
   contribute toward the common basket, however, enabled the laboratory management to
   participate in budgetary decision-making (see below).

   An important discussion related to PBF in Rwanda focuses on the extent to which the
   facility PBF funds can be used for individual incentives for staff (or bonus payments,
   also sometimes referred to in Rwanda as individual PBF). Until 2011, this was relatively



                                                      28
de-regulated, which resulted in large differences between staff and locations. In some
anecdotal cases, the individual bonus payments became larger than the base salary. In
2011, uniform salary schemes were introduced that set rules that were applicable
consistently across institutions. The new scheme was designed in such a way that more
remote areas that scored lower on a national equity index could be more highly
incentivized at the individual level. For all staff, individual performance is assessed
quarterly on a scale from 0 to 100. All employees with a score of 85 percent and above
get the full bonus (subject to availability of funds), while employees with a score below
70 percent do not get any bonus. For all scores between 70 – 85 percent, individual
bonuses are provided in proportional increments. Since individual bonus payments are
paid from the common PBF fund, both individual performance and the facility-level
performance of the different hospital departments combined determine the amount of
individual bonuses: the maximum amount achievable is multiplied by the individual and
the joint scores.

The importance and proportion of individual payments versus facility-level payments was
“subject to hot debate” as one respondent put it, especially during one regional
EAPHLNP meeting. The Rwandan national PBF coordination team insisted on de-
emphasizing individual incentives in favor of facility-level incentives that reward joint
effort, an approach that they see as a necessary condition for sustainability and staff
cohesion.

With decreasing donor financing and an increasing number of health service providers
in the Rwandan public health service provision, additional measures have recently been
discussed in the MoH to ensure sustainability of PBF for facilities, a major concern of
many respondents. The most recent innovation in the national PBF policy in Rwanda
was a result of the method introduced by the EAPHLNP laboratory PBF pilot: the
combination of a continuous quality improvement programme towards accreditation with
PBF financing. Combining quality assessments with PBF data validation creates a
synergy that is being further enhanced by integrating supportive supervision. This new
combination of accreditation with PBF financing for health facilities as a whole (rather
than for the laboratories only) is still in a very early phase and has not been
institutionalized at the national level.

                                 PBF IMPLEMENTATION

Previous to the EAPHLNP, laboratories had been subjected to evaluation of
performance as a part of the wider facility PBF program in place in Rwanda. With the
inception of the pilot, the laboratories were evaluated by an independent team using an
internationally-recognized, standardized tool and process for an independent source of
funding (variable over the project lifetime as described in the previous section). As the
project PBF has decreased, respondents state that the upgraded EAPHLNP
laboratories may be able to bring in income to the hospital through the increased test
and patient volumes and thus partly compensate for the decline in project funding. The
laboratory PBF was perceived to have substantially influenced the relationship between
clinical and laboratory staff – as well as the overall perception of the importance of the
laboratory in the work of the hospital.




                                           29
Despite the change in PBF
amounts, upon introduction of the      “The lab used to generate funds through PBF
EAPHLNP it remained the policy         but now they are generating funds through the
to pool funds obtained through the      tests they are using [providing]. The income
EAPHLNP        PBF    with    other         generated by the lab is also for other
department- or service-based PBF       departments of the hospital. So it’s a matter of
in the hospital in a so-called        building the whole system. They are not looking
‘common basket’. These overall                       at one department.”
facility PBF funds were distributed                                  - EAPHLN Coordinator
by the hospital management team,
a small group typically including
the CEO, a finance manager, and a couple of clinical staff representatives. The fact that
laboratory PBF is pooled with facility PBF means that the role of the hospital
management in determining how to use the overall PBF funds is critical. After the lab
PBF was introduced, a laboratory representative was included on the committee that
determines the budget and use of funds for the hospital in both EAPHLNP facilities
visited. This means that although the “say” of the laboratory management was
increased, there was no automatic increase of investment into the laboratory as a result
of good performance and increasing laboratory PBF to the hospital. Quarterly
disbursements by laboratory are shown in Table 5 on the next page.

The use of facility PBF funds is subject to Ministry of Health guidelines which prescribe
the proportion used towards individual salaries (60 percent), as well as maximum
individual PBF bonus payments for the different levels of qualification in Rwanda. As a
result, other than special bonuses for excellent achievements, the impact of the
laboratory PBF on individual laboratory staff salaries was expected to be relatively small,
especially as these were pooled across the entire hospital. Nonetheless, many
individuals mentioned the increase in individual PBF as an important potential effect of
the lab PBF (out of 31 mentions of the effect of PBF, 21 mentioned the individual
bonus), highlighting the positive expectations and perceptions about individual bonuses.
Individual bonus payments are viewed as a powerful motivator, but one that can easily
become problematic if not sustained. Given that this was a pilot project, hospital
management had more autonomy to decide how PBF was spent, especially since facility
improvement grants for the lab were already included as a separate intervention that
could be used to address quality issues identified through PBF assessments.

No significant relationship was found at the laboratory level between the quality
improvement and overall EAPHLNP disbursement (log-transformed), PBF funds (log-
transformed) and the proportion of PBF payment with LOS regression. The results must
be interpreted with caution due to the limited data availability. This may also be partially
attributable to the decreasing ceiling effect – that is, that as performance improved,
maximum achievable amounts were decreasing. Thus, the financial impact of improved
performance over the project lifetime was not linear: even as performance improved, the
amount the facility received may have decreased year-on-year.




                                            30
              Table 5: Quarterly PBF Disbursements by Laboratory in Rwanda




                                        Source: SPIU

Table 6: Annual Hospital Budget and Total Facility PBF Funds (laboratory and other; FY 13-14)




                                             31
     Figure 8: Actual Facility and Laboratory PBF as a Percentage of Hospital Budget
                                                 (FY13-14)




As shown in Figure 8, laboratory PBF represented about 1 percent of hospital budget in the
satellite labs (FY13-14 taken as example), and between 24-30 percent of the non-laboratory
PBF for each hospital. This partially explains the increased importance of the laboratory in the
facility, given its new revenue generating role – achieved through PBF, and increased range of
tests available.

         IMPACT OF PBF ON LABORATORY PERFORMANCE AND HOSPITAL PERFORMANCE

Since PBF was implemented in all – and only – the EAPHLNP laboratories in Rwanda, the
evaluation team could isolate the impact of the PBF intervention on laboratory performance by
comparing the Rwandan facilities (except NRL) to those outside of Rwanda. We took two
approaches to assessing the impact of PBF on performance:

     •   Compare the performance according to the peer-assessments for EAPHLNP-only
         laboratories with those in Rwanda that had the added PBF element
     •   Compare the difference in performance between PBF/non-PBF labs as compared to the
         SLMTA-only labs (difference-in-difference), statistically controlling for other influences
         such as performance variation between countries

Rwandan EAPHLNP+PBF Labs Outperform Peers in Other Countries on SLIPTA
Scores

First, we looked at the available annual data on SLIPTA assessment scores (2011 – 2014) of all
EAPHLNP labs in the region (25 EAPHLNP-only labs, 5 EAPHLNP+PBF labs 12). The 2011 data
served as the baseline in the analysis, annual data from 2012 to 2014 data made it possible to
explore the change after the intervention on an annual basis.




12
     NRL Rwanda and NTRL Uganda were excluded from the analysis. The former participated in the SLMTA
     exercise before the EAPHLN programme start, and the latter started with a very high baseline score, which
     resulted in a bias in terms of improvement (ceiling effect).

                                                     32
                             Figure 9: SLIPTA Scores of PBF/Non-PBF Labs




Figure 9 reports the mean SLIPTA score by year for the two different interventions among the
EAPHLNP laboratories, excluding RW-NRL 13, and shows a significant additional improvement
in SLIPTA performance (p=0.01). By the end of the project period, the difference in cumulative
improvement between the two groups was 11 percentage points more improvement by the
EAPHLNP+PBF laboratories over EAPHLNP only. In the period from 2011 to 2012, the
EAPHLNP+PBF labs improved by 44 percentage points, while the EAPHLNP-only labs
improved by 9 percentage points, a difference of 35 points. This suggests that the PBF may
well contribute to a more rapid improvement than the EAPHLNP intervention by itself, although
this analysis does not control for confounding factors, for example the possibility that
performance in Rwanda was generally better 14.

PBF has a Signficant Effect on SLIPTA Performance with a Non-intervention Control

Secondly, using a more rigorous approach, we compared the improvement in SLIPTA scores of
three groups: the EAPHLNP+PBF labs, the EAPHLNP-only labs and non-EAPHLNP (SLMTA-
only) laboratories across all countries. We estimated the effect of intervention on SLIPTA
scores using a difference-in-difference approach, which calculated the effect by comparing the
average change over time in the assessment score for the laboratories where the intervention
was introduced to the average change over time for the laboratories that continued with the
status quo 15.



13
     All the following analyses related to PBF evaluation excluded RW-NRL from the sample, because (a) the RW-
     NRL did not get the PBF intervention, and (b) the SLMTA pre- and post-assessments were made before the
     EAPHLN project start.
14   At baseline the laboratories in Rwanda were performing somewhat lower than those in the other countries. The
     selection criteria (i.e. location in cross border areas; targeting vulnerable groups) were the same. In Uganda
     and to some extend in Tanzania, the selected labs had better infrastructure at the project outset. Baseline
     balance is not a pre-requisite for the difference-in-difference analysis we conducted for the evaluation.
15
     In technical terms, the estimation controlled for year and lab fixed effects, which means time-invariant
     unobserved heterogeneity of the labs was taken into account.

                                                       33
Both EAPHLNP intervention groups (with and without PBF) out-performed the control
laboratories. The EAPHLNP+PBF labs outperformed the SLMTA-only control by 20 points (out
of 100), a difference that would likely bring a laboratory to the next star-level of SLIPTA. The
EAPHLNP-only labs outperformed the same control group by 8 points.                       The additional
performance gains due to PBF were measured at p=0.11, very close to the 10 percent level that
is typically reported in the literature. This is a likely positive impact that is influenced by the very
small sample size (for EAPHLNP+PBF, n=5).

Figure 10 illustrates the difference-in-differences between Rwanda, Tanzania and Uganda, the
countries with complete SLIPTA datasets for non-EAPHLNP laboratories. The EAPHLNP
laboratories that received PBF (in Rwanda) outperformed their national peers more (17 point
difference) than the EAPHLNP laboratories in other countries outperformed their compatriots (4
and 6 point differences).

                 Figure 10: Comparison of Improvements in SLIPTA Scores,
                                           Rwanda, Tanzania and Uganda


                                   EAPHLN vs Non-EAPHLN Laboratories
                           Average SLIPTA score improvement pre-and post SLMTA
                                            (without NRL Rwanda and NTRL Uganda)


                                                                  NON-EAPHLN       EAPHLN
                               + 49 p.p.
                                                 
                                                 22
                   + 32 p.p.                                      + 30 p.p.                   + 30 p.p.
                                                      + 26 p.p.                    +24 p.p.




                      Rwanda                             Tanzania                      Uganda




                                                              34
Qualitative Data Support Findings on Performance Improvements
                                                              Data from the qualitative interviews
      “If there was no PBF probably we would only have helped to explain the trends
     one star, or no stars at all. Nowadays the laboratory observed in the quantitative data,
    is four stars accredited. Perhaps five stars one day.” as well as broaden the definition of
                                                              impact. Specific to PBF, the most-
                                    - EAPHLNP Hospital Doctor mentioned impact was on individual
                                                              salaries and the financial motivation
                                                              that drove laboratory staff to work
long hours to reach the targets set 16. Respondents believe that the PBF helped to increase the
pace of improvement, although perhaps SLMTA and strong supervision / mentorship could
have driven similar results. Looking back at the conceptual framework described in Figure 1,
the cycle depicted (“measure, analyze, improve, repeat”) may have occurred at a faster pace in
the Rwandan EAPHLNP-supported laboratories than elsewhere in East Africa, owing to the fact
that the PBF intervention required quarterly (rather than annual) assessments of SLIPTA
scores, strengthening accountability and promoting a results culture.

In several interviews, particularly with mentors, teamwork was mentioned in tandem with the
effects of strong government commitment to progress. Multiple respondents noted strong
government leadership as a key
factor explaining Rwanda’s success.
17
      At the same time, this strong        It’s not one person that can create an impact…
enabling environment was viewed as              It is everywhere, right from the Ministry, the
a potential challenge for other                 district, the national hospital… Everyone is
countries interested in applying this             involved so there is a factor of team spirit.
approach as the environment may                                                 - Mentor, EAPHLN
differ in other countries.

Teamwork is in part required to improve performance on the short (quarterly) timelines that are
being observed as part of PBF measurements. At the same time, the opportunity for
improvement and development, fostered by
the efforts of the mentor, can help foster
team spirit where there previously was just a     Without teamwork, the PBF will not be
collegial atmosphere. The regional nature of         maintained. Without teamwork, you
this project, including experience sharing and                       cannot have the PBF.
healthy competition through South-South                           - EAPHLN  Laboratory Manager
collaboration, may also have helped generate
team spirit across country teams.




16
     Given time constraints and sensitivity of the information it was not possible to get information on absolute and
     relative increases in individual salaries.
17   Other factors which contributed to the strong enabling environment in Rwanda included the national PBF
     program; community health insurance scheme rolled out nationwide; and related health policies which fostered
     facility autonomy and promoted accountability.

                                                         35
The role and commitment of the central
government and other key stakeholders in the                           “People were given incentives and
health system to achieving these improvements                         motivation [by the PBF]. They would
was viewed as a prerequisite for the PBF to work –                    spend sleepless nights here setting
there appears to have been significant top-down                               up policies, making sure that
prioritization of this intervention and emphasis on                        everything is in the right place.”
progress that helped to increase the individual                                - EAPHLN Hospital Director
motivation as well.

Qualitatively, respondents noted that the impact on the hospital appeared to be significant as
well, a positive spillover effect of the project. Mainly, discussion of those effects centered
around views that the increased volume of patients were either attracted to or retained by the
district hospitals due to the updated laboratory facilities and capabilities. This was an
opportunity that increased finances available to the hospital and its prestige. The impact on the
hospital was also shown in the improved relationships between clinical and laboratory staff,
further described in the following section.
In discussions with project managers, the idea that frequent measurement drove a results-
focused culture with greater accountability came up spontaneously in multiple conversations.
Even when planned measurements were not conducted, internal mechanisms to reach the
desired levels of performance were set by the laboratory teams and reflected in individuals’
performance goals. This culture of accountability was a meaningful change derived from the
PBF program that drove ongoing performance improvements and was supported by (4) below.

Several     respondents,      including
many at the central level, expressed            “It is stressful to be assessed in every quarter….it
concern about the sustainability of              can’t work if the leadership is not stressing like in
the EAPHLNP and particularly the            Rwanda. In Rwanda it is top-to-bottom; our president
PBF component.          An EAPHLNP           is committed and wants everything to be done even
mentor observed a change in morale            the staff, ministers and others - it is very consistent
along with the decreases in PBF that               and everybody is like that. [Elsewhere] they can
have come already in the lifetime of        introduce the PBF system but if the leadership of the
the project at some sites. In the hospital is not committed to regularly monitor activities
case of Rwanda, given that the PBF                                  I don’t know whether it can work.
approach is institutionalized in the                                             - NRL staff member
healthcare          system         and
accountability is strong, the risks
inherent in transition from project status are mitigated.


                   MOTIVATION, RELATIONSHIPS, AND THE IMPROVEMENT PROCESS

According to the conceptual framework shown in Figure 1, the following non-technical areas
were hypothesized to play a role in EAPHLNP laboratory performance improvements 18:
increased skills, a higher level of motivation and improved relationships with non-laboratory
staff. These factors were confirmed and explained in more detail during the interviews.



18
     Because qualitative interviews were held only with intervention labs given the scope of the evaluation, it is
     difficult to compare qualitative aspects to any control group.

                                                          36
The Role of Motivation
An increase in motivation – different from a change in attitude and awareness, which also
played a role – appeared to have an important intermediary and reinforcing role for the impact
of the EAPHLNP interventions, as shown in the conceptual framework. Elements of the
EAPHLNP had a direct impact on motivation. The improved infrastructure and equipment
resulted in a broader range of tests offered (“the package”) and a safer and more modern work
environment, which in itself was immensely motivating. Likewise, the possibility to participate in
professional development trainings, which was previously limited to clinical staff, and the
support of mentors boosted motivation directly.

The motivation of health workers under the PBF approach hinges partially on the fact that they
become stakeholders interested in the performance of their facility, more proactive and more
motivated. We were able to identify several other sources of motivation in relation with the
EAPHLNP interventions in Rwanda (see Figure 11). The conditional individual bonus
payments, even though relatively modest for laboratory workers, also contributed to staff
motivation. Staff celebrations after a particularly good performance, along with more visibility
and recognition by other hospital staff were in part due to PBF and also helped boost
motivation. The most important direct motivational effects of PBF, however, were on one hand
through its contribution towards the improved laboratory infrastructure, as well as the effect that
the laboratory’s contribution to the PBF ‘common basket’ had on the relationships with the
hospital management and other clinical staff. The upgraded, state of the art laboratories were
bringing in a substantial amount of money, and this brought them up to equal standing with
clinical departments 19. In any case, the impact of the project on motivation was unarguable and
essential to its success.

In addition to those direct effects from the interventions, staff motivation was also influenced
indirectly. These indirect effects on motivation could play a critical role for the sustainability of
the intervention. Improved knowledge and skills made laboratory staff more motivated. In these
trainings, they acquired expertise that was different from what they learned in school, perhaps –
in part - more practically applicable and meaningful. Increased skills made people enjoy their
work more. A participant reported that the intervention led not only to compliance with the
requirement for documentation, it led
to a desire for more documentation.

 SLMTA training and the regular          "With the SLMTA, we realized that what we called
                                             ‘good’ is in fact bad. We needed to change. We
evaluation of performance with the
                                         needed more organization in the laboratory, in the
SLIPTA tool also had indirect effects
                                              activities. Even in our heads. People needed to
on motivation. Again, the PBF                                                       change. "
intervention had an important role to                           - EAPHLN laboratory manager
play, because of the need to assess
performance on a quarterly basis to
determine payments. According to one expert in Kigali, the regularity of the assessments was

19
     The national (EAPHLN independent) PBF mechanism in Rwanda on the district hospital level incorporates 11
     indicators related to laboratory service, which focus on the results of internal and external quality controls and
     existence of staff evaluation reports. They play a relatively minor role in the overall PBF assessments and
     contribute only marginally to the facility PBF revenue.

                                                          37
more important than the financial incentives. Another expert pointed out that, in addition to new
skills, the SLMTA process led to greater accountability-- if you performed worse than
previously, or lower than your peer laboratories, a competitive spirit would be kindled, or – in the
case of a decrease in performance – staff might even feel ashamed. Through these processes,
and further boosted by the example given by the mentor, a change (or ‘opening’, as one
respondent called it) of the mind occurred. Figure 11 illustrates which aspects of the project
have a positive effect on motivation – the role of PBF both directly on motivation as well as in
improving the timeliness of procurement and the increase in variable budgets to procure
supplies. This will be contrasted with the initial conceptual framework (Figure 6) in the
discussion section of this report.




                                                38
    Figure 11: The Role of Skills, Motivation and Relationships in Improved Laboratory
                                        Performance




The Role of Relationships
Participants in the interviews confirmed
that the EAPHLNP interventions had
an effect on the relationship of                 "If one department fails to achieve the goal that they
laboratory professionals with clinical           are supposed to achieve we all go down – the whole
staff and hospital management. Rather                       hospital. The PBF reduces by that factor."
than being a precondition to improved                                   – Midwife at EAPHLN Hospital
performance (as conceived in the
                                                            conceptual framework), it appeared that
                                                            the enhanced relationships are an effect
“When you take a form [to the lab] that is not filled       of the improved performance. After they
well, they don’t admit it. It should be stamped here        are strengthened, these professional
            and it should be all filled - be it age, sex,
                                                            relationships with clinical staff also play an
 identification of the patient and everything should
                                                            important role for sustainability of
   be filled. So when you take it some sections not
                             filled, they do not admit.”    performance improvement both in terms
                      – Midwife at EAPHLN Hospital          of not letting down clients and maintaining
                                                            the overall facility PBF.

                                                            Relationships play a role in several
                                                            different ways. Within the hospitals, the
EAPHLNP contributed to an increased prestige for laboratories and the laboratory technicians.
In the district hospitals, this was initially a result of the new technology and the state-of-the art
buildings, combined with the hiring of highly qualified staff members (laboratory staff at the “A0”
qualification level were not budgeted for at the district level before the EAPHLNP). The
institutionalization of standard operating procedures (SOPs) is something other clinical
departments are learning from the laboratories. The increase in prestige led to more confidence
for the laboratory professionals, which had a positive effect on individual performance.




                                                     39
The new modern buildings were also seen and admired by patients from the community, who
furthermore tangibly benefited from the improvements in technical capacity through the
provision of specialized tests at the local level instead of higher-level facilities. The laboratories
also received publicity in newspapers and radios about the accreditation programme. Local
access to and awareness of these services meant that patients did not have to travel to Kigali in
order to get treated, a savings in both time and money.

                                                                          As in the other countries in the
                                                                          region, within the MoH the status
        “The laboratory staff felt a little isolated, they didn’t
        really feel they were part of the hospital team. And              of laboratories, which had been
      so they would leave their work post from time to time               underappreciated in the health
         but now they are working properly, and they have                 system overall, was upgraded on
                               the means to work properly.”               all levels, including nationally. The
                           – EAPHLN Laboratory Manager                    accreditation programme for the
                                                                          laboratories      has     been      a
                                                                          pioneering    project  for  the
     “They tell us that because of laboratory performance,                introduction of general hospital
         even hospitalization time has been reduced. They                 accreditation programs that has
       understand that the laboratory plays a crucial role in             become policy in Rwanda.
      healthcare in hospital, contrary to what they believed
                                         before the Project.”   Several interview participants
                         – EAPHLN programme coordinator         agreed that the improvement of
                                                                the laboratory services would not
                                                                have been possible without a
strong spirit of teamwork, which, according to one respondent, was integral to the health
system in Rwanda right from the very top of the central government down to the frontline
healthcare workers 20. For the EAPHLNP-supported laboratories, this was strongly enhanced by
the contribution to the facility’s PBF ‘common basket’ through the incentive payments. For the
first time, the laboratory staff felt that they were an integral part of the hospital teams.
Laboratory managers had more weight and voice in the hospital management and were given a
seat on the hospital boards. Whereas in the past the laboratory was perceived as an inferior
provider of routine services to the clinical departments, this appears to have evolved into more
of a peer relationship over the lifetime of the project. This also manifests in the fact that
laboratory workers sometimes may take clinicians ‘to task’ by demanding comprehensively
completed lab forms that meet standards. If not completed correctly, forms are sent back, and
this is a sign of improved communication and respect between clinical and laboratory staff, as
confirmed by both sides.

The more professional client services offered by laboratories, quicker turnaround times, and
more reliable test results resulting from the introduction of automated technologies, such as the
GeneXpert, has led to an increase in trust in test results by clinical staff. As a spillover effect,
the improved lab services also contributed to a better relationship between clinicians and

20
     The introduction of district-level PBF in Rwanda initially came with its own teething problems and required
     gradual improvement of monitoring and incentive systems. In part, the well-functioning processes and
     teamwork are a result of this early learning almost a decade ago (cp. Fritsche, Soeters, & Meessen, 2014, p.
     168.)

                                                        40
patients, which is critical for quality clinical care. As doctors and nurses can offer their clients
more predictability, a broader range of testing services and shorter turnaround time, the
patients are more satisfied 21. The director of one of the district hospitals supported by
EAPHLNP stated that their clinical staff has “grown fonder of patients” which gives them reason
to keep improving and perform better in the future.

Perhaps most importantly, these different ways in which the relationships and the prestige of
the laboratory workers grew had an effect on motivation of laboratory staff. As shown in Figure
11 above, this can (at least theoretically) lead to a feedback loop, in which better relationships
lead to increased motivation, thus
enhancing      performance,     which
again, increases prestige and further         “Because of these standards, now they can know
improves       relationships.   Such             after how long their results will be out. They are
positively reinforcing feedback loops         happy   to know that if they send samples, they will
are likely to contribute to the               get  results within a specific time. In improves the
sustainability of the benefits of this       collaboration between laboratory and clinical staff.”
project. This compliments the work                                – EAPHLN Laboratory Manager
of Schneidman et al. (2014),
showing the virtuous cycle that could
be built through strengthening laboratory systems as shown in Figure 2.




21
     Note that this patient satisfaction is based on clinician perceptions; there is no systematically available
     satisfaction data covering the pilot period.

                                                          41
               IV. FINDINGS RELATED TO THE EAPHLN PROJECT
                            IMPLEMENTATION OF EAPHLNP INTERVENTIONS

This section turns to an evaluation of the full package of interventions supported under the
project, which included: (i) construction of new laboratories; provision of modern laboratory
equipment and ICT hardware; (ii) recruitment of additional, well-qualified human resources; (iii)
training, capacity building, mentorship, and enrollment in the SLIPTA program; (iv) assisted
supervision; (v) facility improvement funds; and (vi) PBF 22

There are two reasons that this PBF-focused evaluation looks at the impact of the EAPHLNP
on performance. First, many projects have shown that PBF works best when not operating
alone; strengthening systems more broadly helps to amplify the effects of PBF, and so it is
important to look at the effect of the system strengthening that occurred through EAPHLNP.
Second, the timing of the introduction of the various EAPHLNP interventions was not standard
between the Rwandan EAPHLNP sites and sites in the other countries (e.g. all satellite facilities
in Rwanda had civil works completed a year before the others, and the new facilities had an
effect on SLIPTA scores). The PBF intervention began at all sites in Q2 2012 but was not
introduced in a way that its effects could directly be isolated from other interventions, and so a
consideration of the overall effect of the project interventions is important.

The infrastructure part of the financial support was spent on buildings, equipment and
technologies (Figure 12) 23. Complete financial data on all the interventions, as defined in the
conceptual framework, was not readily accessible during the research period.

The management of the different EAPHLNP intervention elements varied. Building and
equipment procurement were done at the central (SPIU) level and provided to the facilities.
Mentorship and supervision were in-kind contributions, also managed centrally (e.g. selection,
management and payment of mentors). Funds were distributed from the SPIU to individual
laboratories for human resources (hiring and capacity building), laboratory improvements, and
PBF. There was some variation in the total amounts that the EAPHLNP supported laboratories
received, mostly due to contributions from other donors (e.g. a similar architectural design was
used in Nyagatare, an EAPHLNP site, which was funded by the Global Fund rather than by the
World Bank). A rough idea of the amounts attributed to different interventions for one of the
laboratories (Gihundwe) is shown in Figure 12.




22   Payments to facilities in the frame of the EAPHLN PBF intervention started in April-June 2012 in Rwanda. In
     Burundi, a small laboratory component is part of the national PBF mechanism for all district facilities with ca. 20
     quality indicators; the EAPHLN “boosted” PBF laboratory mechanism similar to the one described in this
     document, using the SLIPTA checklist, was formally introduced in 2014 after the pre/post measurements
     reported in this evaluation. The remaining countries (Uganda, Kenya, and Tanzania) also initiated laboratory
     PBF pilots.
23   Information and Communications Technology interventions would include computerizing the whole hospital, not
     just the laboratory, in order to reap the benefits, resulting in a higher cost than originally estimated and thus
     deemed impractical at this phase.

                                                          42
         Figure 12: Expenditures for Different Intervention Elements at one EAPHLN Laboratory



                                                         Infrastructure                         725,936
Figure 13: Infrastructure expenditures
             (2012–2014)
      Source: MoH SPIU, Kigali                     Other Disbursements                337,147

                                                        Additional staff    173,475

                                                                    PBF    78,658

                    ICT
                  $ 766,834     Vehicles $43,245


Equipment
  $ 901,344

                   Building
                   $1,750,507




                                                            43
              EFFECT OF EAPHLNP INTERVENTIONS ON SLIPTA PERFORMANCE

The third research question focused on the impact of the EAPHLNP interventions as a whole on
laboratory performance. Since the different elements of the project in Rwanda were delivered
to all sites around the same time, it was not possible to isolate the impact of the different
interventions as would have been desirable.

To understand the impact of EAPHLNP on laboratory performance, it was necessary to
operationalize “performance”. As part of the qualitative interviews, participants were asked how
they defined a high-performing laboratory. Responses ranged from input factors, such as staff
number and training levels, availability and maintenance of equipment to output factors,
including client trust (an element of satisfaction), safety, documentation, ISO certification, and
timeliness of service. As discussed before, and in convergence with these responses, a range
of variables including SLIPTA scores, test volumes, turn-around time (TAT), client satisfaction,
and test accuracy were proposed as outcome variables for the quantitative assessment.
However, only the SLIPTA scores and laboratory test volume data were readily available and
accessible for a statistical intervention/treatment group difference-in-differences comparison.

East Central and Southern African Health Community (ECSA-HC) were able to share SLIPTA
scores from the annual audits of the EAPHLNP. Figure 14 shows the proportion of laboratories
in each country that received two stars or more annually over the project period (2011 – 2014),
illustrating a clear improvement in performance. However, these figures alone do not indicate to
what extent the improvement is attributable to EAPHLNP, SLMTA, or other contextual
influences; support from other donors (e.g. Global Fund and CDC) were mentioned by
respondents at some of these laboratories, but the bulk of financing was provided by the WB.

             Figure 14: Development of SLIPTA Performance in EAPHLN Labs
                                Proportion of laboratories with 2 or more stars
                                                 100%                100%                                 100%

                                                                                            86%
                                                               83%                                83%
                                                    80%

                                           71%
                                67%


                          50%                                                         50%


                                                                                                    33%
                                                                                    29%

                        17%                                                   17%


                   0%                 0%                  0%


                    Burundi                Kenya           Rwanda              Tanzania           Uganda
                                            Baseline       2012             2013          2014
The annual improvement of SLIPTA scores at the EAPHLNP-supported laboratories in Rwanda
is shown in Figure 14, illustrating a rapid increase over the project period. Not surprisingly, the
largest increase for all satellite laboratories (excluding NRL, which was enrolled in the SLMTA
programme before EAPHLNP started) occurred from 2011-2012, which corresponds to the
period the laboratories participated in the SLMTA programme.

                                                                 44
                     Figure 15: SLIPTA Scores in EAPHLN Labs Over Project Period



                              99
                                                88                  91                  88                                    90
                         86
                                        83 82               85 87                                           85
                                                                                                       80
                    75                                                          77 78                                 76 72
               65
                                                                                                  60
                                   52


                                                                           28                28                  28
                                                       23


              2011 '12 '13 '14     2011 '12 '13 '14   2011 '12 '13 '14    2011 '12 '13 '14   2011 '12 '13 '14    2011 '12 '13 '14

                    NRL             Byumba            Gihundwe              Gisenyi           Kibungo            Nyagatare
An EAPHLNP peer-review team composed of experts from the different participating countries
carried out the assessments described above. To assess the impact of the EAPHLNP package
of interventions on laboratory performance, however, the independently assessed SLMTA
baseline and exit scores were used, as they allow for a comparison with the non-EAPHLNP
laboratories in all countries, although they do not capture the full effect of the EAPHLNP 24.
Baseline and exit scores for the SLMTA interventions were assessed at different points in time
for several cohorts of laboratories, as the programme was delivered over time, between 2010
and 2015, at different sites (and is ongoing at others). Because of a possible ceiling effect (i.e.
that it is more difficult to make large improvements when starting closer to the maximum
possible level), facilities that started with a 75 percent score or higher were excluded from the
analysis.

At baseline across all East African countries, the EAPHLNP laboratories had a somewhat lower
mean assessment score compared with the non-EAPHLNP laboratories (32 vs. 34; statistically
not significant at a 90 percent confidence interval), as they were all selected based on their
remoteness and proximity to cross border regions. In contrast, the mean exit score of the
EAPHLNP laboratories was higher than the non-EAPHLNP ones after the SLMTA intervention.
A statistical comparison of the difference of improvements after the SLMTA intervention (using
regression analysis 25) shows that EAPHLNP laboratories had on average 11 percentage points
greater improvement than the non-EAPHLNP laboratories.                    Without the EAPHLNP
interventions, laboratories improved on average by 29 percentage points, while the EAPHLNP
laboratories without PBF (i.e. all laboratories outside Rwanda 26) improved by an average of 41
percentage points. This difference is statistically significant at a 95 percent confidence interval.
It can therefore be concluded that the EAPHLNP interventions as a whole, without the addition
of PBF, had a positive effect on laboratory quality as measured by the SLMTA assessors at the


24 The effect is likely even greater than what is observed here as the EAPHLNP interventions continued over several
years, whereas SLMTA was a one-year program, and as observed in the previous section, PBF likely augments this
positive effect.
25 For technical details of the statistical analysis: see Appendix.

26   NRL Rwanda also didn’t receive PBF, but it was excluded from the analysis since it had participated in the SLMTA
     programme before the start of the EAPHLNP interventions.

                                                                     45
end of their programme, highlighting how targeted interventions such as those provided under
the project can address the historical neglect of laboratories.

            EFFECT OF EAPHLNP INTERVENTION ON RANGE OF TESTS AVAILABLE

One way to measure the impact of the project on the laboratory was to look at the range or
package of possible tests that the laboratory could conduct before and after the introduction of
the new equipment and training. The new tests added between 2011 and 2014 are shown in
Table 7. Although no tests were discontinued by the laboratories, some tests that had been
done primarily at hospital level were decentralized to health centres, either because of improved
equipment or introduction of point-of-care tests. This also had an impact on test volumes
particularly for some routine tests, as further discussed in the following section.




                                               46
                      Table 7: New Tests Added to Satellite Lab Capacity

                                  Viral
     Satellite Lab   GeneXpert               ELISA
                                  Load                  Bacteriology       Biochemistry
        Sites          (TB)                  (HIV)
                                  (HIV)
       Byumba            X
                                                                        Bilirubin; uric acid;
                                                       Copro-, uro-,
                                                                       hepatitis B/C (rapid);
      Gihundwe           X          X           X      hemo-, pus,
                                                                             Rh factor;
                                                       CSF cultures
                                                                       cryptococcal antigen
       Gisenyi           X          X           X
       Kibungo           X
                                                       Copro-, uro-,
                                                                           Electrolytes;
      Nyagatare          X          X           X      hemo-, pus,
                                                                             Bilirubin
                                                       CSF cultures


TB has been a focus disease for the project. Before the introduction of EAPHLN, all sputum
samples from TB patients at high risk of developing multiple drug-resistant TB were supposed
to be sent to the NRL for culture. This was a time-consuming process of 8 to 12 weeks, after
which satellite laboratories would know whether the patient required treatment with 2nd-line TB
drugs. With the implementation of the EAPHLNP, sputum samples are first tested at district
hospitals and the results are available in a very short time (2 hours). This means that drug-
resistant TB cases are being diagnosed earlier, giving patients access to treatment more
quickly and decreasing the spread of the disease. According to the available data from 2014,
the 5 satellite laboratories tested 6,482 TB suspects and diagnosed 14 new rifampicin-resistant
patients. In 2013, only 67 cases were tested in the same laboratories and no resistant cases
were detected.

                     EFFECT OF EAPHLNP INTERVENTIONS ON TEST VOLUMES
To evaluate changes in test volume as a measure of performance, the research team selected
a set of four tests (full blood count – FBC, glucose, TB microscopy, and CD4 count). Laboratory
records from the time period from January 2012 to December 2014 at 21 of the SLMTA sites
were used for the analysis (including the EAPHLNP-supported sites but not NRL). Monthly test
volume data were aggregated to quarterly bins to reduce the effect of short-time variations
(“data noise”). Rather than looking at absolute figures, the number of tests in proportion to the
hospital catchment population was assessed, taking into account population growth rates as
reported by the World Bank. Since information about the catchment population was available
for only 17 of the facilities, only those were included in the analysis. Test volumes for the
selected tests varied between laboratories, most prominently so for Full Blood Count, as
illustrated shown in Figure 16 the year 2012, which is not adjusted for catchment population.
We estimated the effect of the intervention on the test volume using a difference-in-difference
approach, taking into account the different relative test volumes before the interventions.




                                               47
                Figure 16: Variation of Absolute Test Volumes (FBC) in 2012




For the first analysis, the outcome was the mean annual number of tests in proportion to the
catchment population. The 2012 calendar year was treated as the baseline. The findings show
that there was no significant change in test volumes in 2013. In 2014, the EAPHLNP
interventions correlated with a statistically significant decrease in the test volume for CD4 and
FBC, whereas it led to a significant increase in the test volume of microscopy at a 95 percent
level of significance.

Secondly, we used the mean number of tests on a half-year basis as the outcome, and treated
the first half-year of 2012 as the baseline, and the first half-year of 2013 to the second half year
of 2014 as the post-intervention periods. This showed no clear trend effect of interventions on
test volumes of the selected tests.

Since testing volumes are dependent on population care-seeking decisions and other external
factors, the fact that there are no clear trends cannot be interpreted as an intervention or theory
failure. Particularly, routine tests that were already well-established at participating laboratories
might not be expected to change. Some routine tests were shifted to lower-level health centres
(e.g. CD4 tests), where improved equipment and/or introduction of point of care testing
permitted these sites to perform these tests in a more cost effective manner. These factors
highlight the difficulties and complexities of capturing performance of laboratories based in
district hospitals given their variable workloads.

In addition to these selected tests, newer more ‘sophisticated’ tests were also measured (that
is, viral load, HIV – ELISA, molecular TB GeneXpert). There was no baseline data for these
tests as none of the project supported laboratories had the relevant equipment at the outset of
the project and these new equipment were part of the hardware investment. In the first half of
2015, project laboratories conducted more than 24,000 viral load tests; 10,000 ELISA tests; and
6000 GeneXpert tests – a clear increase in test volumes.



                                                 48
                  EFFECT OF EAPHLNP INTERVENTIONS ON TEST ACCURACY

Test accuracy data, as a measure of performance, was available for 2014 (April, July, and
November for BCHE435 and Haematology; April and July for QASI432 and HIVA435), so a
difference-in-differences or baseline-endline comparison was not possible for this performance
indicator. We summarized the mean of observed data points for each test and by EAPHLNP
status (Figure 17), and also tested the difference of the means. There was no significant
difference between EAPHLNP and non-EAPHLNP laboratories in any of the indicators with
regards to BCHE435, Haematology and QASI432. Despite a smaller sample size, non-
EAPHLNP had a statistically significant higher accuracy rate of HIVA435. Therefore, the
EAPHLNP sites performed comparably to the comparison facilities within Rwanda.

In addition, we conducted a regression analysis on the percentage of tests reported as
‘acceptable’ by EAPHLNP status, controlling for a set of confounding variables (that is, the
number of lab rooms, the number of staffs at level A0, A1, A2, and the number of equipment
relevant to respective tests). No significant difference or otherwise meaningful results were
found; this is likely related to the low statistical power of the study due to the very small sample
size.


                                  Figure 17: Comparison of EQA Results in 2014



                                                                                                                11%
                                      28%      25%            25%
                     33%                                                    31%
                                                                                          45%
                                               13%            13%
                                      14%                                   10%
                     21%
                                                                                          15%      97%          89%
                                     58%       62%            63%           60%
                    47%                                                                  40%
                     Non-EAPHLN


                                      EAPHLN


                                               Non-EAPHLN


                                                              EAPHLN


                                                                            Non-EAPHLN


                                                                                          EAPHLN


                                                                                                   Non-EAPHLN


                                                                                                                EAPHLN




                          BCHE435              Hematology                         QASI432               HIVA435

                                                            ACC        UNACC             NE

   QUALITATIVE ASSESSMENT OF THE IMPORTANCE OF DIFFERENT INTERVENTION ELEMENTS

The differential impact of the various EAPHLNP intervention elements could not be assessed
through quantitative data analysis. To capture a more subjective view of those involved with –
or affected by - the EAPHLNP interventions, they were asked as part of the interviews about
how they would prioritize interventions based on impact. The same interviews also captured
other, broader aspects of impact of the EAPHLNP interventions that go beyond the numbers.


                                                                       49
Several participants emphasized the impact of the project on the laboratory staff’s awareness of
quality, and an increased priority given to documentation and standardization. Respondents
saw the effect of the project – especially capacity building, including mentorship - on attitude
and motivation as a prerequisite that led to the observed improvements.

Most interview participants agreed that it is
hard or impossible to assess elements of the     “The first thing is the change in ideas. The
intervention individually or rate them by          mindsets. It’s the SLMTA that pushed us
importance, as they are inseparable, and only      to change. Before the SLMTA everything
lead to the desired effects if implemented             was good enough for us. But with the
jointly. A hypothetical question about how          SLMTA, we realized that what we called
interventions would be prioritized if forced to          “good” is in fact bad. We needed to
show that infrastructure/equipment and            change. We needed more organization in
capacity building (which includes the                the laboratory, in the activities. Even in
SLIPTA/SLMTA programme) took the lead,                our heads. People needed to change.”
closely followed by the hiring of new staff.
There were individual differences between         - EAPHLN-supported laboratory manager
respondents in these matters, so they were
aggregated in Figure 18, where darker colour
represents higher importance, to illustrate the
general tendency on how different participant groups emphasized importance. The importance
of mentorship and PBF was emphasized more by central government and program
management staff than by hospital-level management or laboratory staff, but it is likely that
mentorship – even if not mentioned separately - was perceived to be part of training and
capacity building, which was perceived to be invaluable across the board.                  Hospital
management is likely to have emphasized PBF given that the funds were added to a facility
common basket.

  Figure 18: Qualitative Impression of the Perceived Priority for Different Interventions

                                           Laboratory        Kigali     Other Hospital
                                              Staff     Programme Staff Mgmt and Staff
              Infrastructure, Equipment

             Training, capacity building

                 Hiring additional staff

                         PBF payments

                            Mentorship

                    Improvement funds

                            Supervision




                                                 50
                   Role of Mentorship Under the EAPHLNP

•   Involvement of the mentor in the project from its inception helped to improve
    their ownership and engagement with the work.

•   Introduction of the mentor as a collaborator or resource person rather than an
    auditor to the laboratory and the administration helps reduce resistance and
    improve utility.

•   Contact time is an essential component of mentorship – and more is almost
    always better. More than one respondent suggested that full-time mentorship
    could have been helpful. The contact time was increased upon feedback
    from the mentors after the inception of the project.

•   Minimum time to see impact was mentioned between two weeks per quarter
    and two weeks per month.

•   Mentors can also serve as advocates, either increasing the ‘voice’ of the
    laboratory within the hospital management or at the national level in Kigali.

•   This relationship can be maintained even after the formal end of the
    mentorship period.
In a mentor’s own words:
“I just lived with them, doing what they do every day, slowly doing the work as
they see what you are doing, demonstrating instead of giving instructions. Most of
the time I used to do the things myself - not as their additional employee, but I
would do such things so that they can observe and pick up.”




                                      51
  V. DISCUSSION OF FINDINGS AND LESSONS LEARNED FOR THE
   INTRODUCTION OF LABORATORY PBF IN OTHER COUNTRIES

                                    SUMMARY OF FINDINGS

In summary, the previous pages speak to the putative effect of PBF and the EAPHLN as a
whole in improving laboratory performance in Rwanda, although due to the project design we
are unable to say whether the PBF was the main catalyst increasing the speed of the
improvement or the cause of the improvement. The findings are summarized here as a basis
for analysis and discussion:

Implementation of PBF in Rwanda
   The implementation of the laboratory PBF benefited from the well-established PBF
   programme in the Rwandese healthcare system which focuses on results, good governance
   and accountability. The frequent assessments were viewed to be beneficial in terms of
   enhancing accountability and focusing on results even if individual financial incentives for
   laboratory workers were sometimes modest and the assessments were intense in terms of
   costs and stress reported by some stakeholders. The PBF scheme also had a positive side-
   effect of improving the profile of the laboratory within the facility. The laboratory PBF
   revenues were pooled with other sources of PBF at the facility level to avoid creating
   distortions. Individual bonus payments appeared to be motivating, with the caveat that if
   they were to be reduced or removed in the future, an effective strategy would need to be
   found to mitigate the risk of negative effects on motivation.

Effect of PBF on EAPHLNP-supported laboratories in Rwanda
    PBF appears to have contributed to an accelerated change in the laboratories where it was
    implemented, with PBF laboratories measuring an overall greater increase in SLIPTA
    performance compared to other EAPHLNP supported laboratories in the other participating
    countries. The observed magnitude of outperforming national comparison laboratories in
    SLIPTA scores from baseline to endline between the EAPHLNP-only laboratories in other
    countries and EAPHLNP+PBF in Rwanda, controlling for other factors, was 12 percentage
    points, with p=0.11. This was borne out by the qualitative interviews emphasizing both
    pressures and incentives to conduct quarterly assessments (rather than annual), perhaps
    speeding up the measurement-improvement cycle. Nevertheless it should be noted that it is
    difficult to isolate the effect of PBF.


Role of skills, motivations, and relationships on laboratory and hospital performance
   Motivation was positively affected through direct and indirect processes. Relationships
   between laboratory staff and clinicians improved over the project period, partially a result of
   publicized performance improvements and partially as a result of improved turnaround time
   (TAT) of laboratory results. The contribution to the PBF ‘common basket’ has a strong
   impact on the relationship of the laboratory manager with the hospital management,
   increasing the visibility of the laboratory within hospital decision-making and the reputation
   of laboratory professionals. Improved communication and documentation led to mutual
   respect within the hospital. A spirit of teamwork prevailed at participating facilities which,
   combined with strong commitment of the central government, contributed to successful
   implementation. It is anticipated that the qualitative changes will be sustained, given the
   contribution of the laboratories to increased hospital revenues. This assumption would
   require a follow-up study to be confirmed or potentially revised.

                                               52
   Impact of the EAPHLNP package of interventions

   A clear impact of the EAPHLNP interventions on SLIPTA score improvements was
   demonstrated both inside Rwanda (19 points at p=0.01) and outside27 (10 points at
   p=0.01). As a result of the project, the range of sophisticated tests offered at the district
   level at the intervention sites increased substantially, which saved time for clients in need of
   those tests, and avoided the need to travel to Kigali. The impact of EAPHLNP on test
   volumes was measurable for TB microscopy (increased 10 percentage points at p=0.05),
   showed no impact on FBC, and showed a measurable decrease for CD4 counts, possibly
   as a result of increased responsiveness of EAPHLNP laboratories to a new policy that
   prescribes less frequent CD4 counts and increased availability of point-of-care devices in
   health centres. No measurable difference was shown on results of external quality
   assessments at the endline (impact was not measured due to a lack of baseline data).
   Since the different elements of the EAPHLNP were delivered almost homogeneously, it was
   not possible to isolate the impact of the different interventions. Although these cannot be
   distinguished, there is clearly a system-strengthening value to introducing a package of
   interventions including PBF. There also appear to be positive effects on patient retention
   and public reputation for the district hospitals associated with the laboratory upgrading.

                                VALIDITY OF THE CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

The authors revisited the conceptual framework from Figure 6, assessing its validity in light of
the qualitative findings. Respondents were not questioned about the framework directly, but
their comments on the process of change in performance informed this assessment. From the
outset, the list of EAPHLNP interventions or inputs was known. Performance improvements in
the course of the project occurred incrementally over time (rather than in a single period),
suggesting that as hypothesized an internal cycle of assessment and improvement was
occurring. PBF, with its requirement for frequent measurement, is a means to increase the
turnover rate of this cycle and thus increase the speed of improvement. As seen in other PBF
schemes, larger improvements are possible at the outset when the baseline performance is
lower. The marginal improvements decrease naturally as a laboratory approaches the
maximum possible score.

When we bring in the findings from Figure 11, it is clear that the proposed way the quantitative
SLIPTA-based quality improvement cycle interacts with qualitative improvements is over-
simplified. Instead of improvements in motivation and relationships coming subsequent to the
quality improvement cycle, it appears that these improvements actually help to drive that cycle
(like PBF) and that faster or larger improvements in these areas can similarly speed quality
improvements as measured by SLIPTA.

Overall, EAPHLNP appears to have had a positive effect on both the qualitative performance
indicators as described in the two frameworks (relationships, motivation, and skills) and
quantitative measures of performance, particularly SLIPTA scores.       Because Rwanda
systematically evaluated only SLIPTA scores as a dimension of performance, it is unclear
whether improvements in SLIPTA scores are an intermediate step leading to improvements in
other quantitatively-measurable areas of performance (e.g. test volumes, EQA, TAT) as


   27   Note that missing data were excluded from analyses rather than imputed, which may have introduced bias.


                                                        53
hypothesized, whether all areas improve simultaneously, or whether there is little linkage
between improvements in the various dimensions of performance.

           V. LESSONS LEARNED FOR OTHER IMPLEMENTERS OF LABORATORY PBF

Based on these findings and the nuanced details presented in the previous sections, there are
a number of important lessons learned that other countries considering the introduction of a
laboratory PBF programme should take note of:

      PBF instills a results-focused culture and fosters accountability. The findings of
       this evaluation suggest that PBF contributes to laboratory performance improvements,
       as facilities and individuals are held accountable for improvements in the SLIPTA
       scores. PBF is an effective approach to health systems strengthening, that can be used
       to strengthen motivation but not promised as a regular individual salary top-up. Facility-
       focused PBF is effective without raising the same expectations as individual-bonus
       payments. Interviews showed that individual bonus payments bear the inherent risks of
       threatening sustainability and leading to a decreased motivation if they are removed.
       There needs to be strong leadership and decisive communication by public sector
       managers at the introduction of a PBF scheme, to manage expectations both of the
       facility overall, the laboratory, and the individuals affected. A difference in perceptions
       of the role of individual bonus payments was observed at different levels of the health
       system: at the central, more ‘removed’ level in Kigali the importance of individual
       payments was given less importance, while in the field it was emphasized.

      Linking PBF to accreditation provides further motivation for facility management.
       PBF is often initiated as a project-based intervention; in the case of the EAPHLNP,
       significant time and resources were used to educate the facility management about the
       project’s goals and strategies. While important, another means of achieving buy-in from
       management outside the laboratory is by linking PBF indicators and outcomes to
       laboratory accreditation – the EAPHLNP may constitute one of the first attempts at
       providing financial incentives for progress towards accreditation of laboratories. This is
       efficient, as it allows the teams to merge the quality assessments with the PBF
       evaluations. This innovation from the laboratory PBF has triggered discussions around
       combining facility PBF with hospital accreditation in Rwanda.

      Teamwork/motivation of the laboratory teams was significant. There was some
       disagreement between respondents about whether the ‘team spirit’ that was observed
       came as a function of the project and particularly the common performance goals or
       whether this was a prerequisite for successful teams that was particularly strong in
       Rwanda. Either way, teamwork was observed by many respondents as a significant
       factor related to PBF programs. Future implementers should consider the possible team
       benefits that PBF might engender as a qualitative aspect of motivation. Teamwork is a
       key factor that seems to underlie success in performance improvement.

      PBF for laboratories contributes to their perceived importance in health systems.
       In the course of the study, one of the outstanding changes in the hospital overall was
       the relationships between management /clinicians and laboratory staff. There was

                                               54
    improved recognition of the contributions of laboratory personnel as well as their
    technical and organizational skills, sometimes elucidated by requests for better
    documentation from clinicians. Laboratory professionals and their contribution to the
    health system are often under-appreciated, and this change in perceptions appeared to
    also be reflected at the MoH level, where increased visibility of laboratories raised their
    status. This can help the system with issues around appropriate clinical care and
    differential diagnosis, in addition to improving the motivation of individuals. Revenue
    generation through PBF or other approaches can raise appreciation of laboratory
    personnel.


   PBF works within a broader enabling environment. The effect of PBF by itself is not
    shown in this evaluation as it was implemented as part of the broader EAPHLNP
    package of interventions in a strong healthcare system. However, in agreement with the
    views expressed by respondents to this study (who found it hard or impossible to assess
    elements of the intervention individually or rate them by importance, as they only led to
    the desired effects if implemented jointly), other research has shown the amplifying
    effect of system strengthening interventions on performance-related outcomes. PBF is
    an approach that has to be introduced together with an overall quality improvement
    process supported by other forms of resource deployment and capacity development.
    As found in other studies, there is a criticality of initial investments in infrastructure and
    human resources as well as capacity building for PBF to work. It is noteworthy that
    even though the resources available for PBF declined over the pilot phase performance
    continued to improve, underscoring the combined effect of a better working
    environment, more qualified staff, and enhanced recognition of the laboratory personnel
    in the participating hospitals.


   Selection of performance measures for laboratory PBF is critical, as it drives what
    teams focus on, or, in the time-tested phrase: “what gets measured gets done”. The
    SLIPTA process, while an easily implementable tool, focuses primarily on
    documentation and process indicators.           Using this standardized, internationally
    recognized performance metric is necessary but needs to be complemented with other
    metrics (e.g. accuracy of test results, turnaround time and client satisfaction) to provide
    a more comprehensive picture of performance and to identify weak points in the system
    from an operational point of view. While the collection of additional indicators will
    generate administrative costs, this appears important and partly addressable through
    enhanced laboratory management information systems.

   Cycle of PBF provides opportunity to accelerate performance improvements.
    Frequent assessments drive both individual and institutional accountability; SLIPTA
    assessments showed consistent improvements in most facilities throughout the project
    lifetime. Although some respondents shared concerns that a quarterly PBF cycle was
    too frequent the regularity of the assessments may have helped to maintain the focus
    on results. Numerous stakeholders noted that PBF may motivate a more rapid
    improvement in the quality improvement process towards accreditation. Other countries
    considering PBF laboratory schemes will need to balance the benefits of frequent
    assessments against the additional costs.

                                             55
   Gains in performance may be sustained if institutionalized. Clear gains in
    performance on SLIPTA scores have been measured during the project period. Use of
    a standardized global tool (SLIPTA) and peer assessments led by regional experts
    contribute to institutionalizing the approach and enhancing chances of sustainability.
    The need for ongoing performance measurement was mentioned by many respondents
    in the course of this study, particularly referencing concerns about the impact of its
    termination on staff motivation. Institutionalizing the benefits of laboratory PBF in the
    national Rwandan healthcare PBF, even if in a modified form, will be important to
    sustain the gains in performance. The benefits of this common goal and observable
    reward on the laboratory teams are significant. The new approach of combining
    performance measurement and rewards with an accreditation program was recognized
    as a promising innovation by the MoH Health Financing Unit for the national PBF
    program in Rwanda, and at the time of writing, pilots were underway to test the
    introduction of that approach for hospitals.




                                           56
                                   REFERENCES
Basinga et al., 2011. Effect on Maternal and Child Health Services in Rwanda of Payment to
    Primary Health-care Providers for Performance: An Impact Evaluation. The Lancet ; 377
    (9775): 1421-1428.

De Walque et al., 2013. Using Provider Performance Incentives to Increase HIV Testing and
   Counseling Services in Rwanda. The World Bank, Policy Research Working Paper 6364;
   February 2013.

Fritsche, György Bèla, Robert Soeters and Bruno Meessen. 2014. Performance-Based
     Financing Toolkit. Washington, DC: World Bank. License: Creative Commons Attribution
     CC BY 3.0

Gertler & Vermeersh. 2012. Using Performance Incentives to Improve Health Outcomes. The
    World Bank, Policy Research Working Paper 6100; June 2012.

Nzabahimana I, S. Sebasirimu, J. B. Gatabazi, et al. Innovative Strategies for a Successful
   SLMTA Country Programme: The Rwanda Story. Afr J Lab Med. 2014;3(2), Art. #217, 6
   pages. http://dx.doi. org/10.4102/ajlm.v3i2.217.

Rusa, L., M. Schneidman, G. Fritsche and L Musango. 2009. “Rwanda: Performance Based
   Financing in the Public Sector”, in Eichler R (ed.) Performance Incentives for Global
   Health: Potential and Pitfalls. P.189-214. Brookings Institution Press: Baltimore, MD.

Schneidman, Dacombe & Carter. 2014. Laboratory Professionals in Africa: The Backbone of
    Quality Diagnostics. The World Bank, Health, Nutrition & Population Discussion Paper.
    Washington, DC: World Bank.

World Bank. 2012-14. World Bank Indicators. Washington, DC: World Bank.




                                           57
                                         APPENDICES

         APPENDIX 1: TERMS OF REFERENCE FOR THE LEAD CONSULTANT (ABRIDGED)

                                             Objective
The overall goal of this consultancy is to evaluate the performance of the project-supported
laboratories in Rwanda and to assess the implementation and impact of the Bank-funded PBF
incentive payments implemented through the Cellule d’appui à l’approche contractuelle
(MOH/CAAC).

                                       Specific Objectives

To this end, the consultancy will involve:
           1. Development and application of a methodology for assessing performance of
              participating facilities;
           2. Analysis of the PBF modalities and assessment of the impact of these payments;
           3. Write up of the main findings and conclusions; and
           4. Participation in a workshop to share findings from study.

Specific Tasks

In collaboration with the MOH-SPIU, RBC, MOH/CAAC, and the Bank team, the consultant will,
jointly with technical experts, carry out the following specific tasks. To this end, the consultant
will conduct and synthesize primary research findings along with secondary research and
deliver a full report and a workshop presenting results.
   1. Develop and apply a methodology for assessing the performance of the participating
      laboratories over the past five to six years, taking into account the various interventions
      supported under the project. This will include developing the overall research design,
      inventory of existing data and reports, finalizing data collection tools, data analysis from
      qualitative and quantitative studies.
   2. Propose and apply a methodology for systematically assessing the effects of the
      performance based financing payments on the overall performance of the participating
      laboratories/hospitals.    This will include the identification of adequate research
      participants/ respondents (with the support of SPIU, RBC and CAAS), finalization of
      qualitative discussion guides, conduct qualitative interviews in English, and coding and
      analyzing the qualitative interviews.

As a part of tasks (1) and (2), data to assess overall performance of participating laboratories
and potential PBF impact will be collected and analyzed.

   3. Prepare a report summarizing the main findings, conclusions, and recommendations
      derived from the analysis, interviews, and focus group discussions, and participate in a
      disseminating workshop as a facilitator.
   4. Coordinate inputs and technical support, fieldwork, and analysis from qualitative and
      quantitative studies.
For additional details on the activities, please see details on core activities below.




                                                 58
                                           Field Work

The SPIU, RBC, and CAAC will assist in the identification of the institutions to be studied and
the individuals to be interviewed. The SPIU and CAAC will provide to the consultant the PBF
procedure manual and will facilitate access to information on project-funded activities and to
facility information systems. The SPIU in collaboration with the CAAC will provide logistic
support for the field work.

                                            Timeline

Inception phase                                                                   20 Jan 2015
Assessment of Performance and PBF Implementation phase                            27 Feb 2015
Analysis and reporting phase                                                      27 Mar 2015
Final report and presentation                                                    Apr 2015 TBD

                                Deliverables for Lead Consultant:

   •   An inception report
   •   A draft report
   •   Final report
   •   Workshop presentation

                                   Details on Core Activities
               (Joint Specifications for Lead Consultant and Support Consultant)

Develop and apply a methodology for assessing the performance of the participating
laboratories over the past five to six years, taking into account the various interventions
supported under the project.

This would include an analysis of both pre/post intervention trends as well as a comparison of
performance at non-project sites (which will be carefully selected by matching these to
intervention facilities based on pre-intervention characteristics). The consultant will need to
work in cooperation with the partners noted above to determine appropriate outcome measures
to assess “performance,” given data availability/structure, in addition to information on the
broader literature on health systems/laboratory performance. A data collection guide has been
elaborated for this exercise.
Propose and apply a methodology for systematically assessing the effects of the
performance based financing payments on the overall performance of the participating
laboratories/hospitals.

To this end, describe in detail the process of making PBF payments linked to the SLIPTA
composite scores, including appropriateness of the SLIPTA indicators (i.e. both the number and
type of indicators), payment levels, how the funds were used at each facility, and what has
changed as a result. To isolate the PBF effect (vs the other interventions funded under the
project), the consultant will propose a research design to isolate the PBF effect which would
include but not be limited to the following: (a) facilities where different items and interventions
were phased in at different times or were phased out at different times; (b) anything cyclical

                                                59
about the intervention package -- for example, infrastructure investments and equipment (e.g.
GeneXpert or other molecular technologies) additions are "lumpy" so it may be easier to see a
particular spike in activity after such one-off events, which could possibly be accounted for (and
"subtracted from") any remaining overall trend; and (c) positive or negative spillover effects.
.
Collect and analyze data to assess overall performance and potential PBF impact.

This would include both quantitative and qualitative data. The following type of information
would be collected and analyzed, based on data availability:

           o   Processes and outputs at the lab level (all by disease type): number of
               specimens received, number of tests performed (and as % of specimens
               received), time from specimen to test result, multiple similar tests on the same
               sample, trends in number of patients picking up laboratory results, quality
               indicators like testing kit stock      outs, specimen spoilage and waste.
           o   Linking data above with patient and/or pharmacy records, if feasible, would
               provide more options -- time to patient's diagnosis, time to initiation of drug
               regimen, number of drug regimens per patient, re-visitation rate, multiple testing
               requests, choice of test/use of test to diagnose (vs other clinical indicators). This
               would get at issues related to quality of services, efficiency of services, and
               confidence in results).
           o   Conducting structured interviews with clinicians, laboratory personnel, and
               hospital administrators to determine any changes in level of interaction between
               physicians and laboratory personnel; views/attitudes/practices, such as changes
               in confidence in lab results (e.g., use of lab tests versus clinical judgment for
               diagnosis); issues of accountability (within the lab, and in using lab results), how
               the lab-linked PBF funds are spent, how the various intervention items work in
               tandem (or not), and what are the prospects for sustainability once the project
               closes

Prepare a report summarizing the main findings, conclusions, and recommendations
derived from the analysis, interviews, and focus group discussions.

The report would be 20 to 30 pages and would include annexes with detailed data and other
information. The report would outline the results from introducing the PBF approach and provide
guidance to other countries/stakeholders interested in introducing this scheme.




                                                60
                      APPENDIX 2: FINAL QUALITATIVE SAMPLE


  Respondent Type               Sampling criteria           Number of interviewees

                           Facility containing non-NRL
Hospital CEO/in-charge                                         1 per site = 2 total
                               EAPHLN laboratory

   Hospital finance        Facility containing non-NRL
                                                               1 per site = 2 total
      director                 EAPHLN laboratory

                          One lab in-charge and one lab
                            technologist (first choice:
   Laboratory staff       quality or safety officer) who    2 per site + 2 at NRL = 6
                          has been in post for at least 3
                                      years

                          People who see the patients        2-3 per site = 6 short
                          and prescribe the lab tests –
     Clinical staff                                            (10-15 min short
                          one IP and one OP physician
                            or nurse/clinical officer             interviews)

                          Monitoring and Evaluation for
         SPIU                                                           1
                                    projects

         NRL                Quality management team                     1

     Non-lab PBF          Current or former head of PBF
                                                                        1
     implementer                     Division

  EAPHLN mentors                                                        2

 EAPHLN coordinator             Claver Kayobotsi                        1

                                                    TOTAL       15 long / 6 short




                                        61
         APPENDIX 3: SAMPLE QUALITATIVE DISCUSSION GUIDE (ENGLISH VERSION)


                         Guide for SPIU, MOH, BMC and EAPHLN

                                    Introduction (5 min.)

   • Please introduce yourself briefly:
          o What is your role in your organization, and in the EAPHLN project?
          o How long have you been working in this role?
          o What are the greatest challenges related to your work with EAPHLN? How do
              you overcome them?

                       EAPHLN interventions (RQ 1 and 2) (15 min.)

    • How do you define a high-performing laboratory in the Rwandan context?
         o Are there any additional aspects?

           Probes (and get reasoning for each):
           o Are there any tests a laboratory of this size should be able to conduct, but that
              are sometimes lacking in Rwanda?
           o How about number of tests?
           o How about turnaround time?
           o How about external quality assessments?
           o How about data quality?
           o How about SOPs?
           o How about equipment?

Please think about all the different interventions that EAPHLN has offered.
    • Which aspects of EAPHLN would you say are the most impactful, and why? Which
        laboratory(ies) provides a good case study of this/these? Do you think the successes
        are context-specific?
    • I will mention to you a number of different interventions. Please describe for each of
        them the positive and negative aspects, and what change – if any – it has brought to
        the laboratories with which you interact, according to your own personal experience.
            o Laboratory improvement funds
            o Hiring of new staff
            o Facility upgrading – infrastructure, information technology, equipment
            o Training and capacity building other than SLMTA
            o SLMTA participation
            o Supervision
            o Operations research



                                             62
        • Tell us in some more detail how mentorship influences laboratory performance.
               o How important is contact time of the mentor with the laboratory?
               o Does more time with the laboratory automatically translate into faster progress –
                   or what is optimal time use of the mentors?

    Performance Based Financing (RQ 3) (15 min.)
         • Can you tell me about how performance based financing was implemented for
           laboratories in Rwanda?
               o What were the highlights or challenges of the process?
               o How did you resolve the challenges?



        • Can there be scenarios where PBF has a negative effect? Have you observed any of
          these in practice?
             o How about unmet expectations for funding by management?

        • In relation to the overall funding, how significant were the laboratory PBF amounts to
           hospitals?
        • How important were the bonus payments that were made directly to laboratory staff?
               o How have these payments influenced staff motivation and performance?

        • Do you think that the laboratory PBF will continue without the funding of EAPHLN?
          Why/why not?

        • What would be the conditions for a laboratory PBF programme to work without any
          donor-funding?

    I would like us to talk a bit about the way performance is measured for the PBF.

        •   Are there any of the indicators that you know about that presented challenges? Why?
        •   Can you think of other indicators (outside of SLIPTA assessment) that would be
            valuable as an indicator for PBF? Why?

    Process of Change (RQ 4) (15 min.)

°   When you look at the improved performance that resulted from any of the EAPHLN
    interventions (beyond PBF), how would you describe the process that led to that change? (in
    the hospitals, in the laboratories)
           o Can you give specific examples?
           o What role did your organization have in supporting that?

°   Have you encountered challenges that may have reduced the impact of EAPHLN
    interventions?

                                                  63
          o   Can you give concrete examples?

°   How have changes in management influenced the process of laboratory improvement?
         o Think of both positive and negative effects
         o How about changes in management structure?
         o How about changes of individuals?
         o Please give concrete examples

°   How can potential negative effect of changes in management be mitigated?
         o Are there examples where that worked?

°   Based on everything we discussed today, do you have any additional comments, or question
    you would like to ask?


                   THANK THE PARTICIPANT AND END THE INTERVIEW




                                                64
                         APPENDIX 4: QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS TABLES

                         Table A4-1: Intervention Effect on PBF Score
                        All EA labs                                                   All EAPHLN labs
                                          All EA     All labs   All labs   All labs
       VARIABLES      excluding RW-                                                       excluding
                                           labs      in RW      in UG       in KE
                            NRL                                                           RW_NRL

             y2012                                                                        9.190***
                                                                                          (3.440)
             y2013                                                                        27.61***
                                                                                          (3.540)
             y2014                                                                        33.91***
                                                                                          (3.540)
       y2012XPBF                                                                          35.02***
                                                                                          (8.472)
       y2013XPBF                                                                          20.40**
                                                                                          (8.513)
       y2014XPBF                                                                          22.65***
                                                                                          (8.513)
               post      28.49***        28.49***   27.17*** 22.89*** 40.84***
                         (1.718)         (1.726)    (2.882) (4.435) (2.987)
postXEAPHLN_only         8.225**
                         (3.946)
postXEAPHLN_PBF          20.51***
                         (6.956)
    postXEAPHLN                          10.51***   18.66***  11.09    19.16*
                                         (3.541)    (5.643) (9.090) (9.447)
          Constant       34.60***        34.68***   33.16*** 37.66*** 33.02***            42.22***
                         (1.066)         (1.066)    (1.752) (2.738) (2.004)               (2.248)

       Observations          200           202          46        42         40             119
          R-squared         0.818         0.813       0.895     0.703      0.928           0.691
       Number of id          100           101          23        21         20              31
  Baseline mean of
                            35.23         35.23       35.74     34.79      34.41           46.20
             control
              F-test        2.602
             Prob>F         0.110
   Standard errors in parentheses
    *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1


Effect of the intervention on PBF assessment score

We estimated the effect of intervention on assessment score using a difference-in-difference
approach, which calculated the effect by comparing the average change over time in the
assessment score for the labs where the intervention was introduced to the average change over
time for the labs that continued with the status quo. The estimation controlled for year and lab fixed
effects, which means time-invariant unobserved heterogeneity of the labs has been taken into
account. Table A4-1 shows all the estimation results related to assessment score.


                                              65
                                              Test Volume

                                           Descriptive statistics

The accessible data contained monthly test volume from January 2012 to December 2014 of 21 labs
in Rwanda (an intervention lab (NRL) and a comparison lab (King Faisal Hospital) were missing).
We aggregated the monthly volume to quarterly volume since monthly value may pick up more
noise rather than reflect the impact of intervention. The main outcome variable is the proportion of
volume in relation to the catchment population tested, which is only available for 17 labs (catchment
population wasn’t available for the remaining four). The mean of proportion tested –on a year basis
as well as half a year basis- is presented in the Table A4-2 by test and by EAPHLN status. It shows
that, except for FBC test, EAPHLN labs always had higher proportion tested than that of non-
EAPHLN labs.

                                        Regression estimation

We estimated the effect of intervention on the test volume using a difference-in-difference approach.
The results are reported in Table A4-3. For column (1)-(4), the outcome is the mean of proportion
tested on a year basis, i.e. we treated 2012 as the baseline, and 2013 and 2014 as the post-
intervention periods. In 2014, the intervention led to a significant decrease in the test volume of CD4
and FBC, whereas it led a significant increase in the test volume of microscopy. However, there was
no significant change in 2013. We also used the mean of proportion tested on a half a year basis as
the outcome, and treat the first half year of 2012 as the baseline, the first half year of 2013 to the
second half year of 2014 as the post-intervention periods. There was no clear trend of the effect of
intervention on test volume.

                                  Table A4-2: Test Volumes (1)
                                   mean           mean         mean         mean
                            N
                                  (%CD4)         (%FBC)      (%glucose) (%microscopy)
          2012 (y2012)
           Non-EAPHLN       12      0.35           0.73             0.30       0.09
               EAPHLN       5       0.59           0.66             0.42       0.11
          2012 1st half
             (hy1)
           Non-EAPHLN       11      0.38           0.86             0.35       0.12
               EAPHLN       5       0.58           0.74             0.41       0.13
          2012 2nd half
             (hy2)
           Non-EAPHLN       12      0.35           0.66             0.28       0.08
               EAPHLN       5       0.59           0.58             0.43       0.09
          2013 (y2013)
           Non-EAPHLN       12      0.41           0.85             0.30       0.10
               EAPHLN       5       0.61           0.59             0.48       0.15
          2013 1st half
             (hy3)
           Non-EAPHLN       12      0.39           0.95             0.29       0.10
               EAPHLN       5       0.61           0.65             0.45       0.14
          2013 2nd half



                                                 66
                (hy4)
              Non-EAPHLN 12            0.43        0.75           0.30            0.10
                  EAPHLN 5             0.62        0.52           0.52            0.16
             2014 (y2014)
              Non-EAPHLN 12            0.43        1.01           0.33            0.11
                  EAPHLN 5             0.50        0.68           0.53            0.24
             2014 1st half
                (hy5)
              Non-EAPHLN 12            0.51        0.95           0.33            0.12
                  EAPHLN 5             0.57        0.65           0.53            0.25
             2014 2nd half
                (hy6)
              Non-EAPHLN 12            0.36        1.08           0.32            0.10
                  EAPHLN 5             0.42        0.72           0.53            0.22
                 Note: the statistics are in percentage point, i.e. 0.35 means 0.35%.



                                    Table A4-3: Test Volumes (2)
                 (1)        (2)   (3)      (4)                   (5)        (6)        (7)      (8)
                CD4        FBC glucose microscopy               CD4        FBC      glucose microscopy
                                   -
    y2013     0.0625   0.115*           0.00608
                               0.00769
             (0.0410) (0.0676) (0.0426) (0.0220)
    y2014    0.0858** 0.279*** 0.0223    0.0184
             (0.0410) (0.0676) (0.0426) (0.0220)
y2013XEAPHLN -0.0366   -0.187   0.0687   0.0384
             (0.0755) (0.125) (0.0785)  (0.0406)
y2014XEAPHLN -0.175** -0.256** 0.0852    0.107**
             (0.0755) (0.125) (0.0785)  (0.0406)
     hy3                                                       0.0215      0.151    -0.0517     -0.0168
                                                              (0.0467)    (0.107)   (0.0461)   (0.0253)
    hy4                                                        0.0651     -0.0505   -0.0368     -0.0169
                                                              (0.0467)    (0.107)   (0.0461)   (0.0253)
                                                                                        -
    hy5                                                       0.142***     0.148               0.00152
                                                                                    0.00949
                                                              (0.0467) (0.107)      (0.0461)   (0.0253)
                                                                  -
    hy6                                                                 0.280**     -0.0189    -0.0107
                                                              0.00897
                                                              (0.0467) (0.107)      (0.0461)   (0.0253)
hy3XEAPHLN                                                    0.00765 -0.236         0.0851     0.0305
                                                              (0.0845) (0.194)      (0.0835)   (0.0457)
hy4XEAPHLN                                                    -0.0286   -0.163       0.141*     0.0500
                                                              (0.0845) (0.194)      (0.0835)   (0.0457)
hy5XEAPHLN                                                     -0.146*  -0.239       0.127      0.119**
                                                              (0.0845) (0.194)      (0.0835)   (0.0457)
hy6XEAPHLN                                                     -0.152*  -0.298       0.132     0.0997**
                                                              (0.0845) (0.194)      (0.0835)   (0.0457)
  Constant    0.419***   0.713***   0.338***     0.0974***    0.433*** 0.789***     0.363***   0.120***
              (0.0243)   (0.0401)   (0.0253)     (0.0131)     (0.0280) (0.0642)     (0.0276)   (0.0151)


                                                67
Observations        51         51         51            51          84         84         84           84

Number of labs      17         17         17            17          17         17         17           17
    Mean at
   baseline
    - Control       0.349     0.734      0.303       0.0923       0.381      0.856     0.349         0.117
  - Treatment       0.586     0.661      0.422        0.110       0.579      0.738     0.414         0.131
                        Standard errors in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
 Sample: all labs in RW; the total number should be 23 but data only available from 17 labs.


                                            Test Accuracy

     Test accuracy data is only available for 2014 (April, July, and November for BCHE435 and
     Hematology; April and July for QASI432 and HIVA435). We summarized the mean of observed data
     points for each test (Table A4-4), graphed them by EAPHLN status (Figure A4-1), and also tested
     the difference of the mean. There was no significant difference between EAPHLN and non-EAPHLN
     labs in any indicators with regards to BCHE435 and Hematology; non-EAPHLN had significant
     larger number of analytes with regards to QASI432; with significant smaller number of analytes,
     non-EAPHLN had significant higher accuracy rate of HIVA435.

     Besides, we regressed the accuracy of each test on a set of EAPHLN status, controlling for a set of
     confounding variables (i.e. the number of lab rooms, the number of staffs at level A0, A1, A2, and
     the number of equipment). See Table A4-5 and A4-6 for the descriptive statistics and the regression
     results, respectively. No expected differences were found (either they were not significant or did not
     make sense). This may be caused by the extremely limited sample size.
                                       Table A4-4: Test Accuracy (1)
                                       test       ACC   UNACC            NE    Analytes
                                     BCHE435      46.73  20.67           32.61    1431
                      Non-          Hematology    62.06  13.48           24.50    2241
                     EAPHLN          QASI432      59.62   9.62           30.77      200
                                     HIVA435      97.22   2.78            0.00      109
                                     BCHE435      58.33  13.87           27.87    1040
                                    Hematology    62.73  12.67           24.60    2620
                     EAPHLN
                                     QASI432      40.00  15.00           45.00      160
                                     HIVA435      89.00  11.00            0.00      170




                                                   68
                  Table A4-5: Test Accuracy (2)
                Obs      Mean     Std. Dev.       Min    Max
BCHE_ACC         22      49.36      25.09          5     98.67
HEMA_ACC         22      61.29      23.62          0     93.33
 QASI_ACC        18      54.17      29.70          0      100
 HIVA_ACC        22      95.45       8.99         75      100
  EAPHLN         22       0.23       0.43          0       1
  lab_room       17       8.71       5.37          1       20
   staff_a0      17       2.65       3.77          0       15
   staff_a1      17       5.00       4.47          0       19
   staff_a2      17       3.94       2.59          1       10
 equip_BIO       17       2.29       0.69          1       3
equip_HEMA       17       1.88       0.78          0       3
equip_ELISA      17       0.35       0.49          0       1



                  Table A4-6: Test Accuracy (3)
      8           (1)      (2)    (3)       (4)
             BCHE_ACC HEMA_ACC QASI_ACC HIVA_ACC
   EAPHLN       4.216    19.90  -26.07    -10.71
               (20.87)  (14.74) (19.50)   (8.187)
   lab_room     0.107    -0.980 -0.765     0.899
               (2.153)  (1.552) (2.299)   (0.783)
    staff_a0    0.991    -1.167  0.795    -0.598
               (3.048)  (2.183) (2.970)   (1.113)
    staff_a1    0.474  5.622***  1.414     0.482
               (2.409)  (1.744) (2.573)   (0.887)
    staff_a2    -2.363   -2.339  1.046    -1.006
               (3.241)  (2.525) (3.512)   (1.344)
  equip_BIO     -2.474
               (10.74)
 equip_HEMA             -15.79*  19.96
                        (7.197) (10.72)
 equip_ELISA                               1.800
                                          (6.922)
   Constant    60.10*  76.11***  22.68   91.94***
               (30.88)  (18.78) (28.01)   (6.518)

 Observations      17             17            14        17
  R-squared      0.104          0.603         0.564     0.314
                 Standard errors in parentheses
                  *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                             69
                                    Figure A4-1

                                 Test Accuracy 2014




100
80
60
40
20
0




      Non-EAPHLN   EAPHLN   Non-EAPHLN   EAPHLN   Non-EAPHLN   EAPHLN   Non-EAPHLN   EAPHLN

         BCHE435              Hematology             QASI432                HIVA435
                              ACC                 UNACC                  NE




                                           70
This report summarizes the main findings from the application of performance based incentives linked to
progress on a standardized, globally recognized metric-- the Stepwise Laboratory Improvement Process
towards Accreditation (SLIPTA) checklist-- under the East Africa Public Health Laboratory Networking Project
(EAPHLNP) in Rwanda.

The lab Performance-based Financing (PBF) pilot was introduced in the context of a well-established national
PBF program dating back to the early 2000s. The flexible nature of the EAPHLNP and the favorable context
in Rwanda provided an ideal backdrop to introduce PBF incentive payments to accelerate progress of five
project-supported labs towards accreditation.

The evaluation found improved laboratory performance at all project-supported laboratories in Rwanda as
measured by the SLIPTA scores. For the first time, laboratories were bringing in PBF revenues, instilling a
culture of continuous quality improvements, and focusing management attention on accreditation. PBF appears
to have contributed to an accelerated change, with PBF laboratories experiencing an overall greater increase
in SLIPTA scores compared to project-supported laboratories in the other countries. No clear patterns were
found in terms of improved test volumes or test accuracy, which were not part of the pilot scheme.

While it was difficult to disentangle the effects of different interventions, the evaluation found a system-
strengthening value to combining investments in modernizing laboratories, and strengthening human resources
with PBF. Relationships between laboratory staff and clinicians improved, with laboratory managers having a
greater voice in hospital management and lab staff increasingly valued and respected by clinicians. A spirit of
teamwork prevailed at participating sites.




ABOUT THIS SERIES:
This series is produced by the Health, Nutrition, and Population Global Practice of the World Bank. The papers
in this series aim to provide a vehicle for publishing preliminary results on HNP topics to encourage discussion
and debate. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those of the
author(s) and should not be attributed in any manner to the World Bank, to its affiliated organizations or to
members of its Board of Executive Directors or the countries they represent. Citation and the use of material
presented in this series should take into account this provisional character. For free copies of papers in this
series please contact the individual author/s whose name appears on the paper. Enquiries about the series and
submissions should be made directly to the Editor Martin Lutalo (mlutalo@ worldbank.org) or HNP Advisory
Service (healthpop@worldbank.org, tel 202 473-2256).

For more information, see also www.worldbank.org/hnppublications.




                                                                        1818 H Street, NW
                                                                        Washington, DC USA 20433

                                                                        Telephone: 202 473 1000
                                                                        Facsimile: 202 477 6391
                                                                        Internet: www.worldbank.org
                                                                        E-mail: feedback@worldbank.org
