March 2016




         Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime:
         Investing in Public Safety, the Rule of Law
         and Local Development in Poor Neighborhoods

         PART 1: CRIME, POVERTY AND THE POLICE



                                                Governance Global Practice




  1            Heike P. Gramckow, Jack Greene, Ineke Marshall & Lisa Barão
© 2016 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org



Disclaimer

This work is a product of external consultants and staff of the World Bank. The findings,
interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views
of the World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the governments they represent. The
World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries,
colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply
any judgment on the part of the World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

Rights and Permissions

The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because the World Bank encourages
dissemination of its knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for
noncommercial purposes as long as full attribution is given. For permission to reproduce any
part of this work for commercial purposes, please send a request with complete information to
the Copyright Clearance Center Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA; telephone:
978-750-8400; fax: 978-750-4470; Internet: www.copyright.com. All other queries on rights
and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher,
The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2422; e-mail:
pubrights@worldbank.org.




Cover Photo: Dominic Chavez/The World Bank
Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime:
Investing in Public Safety, the Rule of Law
and Local Development in Poor Neighborhoods




 1
PART       CRIME, POVERTY AND THE POLICE
           Heike P. Gramckow, Jack Greene, Ineke Marshall & Lisa Barão
Table of Contents

Foreword and Acknowledgements	                                                 IV
About the Authors	                                                             VI

1.	Introduction	                                                                1
    INTERNATIONAL EFFORTS TO ADDRESS THE PROBLEM	                               2
    LAW ENFORCEMENT CAN BE IMPROVED	                                            4

2.	 The High Cost and Impact of Crime and Insecurity on Poverty	                7
3.	 Creating and Sustaining Healthy Communities: A Stratagem for
    Crime Prevention and Enforcement in Poor Neighborhoods	                    10
4.	 Learning from Past Experiences: Focus Must be Local	                       12
    LESSONS ARE TRANSFERABLE	                                                  12
    EFFECTS OF URBANIZATION WORLDWIDE	                                         12

5.	 Understanding the Scope of Crime in Context	                               15
    LIMITS OF NATIONAL DATA	                                                   15
    IMPORTANT ISSUE: VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN	                                   16

6.	 Systems of Social Control and the Importance of Law Enforcement	           18   III

    SOCIAL CONTROL AND SOCIAL DISORGANIZATION	                                 18
    COLLECTIVE EFFICACY	                                                       19

7.	 Reformulating the Role of the Police – Potential for Investment	           21
    NEW MODELS OF POLICING, FROM TRADITIONAL TO COMMUNITY ORIENTED	            22
    TRADITIONAL NOTIONS OF POLICING	                                           22
    ALTERNATIVE APPROACHES	                                                    24
    COMMUNITY POLICING: CENTRAL TENETS	                                        24
    PROBLEM-SOLVING POLICING IN URBAN NEIGHBORHOODS	                           26

8.	 The Value Added of the New Approaches to Policing	                         28
    POLICE AS FORMAL SOCIAL CONTROL ON THE COMMUNITY LEVEL	                    28
    ROOTS OF CRIME REFLECT OTHER SOCIAL ILLS	                                  30
    PRIVATE SECTOR HAS A ROLE	                                                 31
9.	 An Important Piece of the Puzzle: The Commitment to Restorative Justice	   32
10.	 Investing in Police and Community Engagement	                             35
    THE IMPORTANCE OF HORIZONTAL AND VERTICAL INTEGRATION	                     36
    EXAMPLES OF SUCCESSFUL IMPLEMENTATION	                                     36
    COMMUNITY MOBILIZATION ON ALL FRONTS	                                      37

11.	 Challenging Barriers to Implementing Effective Policing Methods	          39
    TREATING ENTIRE COMMUNITIES AS CRIMINAL	                                   39
    THE SPECIAL PROBLEM OF CORRUPTION AND OTHER POLICE CRIMES	                 41
    CONSEQUENCES OF POLICE CORRUPTION AND CRIME	                               42

12.	 Community and Problem-Oriented Policing and Restorative Justice:
     Making a Human Rights Approach Central	                                   44
13.	Conclusion	                                                                46

References	49
     Foreword and Acknowledgements



                                          Justice is central to the World Bank’s core agenda of reducing poverty and boosting
                                          shared prosperity. It is an intrinsic goal of development overall and influences
                                          the achievement of many specific development outcomes. Well-functioning and
                                          inclusive justice institutions prevent and mitigate conflict, crime, and violence;
                                          ensure executive accountability and people’s meaningful access to services;
                                          give people legal identity and voice to protect their rights; enable investment
                                          and private sector growth; and promote equitable and inclusive development
                                          outcomes.

                                          The Bank’s 2011 World Development Report demonstrated that conflict, crime,
                                          and violence are major barriers to development, with direct economic costs that
                                          can add up to substantial proportions of GDP.1 Of the various dimensions of the
                                          rule of law, the basic control of violence has the strongest correlation to economic
                                          growth in developing countries. Moreover, crime and violence especially affect
IV
                                          the poor. High levels of criminality and widespread violence create fear that
                                          constrains mobility, erodes trust between people and communities and their trust
                                          in institutions, and reinforces stigmas toward and the exclusion of certain groups
                                          perceived to be dangerous, all of which impede long-term development. Effective
                                          and well-functioning justice systems can provide the critical legitimate processes
                                          that are needed for the resolution of grievances that might otherwise lead to
                                          conflict, crime, and violence.

                                          Implementing holistic approaches to violence, crime, and insecurity has become
                                          a part of the Bank’s work. These engagements have thus far been limited and
                                          led chiefly by two Global Practices (GPs), primarily in Latin America and the
                                          Caribbean. The Urban and Social Development GP focuses on urban design
                                          and social approaches to violence prevention,2 and the Governance GP’s justice
                                          team is collaborating with them on analytical work, operational design, and initial
                                          implementation and on initial engagements with ministries of justice to support
                                          police and other criminal justice sector agencies, especially in Latin America.
                                          Citizen security and violence prevention are currently a small area of the Bank’s
                                          work, but they have significant growth potential, primarily in Latin America and
                                          the Caribbean, though demand also exists in the Middle East and North Africa,
                                          Europe and Central Asia, and various fragile and conflict-affected states.




     1	 In El Salvador, for example, the value of lives lost due to death and disability reached approximately US$271 million, nearly 2 percent of
        GDP, in 2010. See World Bank, “Crime and Violence in Central America:
        A Development Challenge (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2011a). In Guatemala, violence cost the country roughly US$2.4 billion, or 7.3
        percent of GDP in 2005. See UNDP, “El Costo Economico de la Violencia en Guatemala” (New York: UNDP: 2006).
     2	 In the area of violence prevention and citizen security, there are six Development Policy Loans (DPLs) worth US$2.7 billion in Brazil, Colom-
        bia, and Honduras. In addition, the Bank’s portfolio includes 53 projects aimed at violence prevention (20 investments, two Institutional
        Development Funds (IDFs), 16 analyses, and nine technical assistance operations). Roughly 60 percent of violence-related investments are
        located in Latin America and the Caribbean, with the remaining 40 percent divided between East Asia and Africa.




     Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
This document was developed as a result of a request from World Bank President
Jim Yong Kim to the Governance GP for more information on the link between
crime and poverty and the Bank’s current and potential engagement to support
client countries in their efforts to counter crime in their communities. The resulting
review of the evidence base and the Bank’s response to date pointed to the need
to highlight the importance of law enforcement to counter crime as part of a holistic
approach, especially in poor communities, which not only suffer from economic
and social ills but also rarely have access to the government services needed to
address these problems. Effective policing services are also lacking, leading to a
serious enforcement gap in many poor communities that requires attention and
investment to allow these neighborhoods to recover and eventually prosper.

The authors would like to thank the World Bank’s internal and external reviewers
of an earlier concept note and a draft of this document: Rodrigo Serrano-Berthet
                                                                                                                     V
(Lead Social Development Specialist, Social, Urban, Rural, Resilience Global
Practice [GSURR]), David Hawkes (Lead Specialist, Integrity Vice Presidency,
Directorate of Operations [INTOP]), Jorge Luis Silva (Public Sector Specialist,
Governance Global Practice [GGODR]), Joan Hofman Serrano (Senior Social
Development Specialist, GSURR), Jimena Garotte (Senior Counsel, Legal Vice
Presidency), and Holly Burkhalter (International Justice Mission). Input was also
provided by Alexander Berg, Deborah Isser, Doug Porter, Jared Schott, and Nicolas
Menzies (GGODR). Their feedback and comments have helped shape this paper
into what we hope will be a useful contribution to the growing literature on crime,
poverty, and development and ways to address police reform in challenging
circumstances. We also thank Patricia Carley for her excellent and skilled editing.




                                                                             PART 1: CRIME, POVERTY AND THE POLICE
     About the Authors



                               Dr. Heike Gramckow is a Lead Counsel with the Justice and Rule of Law Group
                               in the Governance Global Practice of the World Bank in Washington, DC, where
                               she advises on justice reform issues and conducts related research. She has been
                               working on justice sector reform issues for nearly 30 years. Before joining the
                               Bank, she was Deputy Director of the International Division of the National Center
                               for State Courts and served as Director for Research and Development for the
                               American Prosecutors Research Institute. Dr. Gramckow has worked with courts,
                               prosecutors, and police in the United States and throughout the world, especially
                               on justice system management and reform. She has directed justice reform
                               programs and assessments and provided advice to the governments of numerous
                               countries, including Argentina, Bosnia, Bulgaria, Egypt, Germany, Haiti, Hungary,
                               Indonesia, Japan, Kenya, Mali, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Nepal, Nigeria, Papua
                               New Guinea, Qatar, Romania, Saudi Arabia, Serbia, Slovenia, Syria, Thailand, the
                               United Arab Emirates, and the United States. In her career, Dr. Gramckow has
VI
                               worked with common law, civil law, Shari’a-based, and customary justice systems.
                               She has trained judges, prosecutors, and court personnel on management,
                               budget and strategic planning, reengineering, and other substantive issues, such
                               as victim assistance, drug case management, juvenile offenders, and domestic
                               violence. She has also provided advice on establishing sustainable mechanisms
                               for continuing education, introducing effective information and communications
                               technology (ICT) solutions and designing good governance structures that
                               support democratic and accountable agencies. Dr. Gramckow holds a law degree
                               and a doctorate in law from the University of Hamburg, Germany. She has taught
                               undergraduate and graduate courses on international criminal justice systems and
                               juvenile justice at American University and the George Washington University in
                               Washington, DC, and is widely published in the United States and internationally.

                               Dr. Jack R. Greene is professor at the School of Criminology and Criminal Justice
                               at Northeastern University in Boston, MA, where he studies the police. Recognized
                               as one of the leading scholars in the United States in the field of policing,
                               Dr. Greene has published six books, a two-volume Encyclopedia of Police Science,
                               and over 150 research articles, book chapters, research reports, and policy papers
                               on matters of policing in the United States and internationally. He has consulted
                               for various U.S. agencies and organizations, including the Philadelphia and Los
                               Angeles Police Departments, the U.S. Justice Department, the National Institute
                               of Justice, the Urban Institute, the Rand Corporation, and the U.S. Department
                               of State, and currently serves on the Research Advisory Committee of the
                               International Association of Chiefs of Police. He is also a former Commissioner on
                               the Commission for Accreditation of Law Enforcement and a former member of
                               the Research Committee of the Police Foundation. Dr. Greene has written widely
                               on matters of police service delivery, community approaches to policing, crime
                               prevention, and police management.




     Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
Dr. Ineke Haen Marshall has earned degrees in Sociology from Tilburg University
(the Netherlands), the College of William and Mary (the United States), and
Bowling Green State University (the United States) and is currently professor of
sociology at the School of Criminology and Criminal Justice at Northeastern
University (Boston, MA). She has published several books and many articles on
comparative criminology, juvenile delinquency, homicide, criminal careers, and
international crime trends. Professor Marshall is chair of the International Self-
Report Study of Delinquency (ISRD), a large international collaborative study
of juvenile delinquency and victimization with 35 participating countries across
the globe. She has worked as an expert with the European Institute for Crime
Prevention and Control (HEUNI) and the United Nations Office for Drugs and
Crime (UNODC), and was the American Society of Criminology (ASC) Main Liaison
to the United Nations Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) between 2005
and 2011.
                                                                                                                   VII

Lisa Barão is a doctoral student at Northeastern University in Boston, MA, earning
her degree in Criminology and Justice Policy. She obtained her bachelor’s degree
in criminal justice from the University of Massachusetts Amherst and her master’s
degree in criminal justice from the University of Massachusetts Lowell. Her research
interests are centered on police-community relations, organizational policies, and
law enforcement recruitment and selection processes.




                                                                           PART 1: CRIME, POVERTY AND THE POLICE
VIII




       Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
1.	Introduction


  Crime and violence across the world impede development and disproportionally
  impact poor people. The World Bank, the World Health Organization (WHO), the
  United Nations Office for Drugs and Crime (UNODC), and the Geneva Declaration
  Secretariat collectively point out that though crime and violence represent serious
  problems in many countries, they are particularly concentrated in less-developed
  countries, often those that are characterized by fragile or less-trusted government
  institutions and pervasive insecurity. Under such circumstances, human, social,
  political, and economic development suffers. The corollary is demonstrated by the
  Geneva Declaration Secretariat (2011, 9) which found that “Countries with higher
  respect for the rule of law – including effective criminal justice systems – … show
  lower levels of intentional homicide.” An effective and accepted justice system,
  especially one that includes the efficient and consistent enforcement of the law and
  social order, has been shown to be a prerequisite to reducing violence and crime in
  many parts of the world. Moreover, economic and other development efforts can
  be more effectively implemented when safer and less violence-prone communities
  can shift attention and resources away from efforts to maintain personal safety,
                                                                                                                        1
  secure property, and avoid victimhood toward measures to promote economic
  and social growth.

  Violence and crime have broad implications for public safety, local justice, and
  economic and community development. Worldwide, the costs of violence, crime,
  and social disorder are staggering. These costs involve the breadth and depth of
  harm and human suffering that crime, violence, and disorder cause to individuals,
  families and communities; the “containment costs” of such negative and destructive
  behaviors (World Bank 2011c), and the subsequent lost opportunities for social,
  economic, and government development and stability. Estimates of the annual
  public expenditures for the containment of crime alone reached US$1.989 trillion
  globally in 2014 (IEP 2015), a figure that does not include the costs of conflict-
  related violence and internal security. If those are added, the global estimate of
  annual losses reaches US$14.3 trillion. At the same time, when weak domestic
  institutions (e.g., education, health care, government) are confronted with
  sustained crime and violence, their capacities and resources are further drained,
  the cycle of decline continues, and the states’ capacity for social and economic
  development continues to weaken.

  In most countries, the police or similar law enforcement agency are supposed to be
  a main line of defense in addressing violence and crime in neighborhoods, across
  the country, and even across borders. Constitutionally, the power to enforce the
  law is generally given to the state, which has the responsibility to protect vulnerable
  people and communities, and the local police in particular, who are imbedded
  in these communities and tasked with the preservation of law and order. At the
  same time, police agencies often struggle with many problems, including uneven
  service quality, inefficient organizational models, and longstanding connections
  between corruption, organized crime, and law enforcement. All of this in turn often
  leads to an ingrained civic mistrust of the police and other criminal justice actors in
  many places, especially those that need just and effective police services the most.



                                                                                PART 1: CRIME, POVERTY AND THE POLICE
                               INTERNATIONAL EFFORTS TO ADDRESS THE PROBLEM
                               Considering the negative impact on development, and especially the negative
                               results for poor people, the World Bank, Inter-American Development Bank (IDB),
                               United Nations, and numerous bilateral donors provide funding and assistance to
                               address crime in their client countries, and many lessons can be drawn from these
                               efforts. Research across the globe has shown that holistic approaches that focus
                               on the entire spectrum of a government’s crime response chain, ranging from
                               crime prevention to enforcement, tend to have better outcomes than isolated
                               interventions involving only the police or other individual government agency.
                               Not surprisingly, the UN Summit for the adoption of the post-2015 development
                               agenda explicitly recognized the role of safety and justice in achieving
                               development objectives, highlighting the need for “strengthening institutions at
                               all levels; promoting peaceful and inclusive societies; securing access to justice
                               for all; and respecting human rights, including the right to development” (UN
                               2015). Nevertheless, the percentage of international investment in programs
                               that support the criminal justice portion of the response chain remains small. A
                               2015 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) report
                               indicated that even in the 50 most fragile states, funding for legitimate politics (4
                               percent), security (2 percent), and justice (3 percent) is low (see figure 1). In other
                               developing countries, investment patterns look very similar.



2




    FIGURE 1.	 Overseas Development Assistance Allocations to the Peacebuilding and Statebuilding
                Goals (PSG) in 50 Fragile States, 2012



                                                                         Legitimate politics 4%
                                                                                         Security 2%
                                                                                               Justice 3%




                                                                                   Economic foundations/
                                                                                   Revenues and services 45%




                                                                                        Non-PSG
                                                                                        allocated aid 46%

    Source: OECD 2015.




    Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
As the UN’s Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) are being finalized, the
need for effective programming and financing to achieve Goal 16, which aims at
promoting just, peaceful, and inclusive societies, will become more prominent.
Considering the World Bank’s twin goals of ending poverty and boosting shared
prosperity and the negative implications crime and violence have on reaching
these objectives, the Bank can play an important role in incentivizing, monitoring,
and chronicling the “good practices” that seek to improve the administration of
justice in poor and marginalized communities and in financing their adaptation in
client countries.

To date, most of the Bank’s investment in efforts to reduce crime has focused
on crime prevention in the form of urban and social development programs.
Investment and policy lending that support the improvement of police operations
to reduce crime and develop stronger neighborhoods are more limited. Currently,
even in Central American countries with staggering crime rates that impede
development and effective investments in other sectors, large lending programs
that focus on crime prevention do not include a component to strengthen police
capacities. In part this gap is due to prior interpretations of the Bank’s articles of
engagement, especially International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
(IBRD) Article III, Section 5(b),3 which had been interpreted as precluding the Bank
from engaging with criminal justice institutions, especially police. Although some
activities involving the criminal justice sector, including even police agencies, had
been financed (for a list of projects prior to 2010, see Leroy 2012), it was only in
                                                                                                                                                      3
2011 that a new Legal Note was issued by the Bank’s General Counsel that clarified
the framework for the Bank’s engagement with law enforcement agencies (Leroy
2012). In some countries, the significant enforcement gaps in poor neighborhoods
might be getting some needed attention from other donors, such as the U.S.
Agency for International Development (USAID), the United Kingdom’s Department
for International Development (DFID), or Australia’s Department of Foreign Affairs
and Trade (DFAT). In other instances, the enforcement gaps remain, reducing the
effectiveness of other investments in poor communities.

A 2014 review of the Bank’s lending portfolio to understand if and how the issuance
of the Legal Note on Criminal Justice influenced Bank programming indicated an
uptake in projects that included some criminal justice component (see figure 2).
Still, no lending project could be identified that included assistance to build the
capacities of local police to address crime in poor neighborhoods beyond a few
activities to develop data collection capacities or provide limited to support for
police to deliver better services to victims (World Bank 2014b). Interestingly, for
years, almost every road project the Bank supported included a component to
bolster the traffic police to increase road safety. Taking a cue from road projects,
the idea to include problem- and community-oriented police services in urban
development programs, for example, to improve neighborhood safety, does not
appear farfetched.




3	 This article provides that “[t]he Bank and its officers shall not interfere in the political affairs of any member; nor shall they be influenced
   in their decisions by the political character of the member or members concerned. Only economic considerations shall be relevant to
   their decisions, and these considerations shall be weighed impartially in order to achieve the purposes stated in Article I.” Substantively
   identical provisions are contained in the International Development Association (IDA) Articles Article V, Sections 1 (g) and 6, and Article VI,
   Section 5 (c).




                                                                                                 PART 1: CRIME, POVERTY AND THE POLICE
    FIGURE 2.	 World Bank Lending Projects with Criminal Justice Components, 2010–2014



    25

    20

    15

    10

    5

    0
          Citizen Security/     Anti-Corruption/    Post-Conflict     Gender-Based        Courts and          Others
          Crime & Violence       Transparency      Reconstruction       Violence         Other Justice
                                                    and Conflict                         Institutions
                                                     Prevention

    Source: World Bank 2014b.




                                       LAW ENFORCEMENT CAN BE IMPROVED
4
                                       The main aim of this paper is to provide World Bank Country Management
                                       Units, teams, and client counterparts interested in exploring ways to address the
                                       enforcement gap in poor neighborhoods with a general understanding of the
                                       important role police play in helping to alleviate problems related to poverty, crime,
                                       and social disorder. The paper also identifies the kinds of approaches to policing
                                       that tend to be most effective in reducing crime in a sustainable manner. Building
                                       on the already significant body of World Bank and other literature outlining the
                                       impact of crime on development in general and poor people in particular and
                                       the role of holistic crime prevention in addressing crimes and violence (see, for
                                       example, World Bank 2003, 2011a, 2011b; World Bank and UNODC 2007), the
                                       discussion presented here relies particularly on criminological research to outline
                                       what is known about crime, as well as the role and importance of effective and
                                       inclusive police services, in socially disorganized, marginalized, and impoverished
                                       communities. As local police are regularly deployed in these areas, they have
                                       both an opportunity and a responsibility to work with community members, their
                                       leaders, other government and private service providers, and local businesses to
                                       improve the conditions for reducing harm from crime, violence, and disorder and
                                       improve community and economic development. In this regard, local policing
                                       either helps to create a climate for community social and economic development
                                       or detracts from it.

                                       Research has shown that a combination of community and problem-oriented
                                       policing, as well as restorative justice practices involving the police, is particularly
                                       effective in buttressing community development and harm reduction and
                                       addressing governance shortcomings in the police structure. The focus of part
                                       1 of this paper is on understanding the breadth, scope, and anticipated changes
                                       brought about by implementing combined community and problem-oriented
                                       policing and restorative justice approaches, and the related important role of
                                       police in sustaining community development efforts.




    Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
  BOX 1 – Experiences from Brazil
  In 2008, to curb the violence in the city and in preparation for its bid to host the World Cup and the
  Olympic Games, Rio de Janeiro implemented the “Unidades de Policia Pacificadora” (UPP) program.
  The aim was to increase security by restoring state control in the favelas and by integrating the favelas
  and their residents into the formal city. Five years later, fewer incidents of lethal violence are being
  registered, residents feel safer, and pacified favelas have been integrated to some extent into the
  rest of the city. These achievements have also led to increased costs for public services and housing,
  however, compelling some residents to move to other marginalized parts of the city.
  Source: Oosterbaan and van Wijk 2015.




This paper also examines the requirements for implementing community-
grounded programs by the police and the obstacles within and outside of police
organizations that impede increased and sustained collaboration for community
safety. Implementing planned changes in police organizations has proven to be
complicated, as they usually involve the reorientation and reengineering of many
parts of the police system and its work cultures, as well as extensive outreach
to the communities the police serve. The police’s ability and willingness to
respond to community needs especially affects how communities perceive police
                                                                                                                    5
interactions, and these perceptions ultimately can be tied to the institutional
legitimacy of the law and its agents. Such changes have been realized in some
parts of the world, leading to improved police and community interactions and
ultimately to more secure and less crime-ridden communities. Lessons from
these reform efforts have also shown that if such change is to take place, the
administrative, professional, and political will of the police and superordinate
government leadership is mandatory. Such commitment is the cornerstone of
moving forward with meaningful change processes.

Developing a meaningful and feasible pathway for the local police to embrace the
goal of community growth, civic cohesion, and social integration is not an easy task.
Yet armed with what is known about crime and its manifestations in impoverished
and often marginalized communities, coupled with an understanding of the
underlying supporting role played by local justice system actors (police and other
decision makers), it is possible to outline the building blocks needed to create a
supportive environment for greater community cohesion and collective efficacy in
order to improve community safety, promote justice, and enhance development.

Building on these concepts, part 2 of this paper outlines what is needed to design
and implement effective change in police agencies in more detail. This is done
with the view of broadening World Bank programs especially in the areas of rule
of law, anti-corruption, and governance, but also other sectors that are needed to
address crime effectively, such as social and urban development, education, and
health. Part 3 provides an annotated bibliography of relevant sources for those
interested in learning more.




                                                                            PART 1: CRIME, POVERTY AND THE POLICE
     BOX 2 – The Impact of Crime on the Poor

     “When we think of global poverty we really think of hunger, disease, homelessness illiteracy, dirty
     water and a lack of education, but very few of us immediately think of the global poor’s chronic
     vulnerability to violence—the massive epidemic of sexual violence, forced labor, illegal detention, land
     theft, assault, police abuse, and oppression that lies hidden underneath the more visible depravations
     of the poor.”
     Source: Haugen and Boutros 2014, xiv.




6




    Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
2.	The High Cost and Impact of Crime and
   Insecurity on Poverty

  Across the world, crime and violence have a disproportionate presence in and
  impact on poor and marginalized communities that in turn are often home to a
  disproportionate number of offenders as well as victims. Poverty is made manifest
  and reinforced through social and economic exclusion, and the resultant negative
  behaviors often concentrated in poorer communities include considerable
  interpersonal violence and property crime, as well as a wide array of disorderly
  behaviors (ranging from the trivial to the serious) that continue to destabilize
  community life.

  Poverty and insecurity are intimately connected. Insecurity with regard to food,
  water, and the necessities of sustaining life, coupled with poor health care,
  education, and other social services, contributes to social and economic decline.
  The direct effects of economic crises, unemployment, family health crises,
  unexpected changes in household composition, or natural disasters all contribute
  to vulnerability and poverty (for a review, see Barrientos 2007). Insecurity further
  contributes to a weakening of the capacity of socially disorganized communities
                                                                                                                           7
  to develop collective efficacy, and within these communities, of the individual
  to take charge of his or her life. At the same time, vulnerability to crime and
  violent victimization in itself is a source of insecurity. Fear of crime negatively
  affects community social cohesion, as people withdraw from the public square.
  Fear of crime has also been shown to contribute to the cycle of decay in urban
  neighborhoods (Skogan 1990). At the same time, public fear of crime has often led
  to “get tough on crime policies.” Although such approaches aim at taking criminal
  elements out of the communities they threaten, they tend to be ineffective, do not
  address most of the underlying causes of crime, are very costly, and are most often
  applied to marginalized communities (Garland 2001; Simon 2007; Selke 2014).
  This has been the case not just in Western countries but throughout many Latin
  American nations and other regions of the world.

  Instead, the World Health Organization (Krug et al. 2002, 12) and others, using an
  ecological model and public health approach for understanding violence across
  a number of social contexts, suggest that “Violence is the result of the complex
  interplay of individual, relationship, social, cultural and environmental factors.
  Understanding how these factors are related to violence is an important step in
  the public health approach to preventing violence” (see figure 3 below).


  FIGURE 3.	 Socio-Ecological Model for Understanding Crime and Violence




                Societal     Community       Relationship      Individual


                                                                                           Source: Krug et al. 2002, 12.




                                                                             PART 1: CRIME, POVERTY AND THE POLICE
                                       As shown in figure 3, the nature and complexity of violence, crime, and disorder
                                       result from complicated interactions between and among individuals, their
                                       immediate social groups, the communities in which they live, work, and recreate,
                                       and the larger society in which they live. All crime is local in its impact if not its
                                       genesis. As the costs of violence, crime, and disorder are primarily realized at
                                       the local community level, local police and justice officials are the most essential
                                       players in community crime prevention.

                                       The costs of crime and violence are many:4

                                       Governments face substantial direct costs. These include the health and medical
                                       care costs associated with helping victims of violent crime; lost productivity
                                       and earnings; the costs of containing violence, such as law enforcement, the
                                       prosecution and adjudication of offenders, and correctional procedures, as well as
                                       the restorative processes associated with individual and communal rehabilitation;
                                       and the costs involved in repairing damage to property (Hoffman et al. 2005;
                                       Krug et al. 2002). In some parts of the world, such costs also include the loss of
                                       development investment and tourism. In addition to the direct loss of resources,
                                       countries or communities that face these negative economic impacts can be
                                       breeding grounds for terrorism and other forms of radicalized behavior (Akyuz and
                                       Armstrong 2011; LaFree and Ackerman 2009).

                                       The costs of crime at the macro-level are substantial though difficult to estimate.
8
                                       As noted above, the “containment costs” alone, that is, the annual costs of the
                                       government apparatus required to deal with crime and violent victimization, were
                                       estimated by the Institute for Economics and Peace to be close to US$2 trillion
                                       in 2014 (IEP 2015), a figure that reaches US$14.3 trillion, or 13.4 percent of the
                                       global GDP, if the costs related to violence from conflict are added. This is an
                                       astounding figure, indicating that more than 1 in 10 U.S. dollars in gross world
                                       product expenditures are dedicated to the containment of crime and violence,
                                       adding substantially to world economic deficits and detracting from countries’
                                       ability to invest in other common social goods, such as health care, housing,
                                       education, and so forth.

                                       Victims suffer a wide array of injuries from crime. If they are assaulted or injured,
                                       they suffer the immediate physical effects and/or financial losses associated with a
                                       criminal act. Financial costs also stem from the loss of wages due to lost work and
                                       the immediate and longer-term medical costs of recovery and rehabilitation. Long-
                                       term disability results in further physical and financial costs to victims. All of these
                                       financial, physical, and even psychological costs can be greatly debilitating (Krug
                                       et al. 2002). Moreover, for people who already live in impoverished conditions,
                                       becoming victims of crime has a disproportionate impact because of their lack of
                                       the resources and access to government services needed to recover.

                                       Businesses can be significantly impacted by crime, increasing the cost of doing
                                       business, reducing potential profits, and often leading firms to relocate and not
                                       invest in certain neighborhoods, cities, or regions. When businesses withdraw
                                       from communities, tax revenues and other investments vanish along with job
                                       opportunities and other development options that are so vitally needed in poor
                                       communities. Enterprise surveys conducted by the World Bank indicate the high
                                       cost businesses incur as a result of crime (see figure 4).

    4	 For a good overview of assessing the cost of crime, see, for example, World Bank and UNODC (2007).




    Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
FIGURE 4.	 Crime-Related Losses and Security Costs are High for Firms in Developing Regions
               (Percentage of Annual Sales)


Costs (%)

 4.0

 3.5

 3.0

 2.5

 2.0

 1.5

 1.0

 0.5
  0
              Sub-Saharan              East Asia                  Latin America         Eastern Europe
                                                                                                                South Asia
                 Africa                & Pacific                   & Caribbean           & Central Asia

            Losses due to crime               Security expenses              Combined

                                                                                                          Source: World Bank 2014a.


                                                                                                                                      9

Communities, beyond the immediate victim or business, must deal with costs, as
the vicarious victimization and resulting increase in fear have broader psychological
impacts and associated costs for communities that experience crime and disorder,
especially repeatedly and over time (Cornaglia, Feldman, and Leigh 2014). Such
broader community trauma has important implications for building confidence in
the police and the administration of justice. Those who believe that the police are
not present or cannot protect or help them are likely to withdraw further from the
civic space and/or rely on local groups, even criminals, for such protection, or at
least become cynical about the legitimate role and function of the law and the police
(Kirk and Papachristos 2011). Youth especially often join gangs for protection and a
sense of identity and as a vehicle for social and economic mobility, pathways often
lacking in socially disorganized communities (Gibbs 2000). Sustained community
trauma resulting from repeat victimization, often accompanied by a persistent
climate of violence, has many implications for community development that are
similar to the traumatic impacts experienced by individuals and communities
embedded in war zones. As reported by Tuller:

       Violence causes disruption to social roles when different groups vie for
       dominance … It endangers children’s emotional development as parents and
       authority figures, themselves traumatized, struggle to create psychologically
       protective environments that will mediate children’s experiences of violence...
       It causes ruptured social networks when people fear to participate in normal
       activities, when people must move to avoid the threat of violence, and when
       loved ones are imprisoned, injured, or killed … It reduces social and political
       trust… By destroying the norms and values that underlie collective action for
       the common good, violence compromises people’s ability to prevent further
       violence or to advocate for improvements to their communities (2015, 1–2).




                                                                                          PART 1: CRIME, POVERTY AND THE POLICE
     3.	Creating and Sustaining Healthy Communities:
        A Stratagem for Crime Prevention and
        Enforcement in Poor Neighborhoods

                                 One of the fundamental values outlined in the UN Millennium Development
                                 Declaration (2000) states that “Men and women have the right to live their lives
                                 and raise their children in dignity, free from hunger and from the fear of violence,
                                 oppression or injustice. Democratic and participatory governance based on the
                                 will of the people best assures these rights.” The SDGs take this forward in Goal
                                 16, which aims at promoting just, peaceful, and inclusive societies, recognizing
                                 that peace, stability, human rights, and effective governance based on the rule of
                                 law are important conduits for sustainable development (UNDP 2015).

                                 Living in safe and secure communities that are relatively free of crime, violence,
                                 and disorder are also expressed values in the UN Declaration of Human Rights
                                 (UN 1948). Safe and stable community conditions support pro-social behavior
                                 and community engagement; unsafe and insecure communities do not attract or
                                 support residents or businesses. The incidence and fear of crime in these
10
                                 communities degrades the quality of life, erodes community capacity to participate
                                 in the larger society, discourages community investment, and consigns the
                                 community to a dependent and subservient status. According to the International
                                 Crime Victimization Survey (ICVS), a unique standardized general population
                                 survey of the experience of being victimized, considerable proportions of the
                                 respondents in Latin America and Southern Africa report feeling “very unsafe”
                                 walking alone in the dark. Reported feelings of fear are considerably lower in
                                 the developed world. Still, feelings of insecurity do not have a straightforward
                                 relationship with levels of likelihood of victimization; indeed, the ICVS has found
                                 that feelings of insecurity are relatively high in several countries with low levels
                                 of common criminality, suggesting that feelings of insecurity may reflect a lack of
                                 neighborhood social cohesion (van Kesteren, van Dijk, and Mayhew 2014, 62).

                                 Building safe and secure communities is a prerequisite to much of social and
                                 economic life. Any development efforts should therefore recognize the critical role
                                 of personal and community safety, particularly in the developing world (Haugen
                                 and Boutros 2014), and preventing crime, ensuring community safety, and building
                                 greater community trust in the law and those who enforce the law should be
                                 taken as important benchmarks for community development efforts. Moreover,
                                 how the police address communities that suffer from poverty and a host of other
                                 social and economic problems, including crime, violence, and disorder, must be a
                                 central focus of attention. Police engagement with communities to increase public
                                 safety can improve community social cohesion and collective efficacy, central
                                 elements in informal social control. Where communities are less plagued by crime
                                 and other violence because of police action, violent subcultures will erode, thus
                                 potentially halting or reversing community residents’ life trajectories of crime and
                                 violence (Bernburg 2014; Cohen 1980).




       Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
The ICVS also measures perceptions of general police performance on the part
of the public at large. Its surveys demonstrate considerable variation in reported
levels of satisfaction with the police, with Western Europe and other developed
countries, including the United States, Canada, New Zealand, and Australia,
reporting higher levels of satisfaction than other areas. Residents of Latin America,
Eastern Europe, and Africa are most skeptical about the capacity of the police to
prevent and control crime (van Dijk 2008, 23), though within each region, there
is similar variation in the levels of satisfaction with law enforcement. Feelings of
safety also vary considerably across countries (Zvekic and Alvazzi del Frate 1995).

Recognizing the importance of crime prevention for safe and healthy communities
and for successful economic development, the UN issued Guidelines for the
Prevention of Crime in 2002 (see box 3). Building on decades of research in many
countries, these guidelines outline the need to develop a holistic approach to crime
that includes the entire response chain that the government, in collaboration with
communities and other players, should develop and strengthen. To be effective,
police services have to be implemented across the dimensions outlined in the box
below, understanding that other government institutions have equally important
roles to play and should be part of a combined, collaborative response.



  BOX 3 – From Crime Prevention to Enforcement: the Response Chain
                                                                                                                    11
  1.	 Promoting the well-being of people and encouraging pro-social behavior through social, economic,
      health and educational measures, with a particular emphasis on children and youth, and focusing
      on the risk and protective factors associated with crime and victimization (prevention through
      social development or social crime prevention)

  2.	 Changing the conditions in neighborhoods that influence offending, victimization and the insecu-
      rity that results from crime by building on the initiatives, expertise and commitment of community
      members (locally based crime prevention)

  3.	 Reducing opportunities, increasing risks of being apprehended and minimizing benefits of crime,
      including through environmental design, and by providing assistance and information to potential
      and actual victims (situational crime prevention)

  4.	 Preventing recidivism by assisting in the social reintegration of offenders and other preventive
      mechanisms (reintegration programs).
  Source: UN 2002.




As will be outlined and explored in more detail in part 2, the need to develop the entire
response chain within different community contexts effectively places the World Bank at a
distinct competitive advantage. A successful response to crime requires a programmatic
approach across sectors that the Bank may already invest in (i.e., governance, social
and urban development, education, health, etc.), activities upon which a problem-
focused crime response program can be developed. Moreover, the Bank’s convening
powers provide many options not only for bringing various stakeholders together, but
also for coordinating the efforts of different donors with the aim of developing and
financing an effective program against crime in a client country.




                                                                            PART 1: CRIME, POVERTY AND THE POLICE
     4.	Learning from Past Experiences:
        Focus Must be Local

                                 Although this paper aims to provide information to effectively address crime
                                 enforcement gaps in World Bank client countries, most of the fundamental
                                 knowledge about how crime evolves, how communities are impacted by
                                 it, and how police can more effectively respond has been developed in the
                                 West. The Bank’s many client countries vary significantly in terms of economic
                                 development, population, ethnic diversity, and political, religious, social, and
                                 cultural characteristics. These countries also differ substantially with regard to
                                 the capacity of government structures, past and more recent history and other
                                 events that influence crime, the scope and presence of crime and violence in
                                 communities, and the government—and especially the police—response to that
                                 crime. Globalization and internationalization are believed to have a homogenizing
                                 effect on these issues, but there is no question that important differences continue
                                 to exist between regions and nations (Braudel 1993; Gannon and Pillai 2013), and
                                 programming should reflect these differences.
12

                                 LESSONS ARE TRANSFERABLE
                                 At the same time, experience from client countries, especially in Latin America,
                                 South Africa, and Eastern Europe, has shown that lessons learned in the West can
                                 be applicable to other contexts, provided that the local context is well understood
                                 and programs and models are appropriately adjusted, tested, and implemented
                                 (Newburn and Sparks 2004). Furthermore, experience and research from the
                                 Bank’s client countries, whenever available or accessible, are adding to a growing
                                 body of evidence that is being used to develop more holistic approaches involving
                                 the entire crime response chain, from prevention through enforcement. Problems
                                 related to exclusion, victimization, crime, and disorder are common experiences
                                 in many poor communities across the globe, and data show that poor urban
                                 communities share basic commonalities in the role of policing and its potential
                                 as an agent of change. Still, it is important not to overgeneralize when drawing
                                 from lessons learned in other client countries. Regional and local levels and types
                                 of crime and violence in developing countries differ, as do the drivers of that
                                 crime and violence and the capacity of the state and community to respond, all of
                                 which has to be reflected in adequately adjusted programming. Particularly when
                                 countries are experiencing or coming out of conflict, violence may still result from
                                 and be intermingled with criminal behavior, requiring modified approaches.


                                 EFFECTS OF URBANIZATION WORLDWIDE
                                 In order to address crime effectively, it has to be recognized that crime is first
                                 and foremost occurring and experienced at the local level, and that is where
                                 interventions need to focus. Accordingly, this paper emphasizes local crime
                                 and response mechanisms, which requires an understanding of the subnational
                                 variations in crime and response options and programming. To this end, one
                                 needs to be cognizant of the huge differences in the local or immediate social
                                 context in which people—and the police—find themselves, even within a country



       Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
or city. Poverty and crime exist everywhere, and different localities tend to require
somewhat different responses; at the same time, crime, disorder, and violence
manifest themselves most commonly and in more extreme forms in rapidly growing
but impoverished urban communities, where crime is often the most critical issue,
hence this paper’s focus on crime response mechanisms in cities. This does not
mean that crime in marginalized rural communities is neglected, because in many
of the Bank’s client countries, the police are a national institution with local area
command structures, and even where this is not the case, interventions in the main
urban centers tend to have cascading effects. Reform of the larger national system
therefore tends to eventually affect policing in urban and rural communities alike,
and some programming approaches for urban centers may also apply to rural
areas, with the needed adjustments.

As the 2014 UN World Urbanization Prospects report concludes, the world is
becoming more urbanized at a rapid pace. Globally, more people now live in
urban than rural areas and the rate is increasing. Africa and Asia are urbanizing
faster than other regions. Still, in 2014, close to half of the world’s urban dwellers
resided in cities and towns of fewer than 500,000 inhabitants, and only one in
eight lived in the 28 mega-cities, with more than 10 million inhabitants. By 2050,
however, the UN predicts that an additional 2.5 billion people will be living in
cities, with 90 percent of the increase occurring in Africa and Asia (DESA 2014).
By that time, the world is projected to have 41 mega-cities with more than 10
                                                                                                                     13
million inhabitants, mostly concentrated in the global south. Many of the worst
problems related to (violent) street crime are concentrated in the larger slum
areas in the developing world, in the mega-cities in the Philippines, India, South
Africa, Mexico, and Brazil. These cities also tend to suffer from serious gaps in
all public service delivery, including in preventive and enforcement services,
especially in poor neighborhoods. These gaps exist due to high needs combined
with a lack of resources, compromised service delivery systems, and often weak
governance structures.

Comparable problems related to disorder, crime, and a lack of public safety
have been well documented in western urban agglomerations around London,
Paris, New York, and Chicago (Body-Gendrot 2012). Scholarly writing on “urban
security” (where the role of policing, private and public, is central) has focused on
the ghetto, the slum, the banlieue, and the favela as spaces of “urban marginality”
(Aas 2013, 68), of social and economic exclusion, where residents often share
similar experiences, regardless of whether they live in Rio de Janeiro, Detroit,
Manila, or Mexico City. Even in Norway, one of the wealthiest welfare states in the
world, there is documentation of the “existence of spaces governed by the drug
economy, violence, deep urban marginality and ethnic and racial exclusion” (Aas
2013, 69). A number of scholars have written about the impact of globalization on
local urban environments, highlighting the social and economic exclusion of those
living in slums on the outskirts of many world cities (Aas 2013; Davis 2006; Sassen
2001; Wacquant 2008). In the view of many, there now exist numerous “dual cities”
across the globe, reflecting the social polarization of the privileged elite and the
marginalized city residents.

International data show a concentration of homicides and other violent and
non-violent crimes in urban centers. At the same time, recent studies to better
understand the relationship between urbanization and crime and violence seem to
indicate that urbanization in itself may have a positive effect on the peacefulness of



                                                                             PART 1: CRIME, POVERTY AND THE POLICE
                               a country due to a range of potentially positive factors, such as greater economic
                               opportunities and access to services in urban centers (IEP 2015). The data, however,
                               also indicate that high levels of urbanization are associated with poor scores for
                               societal safety and security when rule of law is weak and intergroup grievances
                               and income inequality are high. These studies point to the need to address these
                               issues to counter crime in a holistic manner.




14




     Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
5.	Understanding the Scope of Crime in Context


  As noted above, crime and violence vary across regions and countries, within a
  country and locality, and across time. Understanding where a specific type of crime
  occurs, as well as its perpetrators and victims, is essential for developing effective
  response systems. One of the issues many of the Bank’s client countries face is
  that reliable crime data to inform programming choices are difficult to obtain, so
  programming to support the development of such data can be a helpful entry
  point (see box 4).

  When local data are scarce or of variable reliability, international data sets can be
  a good place to start in understanding the crime and violence issues that need to
  be addressed. Among the most widely used international crime data are homicide
  data published by WHO and UNODC. UNODC’s 2013 Global Study on Homicides
  provides a good overview of homicides across the globe and a valuable account of
  the usefulness and limitations of these data for the development of interventions.


                                                                                                                       15
    BOX 4 – Jamaica: Inner City Basic Services for the Poor

    This World Bank project supported the Ministry of National Security (MNS) in building a crime observatory
    to monitor crime levels throughout Kingston. At the time of project completion, the observatory was
    tracking crime and violence data for four key incidence types in five parishes and was beginning to cross
    validate the data. This information has since been used to inform prevention and enforcement activities
    and to engage communities in prevention processes.
    Source: World Bank 2014d.




  LIMITS OF NATIONAL DATA
  It is important to recognize that national-level data are rarely helpful in designing
  local-level interventions. The type and scope of crimes, offenders, and victims
  vary across neighborhoods and require targeted approaches. Even the seemingly
  straightforward “homicide” category requires further analysis to inform response
  options. For example, in their recent study of homicide trends, Alvazzi del Frate
  and Mugellini (2012, 148) report that in countries with relatively low homicide
  rates (for example, in various European and Asian countries), homicides related
  to intimate partners or within relatively small groups or communities, such as
  families, workplaces, or apartment block buildings, tend to dominate. Homicides
  related to property crime (robbery, burglary, theft) are often opportunistic and
  tend to appear more frequently in countries with greater income inequality. Finally,
  homicides connected to gangs and organized crime are increasing the fastest and
  are significantly higher in countries in Central and South America than those in
  Asia or Europe, for example (Geneva Declaration Secretariat of 2011 as cited in
  Alvazzi del Frate and Mugellini 2012, 148).




                                                                               PART 1: CRIME, POVERTY AND THE POLICE
                                        All of these international data sets and studies rely on officially reported crimes,
                                        that is, crimes that were reported to or detected by the police. In most countries,
                                        however, including in the developed world, only a fraction of crimes actually
                                        committed are reported to the police. In an attempt to shed more light on crime
                                        and victimization in different countries, the ICVS has been conducted six times
                                        over the period 1989–2010 in more than 80 countries in different regions of
                                        the world, including many Bank client countries (van Kesteren, van Dijk, and
                                        Mayhew 2014). Most of the samples in the developing world are city-based5 and
                                        the method is not without its critics (i.e., the scope of crimes included is limited,
                                        respondents may not recap the crime events properly, etc.). As a result, the ICVS
                                        results cannot be used as reliable estimates of the true extent of property and
                                        violent victimization across the world but are nevertheless useful as an indicator
                                        of respondents’ perceptions of the seriousness of crime and neighborhood
                                        safety, reporting behavior, and satisfaction with the police. Moreover, the ICVS is
                                        probably also the most useful source available on the rates at which crimes are
                                        reported to the police. The survey results indicate that globally, fewer than half
                                        of conventional crimes (excluding homicide) are reported to the police by victims
                                        (40 percent). The rates also show considerable variation across world regions;
                                        the rate is roughly twice as high in Western developed countries than in developing
                                        or transition countries (van Dijk 2008, 20).


                                        IMPORTANT ISSUE: VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN
16
                                        There is less confidence especially in the accuracy of what is known about the
                                        extent and nature of violence against women. At the same time, even the limited
                                        data available indicate that this is one of the most pressing problems facing
                                        many parts of the world, independent of the country income level, with many
                                        implications for development overall. Since the UN Resolution on Abuses against
                                        Women and Children was adopted in 1982, global efforts have been made to
                                        collect more information on violence against women. A 2013 WHO report with
                                        global data on the prevalence of violence against women indicated that overall, 35
                                        percent of women worldwide experienced either physical and/or sexual violence
                                        by a partner or non-partner, and there are many other forms of violence to which
                                        women may be exposed. The hidden nature of gender-based violence makes it
                                        difficult to measure its prevalence, and this is even more the case in a comparative
                                        context (Kangaspunta and Marshall 2012). The International Violence against
                                        Women Survey (IVAWS), which was designed to assess this specific issue, used
                                        standardized surveys in Australia, Costa Rica, Czech Republic, Denmark, Greece,
                                        Hong Kong, Italy, Mozambique, the Philippines, Poland, and Switzerland. It found
                                        that in 2003 and 2005 (the last time these data were collected), between 35 and
                                        60 percent of women in surveyed countries experienced violence by a man during
                                        their lifetime (and between 22 and 40 percent experienced intimate partner
                                        violence), with the highest levels reported in Australia, Costa Rica, Czech Republic,
                                        and Mozambique, countries with very different income levels. It is noteworthy
                                        that less than one-third of the women reported their victimization to the police
                                        (Kangaspunta and Marshall 2014, 5,104–17).




     5	 For example, Buenos Aires, La Paz, Beijing, Bogata, Cairo, Mumbai (Bombay), Lagos, Panama, Seoul, Kampala, and Dar es Salaam.




     Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
  BOX 5 – The Cost of Violence Against Women in the European Union (EU)

  The hidden nature of gender based violence, especially domestic violence, makes the development of
  meaningful cost estimates difficult. Using a quite comprehensive estimation methodology, a 2014 study
  estimated that the cost of gender-based violence against women to the EU was €225,837,418,768—
  a staggering amount for any economy and especially devastating for the less-affluent countries and
  population groups.
  Source: EIGE 2014.




To understand the full impact of gender-based violence on development, it is
important to recognize that although women face dangers at home, they also
face harassment, abuse, and violence in many public and community settings,
such as school or the workplace, or simply while shopping for food or carrying out
other everyday activities. Local police services need to reflect the extent to which
women are especially vulnerable to violent victimization, as does donor support
and Bank programming.




                                                                                                                   17




                                                                           PART 1: CRIME, POVERTY AND THE POLICE
     6.	 Systems of Social Control and
         the Importance of Law Enforcement

                                 In order for any group to live together in a more or less orderly fashion, there
                                 is a need for conformity to social norms (including legal norms). Every society,
                                 small or large, has a way to make sure that most people follow most of the rules
                                 most of the time, particularly those that are essential to life and property. Here,
                                 the generic term “social control” is used to refer to the capacity of a group to
                                 regulate itself (through rules and sanctions). Internalized (i.e., conscience) and
                                 informal social control is the glue that holds all societies together. Informal social
                                 control exists when the sanctions for norm-violating behavior are given by other
                                 members of the social group: friends, parents, neighbors, or bystanders (through
                                 expressions of approval, shaming, punishment, and exclusion). A society cannot
                                 survive without informal social control. The predominance of informal social control
                                 is more typical of traditional and less-developed communities, but this type of
                                 control remains crucial in all societies, including the most advanced nations of the
                                 world. In many impoverished communities, delinquency, disorder, and crime often
                                 flourish because individuals, families, and communities lack the capacity to sustain
                                 informal social control.
18

                                 When this informal control fails to restrain people from getting involved in
                                 undesirable behavior, there a need to rely on the more formal variant. Formal
                                 social control implies that formalized rules are set, and sanctions (punishments
                                 and rewards) are imposed by a specifically designated authority, primarily the
                                 government. Formal social control, in the form of state law (with the police as
                                 primary enforcer) is becoming more important in many countries today as the
                                 informal social control mechanisms deteriorate, in part due to increased migration
                                 to urban centers and the breakdown of larger family units and community networks
                                 in a fast-changing, globalizing world.


                                 SOCIAL CONTROL AND SOCIAL DISORGANIZATION
                                 There are a number of social and criminological theories, particularly the control
                                 and the social disorganization theories that are connecting poverty and crime
                                 to community social disorganization and a lack of effective community-initiated
                                 change. Individual social capital is often depleted, while there is an ever-present
                                 need for increased community social cohesion and a lack of access to even basic
                                 government services, including police services. Social cohesion refers to community
                                 bonds that at once give neighbors a “community” identity and condition their
                                 interactions, which serve as informal social controls inhibiting deviance, crime, and
                                 violence, especially among local youth. Individuals’ sense that they have the ability
                                 to influence their own lives often comes from community bonds, which link them
                                 to pro-social normative behavior. Persistent and structural poverty decreases the
                                 level of pro-social social cohesion, which in turn lessens collective efficacy (i.e., the
                                 capacity of the community to exercise informal social control).

                                 As a result, these communities must rely on secondary agents of social control,
                                 like the police, to help establish orderly community processes. If the police are
                                 absent, compromised, and/or not trusted, an enforcement gap exists that poor



       Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
communities can often address only by turning to local vigilante groups, frequently
criminal gangs. Isolated and marginalized communities thus often must confront
what might be called “underground” social control processes, imposed by gangs
and other criminal enterprises to serve as the arbiters of social order, even when
those groups are violent and inconsistent in their application of “street order”
(Manwaring 2007). In what has become a landmark study in social disorganization,
Kornhauser (1978, 66) found that in socially disorganized communities, “a
delinquent-criminal organization arises and persists as a semi-autonomous
system, with its own culture and a well-knit social structure.” Such findings are
supported in the research of Anderson (1999) and Kirk and Papachristos (2011) in
the United States, where neighborhood cultures born in social disadvantage and
disorganization give rise to persistent violence.

At an individual level, social control theory states that individuals abstain from
crime and conform to social norms because of bonds formed through attachment
to peers and family, commitment to school and work, involvement in conventional
activities, and belief in societal rules and morals (Hirschi 1969). Those with strong
bonds are more likely to care about and adhere to normative expectations of
behavior. When bonds are weak or nonexistent, individuals are free to violate the
rules of society. Control theories have been widely tested within the United States
and elsewhere, and results tend to confirm that stronger social bonds reduce
the frequency and severity of delinquency (Hoeve et al. 2012; Chui and Chan
2012; Junger-Tas et al. 2012; Shechory and Laufer 2008; Ozbay and Ozcan 2008;
                                                                                                                    19
Chamratrithirong et al. 2013; Hartjen and Kethineni 1999).

At the neighborhood level, social disorganization theory (Shaw and McKay 1942)
suggests that structural characteristics affect a community’s ability to exercise
informal social control. Community-level problem solving is impeded by factors
such as concentrated disadvantage, residential mobility, and ethnic heterogeneity
(Bruinsma et al. 2013; Messner et al. 2013; Steenbeck and Hipp 2011). Socially
disorganized neighborhoods experience higher rates of crime, which makes
citizens feel threatened and fearful, leading them to withdraw and further hindering
the ability of communities to exercise social control. Social disorganization theory
too has been supported by numerous studies conducted across the globe and has
demonstrated that the effects of structural characteristics operate in similar ways
within very different cultures. In Guangzhou, China, for example, citizens living in
neighborhoods with higher levels of residential instability and poverty perceived
higher levels of neighborhood property crime (Jiang, Land, and Wang 2013).
Studies in Latin America demonstrate the especially powerful effects of social
disorganization in producing crime. Although neighborhoods in Latin American
countries tend to have particularly high levels of social cohesion and would thus be
expected to be able to maintain social control, disorganized neighborhoods still
experience higher rates of violent crime despite their very dense social networks
(Villarreal and Silva 2006).


COLLECTIVE EFFICACY
Importantly, social disorganization theory has been expanded to include the
concept of collective efficacy as the mediating process between structural social
disorganization in neighborhoods and increased levels of crime and disorder
(Sampson, et al. 1997). Collective efficacy is defined as the shared power of a
group of connected and engaged individuals to influence the maintenance of
public order. When the police work to form community and social partnerships to



                                                                            PART 1: CRIME, POVERTY AND THE POLICE
                               address the effects of social disorganization, they can help foster the development
                               of collective efficacy and social capital, resulting in far-reaching effects. Even within
                               poorer developing countries like Trinidad and Tobago, higher levels of collective
                               efficacy are associated with more positive views toward police services and greater
                               perceived institutional legitimacy (Kochel 2012).

                               Lederman, Loayza, and Menendez (2002) examined measures of social capital and
                               the incidence of homicide in 39 different developed and developing countries.
                               Their results indicated that a sense of trust among community members was most
                               strongly associated with lower rates of homicide, even while controlling for such
                               factors as income inequality and economic growth. Although various dynamics,
                               such as concentrated disadvantage, residential mobility, and ethnic heterogeneity,
                               tend to impede the ability and desire of citizens to develop close relationships with
                               one another and with local institutions, police departments that form collaborative
                               partnerships with neighborhoods are able to help foster relationships, cooperation,
                               and investment in communities (Choi and Choi 2012; Pino 2001) and can therefore
                               help reduce the negative effects of social disorganization.




20




     Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
7.	 Reformulating the Role of the Police
    – Potential for Investment

  First and foremost, the police must protect communities from violence, crime, and
  disorder, but do so in a way that respects the rule of law. In addition to protecting,
  the local police can and sometimes do play an important role in assisting socially
  disorganized communities to build social capital and collective efficacy, though
  this often requires a reformulation of police functioning in these communities from
  almost exclusively managing risk and exercising control to emphasizing community
  development values. Although police are well positioned within communities to
  take on these tasks, it is often a substantial role change for the police and is not
  easily achieved.

  It is important to note that the lack of police services in poor and marginalized
  communities is not always due to the absence of funding but rather to the dearth of
  appropriate policing approaches. In many places, a shift in policies and resources
  from a police force that only engages with communities if called to a crime scene—
  if they come at all—to one that is embedded in the communities it serves and
  connected to other service providers could make a substantial difference without
                                                                                                                        21
  significantly increasing resource needs.



  FIGURE 5.	 Police Services
               (Community Oriented Policing, Problem Oriented Policing, Restorative Justice)

                                            S
                                            O
                                            C
                                            I
   Marginalized Urban Communities           A
                                            L

   -	 Poverty, Stress,                      D                                         Crime
                                            I
                                                 Weak Informal Control
      Lack of Opportunities                 S                                         Disorder
                                            O    Low Social Cohesion &
   -	 Weak Local Institutions
                                            R    Social Integration                   Fear of Crime
      (School, Churches, Voluntary          G
      Associations, Businesses, etc.)       A    Low Collective Efficay               Lack of Community Development
                                            N
                                            I
                                            Z
                                            A
     INTERVENTION                           T
                                            I
                                            O
                                            N
   Police Services (COP, POP, RJ)

   -	 Strengthen local leadership                  increase informal social control, social cohesion,
   -	 Strengthen local institutions                social integration, collective efficacy
   -	 increase community involvement


   -	 Strengthen belief in police legiti-          increase normative compliance (conformity
      macy (procedural justice)                    because belief in the normative power of the law)




                                                                                PART 1: CRIME, POVERTY AND THE POLICE
                               Figure 5 diagrams the relationships between crime, poverty, social disorder, and
                               police interventions. Marginalized urban communities suffer from many social and
                               economic ailments, have weak local social institutions, and are underserved by the
                               state in many aspects. Such conditions are characteristic of social disorganization,
                               leaving these communities with weak social controls, minimal social cohesion
                               and social integration, and low collective efficacy, and leaving them also ripe for
                               increased crime and disorder, a heightened fear of crime, and a weaker ability
                               to implement community development efforts. Improved police services aimed
                               at strengthening local community leadership, social institutions, and community
                               involvement in social control can help overcome community social cohesion and
                               collective efficacy problems. What is more, as shown in figure 5, these efforts can
                               strengthen the interactions between communities and their police, increase the fair
                               and impartial administration of the law, and improve community assessments of
                               the legitimacy of the law and the police, which in turn helps to increase conformity
                               to the law within the community.


                               NEW MODELS OF POLICING,
                               FROM TRADITIONAL TO COMMUNITY ORIENTED
                               Over the past 20 years, alternative models to traditional policing have emerged
                               and set the stage for improving police and community interactions as well as
                               solving persistent community crime and disorder problems. These models, known
                               as community and problem-solving policing, have been advanced to overcome
22
                               three important problems of traditional policing: 1) police disengagement from
                               the communities they protect, 2) police inefficiency in dealing with persistent
                               crime and disorder problems, and 3) the challenge of creating an organizational
                               and service delivery model that is transparent and accountable. At the same time,
                               models of restorative justice have also emerged that provide additional support
                               for helping individuals and communities to increase social cohesion and heal
                               community and individual injury. Importantly, these approaches seek to improve
                               community resistance to criminality and resilience against criminal victimization.

                               Assuming that police are even serving poor communities, which is not always
                               the case even in parts of U.S. cities, the policing practices applied frequently
                               do not address the particular needs of poor neighborhoods. Table 1 compares
                               and contrasts traditional policing with that of community-oriented, problem-
                               solving, and restorative justice approaches, outlining the major differences across
                               these models and how each model contributes (or not) to improved community
                               engagement, increased problem-solving efficiency, and police transparency and
                               accountability.


                               TRADITIONAL NOTIONS OF POLICING
                               On the matter of civic engagement and inclusion, the police have often embraced
                               a military or professional ideology about their work that has tended to exclude
                               their clientele from ongoing discussions about crime, justice, and police responses.
                               Such social distancing of the police effectively cuts them off from those whom
                               they are expected to protect and serve. There are many reasons why and how
                               the police have distanced themselves from their publics, which has the collective
                               effect of fostering and sustaining distrust of the police by the public and the public
                               by the police. One important reason is associated with their institutional sensitivity
                               about their acceptance within the community, and especially with regard to any
                               real or perceived challenges to their authority. This view often leads the police



     Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
to avoid meaningful interactions with their communities as much as possible,
and where they must act, they do so authoritatively. This wariness of community
criticism and distrust of community attitudes toward law enforcement frequently
leads the police to withdraw into an internal police culture that is suspicious of
outsiders and committed to supporting fellow officers, almost to a fault. It is also
a culture that will use force, even violent force, to maintain respect for the law and
especially the police (Chevigny 1995).

A second factor is associated with police deployment practices. When police
become more distant from the public as a result of patrolling in cars and not on
foot, for example, and responding to disturbances by simply taking a crime reports
instead of engaging with community members, they will not gain an understanding
of community problems and be in a position to propose response options that aim
at prevention. This is further exacerbated by patrol deployment procedures that
frequently rotate police through different community settings, resulting in little
understanding or ownership of the communities they police. This state of affairs
greatly resembles the role of an occupying army, emphasizing control and oversight
rather than support and problem solving. Ineffective police deployment practices
can be made worse by a nation’s inability or failure to pay salaries high enough to
attract and retain qualified officers. In countries such as Afghanistan, Ghana, and
Belize, low salaries generally lead to very high rates of attrition and turnover, thus
obstructing the ability of officers to forge close relationships with members of the
communities (Aning 2006; From et al. 2010; Hanson, Warchol, and Zupan 2004)
                                                                                                                     23
while also inviting corruption. Police who do not trust or have little knowledge
of the communities they serve are likely to be ineffective in addressing crime or
other problems in any meaningful way. Absent solid community connections, it
is not surprising that the police often fail to meet the needs and expectations
of local communities, particularly the more severe needs of disenfranchised and
marginalized communities.



  BOX 6 – A Different Use of Data – Results-Based Financing of Police

  In a remote village in South Kivu in the Democratic Republic of Congo, using a notebook, a local
  policeman keeps track of his patrols, the people he has assisted and the arrests he has made. Once
  a month this notebook is sent to the provincial capital, where a local nongovernmental organization
  (NGO) compiles the notes into a database. Local communities then check the data, verifying whether
  the policeman really did patrol the mentioned areas and whether he behaved correctly and lawfully
  toward the citizens. Based on the verified data, a donor agency then pays his police station according
  to agreed-upon indicators.
  Source: Cordaid 2015.




A third area that generally requires improvement is the ability of police to provide
crime, disorder, and other social support services that actually address community
problems. All too often, the organizational delivery system impedes effective
police services in places where the outcomes of police interventions are most
valued. This mismatch between police delivery systems and the results achieved
occurs on several levels. If not focused on community inclusion, technology-driven
reforms can further undermine the provision of effective police services.



                                                                             PART 1: CRIME, POVERTY AND THE POLICE
                               Police systems in many parts of the world still emulate military organizational and
                               command and controls structures (see table 1). Such police interventions have
                               largely been reactive to social and criminal problems, responding to problems
                               once alerted either by the community or by police officers on the street and
                               then withdrawing and awaiting other calls for assistance to emerge. Under such
                               circumstances, the police have resembled a revolving door response to many
                               urban crime and disorder problems; they arrive, quell the problem for the moment,
                               and leave, only to return as the problem resurfaces and then repeat the cycle
                               (Goldstein 1990). Rarely do the police actually address the underlying conditions,
                               giving rise to repeat calls for police services. Especially in countries emerging from
                               conflict, where the primary source of recruits for police service is ex-soldiers or
                               where the military still has a key role in keeping the peace, creating a different,
                               more effective approach is not easy but is often sorely needed.


                               ALTERNATIVE APPROACHES
                               Taken together, these dynamics—the inability of local police to engage with their
                               communities for the common purpose of community safety and civic protection,
                               as well as their inadequate service delivery system, which is effort rather than
                               results oriented—have led to the development of two alternative police models
                               to address the shortcomings of traditional policing systems. The first is community
                               policing, which is centered on civic engagement, and the second is problem-
                               solving policing, which is focused on thinking more deeply and analytically about
24
                               community problems with a view to addressing persistent calls for service by finding
                               and ameliorating their underlying common cause. Both methods are currently
                               being implemented. For example, Singapore has shifted its police services to a
                               Neighborhood Policing Center model, emphasizing the integration of community
                               and problem-oriented policing. As Brogden and Nijhar (2005, 93–96) report, such
                               shifts were meant to 1) increase police proactive problem solving in neighborhood
                               settings, 2) increase police sensitivity to local social contexts, 3) increase police
                               ownership for local crime and disorder problems, and 4) provide more direct
                               service to victims of crime.


                               COMMUNITY POLICING: CENTRAL TENETS
                               Community policing is centrally focused on improving civic engagement as well
                               as the transparency of the police in community settings. The central tenets of
                               community policing include establishing beat integrity (maintaining the same
                               officers in patrol areas over time), increasing police-public interaction and
                               exchange, and building and combining resources and information to address
                               community problems more systematically with the police in partnership with other
                               civic, government, and private agencies. Here, policing is seen as a broadly cast
                               enterprise, where civic leaders, other government service providers, the police,
                               and interested private agencies come together to increase public safety, reduce
                               fear of crime, and improve police-community relationships. Community policing
                               is also about moving the police toward better use of discretion as shaped by the
                               rule of law. At its core, community policing is about improving police legitimacy
                               in communities where it may be in question, a theme that is directly connected
                               to respecting community needs and problems and working collaboratively to
                               solve them. The key elements of community policing include community crime
                               prevention; patrol deployment for nonemergency interaction with the community;
                               active solicitation by police of requests for public service; and the provision
                               of opportunities for feedback from the communities about police operations
                               (Bayley 1984).


     Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
TABLE 1.	From Traditional to Inclusive, Problem-Oriented Policing (Adapted from Greene 2000)


 SOCIAL/INTERACTION
                                                                             PROBLEM-ORIENTED
 OR STRUCTURAL         TRADITIONAL POLICING      COMMUNITY POLICING                                  RESTORATIVE JUSTICE
                                                                             POLICING
 DIMENSION

 Focus of policing     Law enforcement           Community building          Law, order, harm,       Restoring community
                       and aggressive order      through crime               and fear problems       sense of order and
                       maintenance               prevention, harm and        eliminated or reduced   safety
                                                 fear reduction

 Forms of              Reactive, based on        Proactive, using            Mixed on                Proactive, seeking the
 intervention and      criminal law; proactive   criminal and                criminal, civil, and    reconciliation between
 deployment            in aggressive police      administrative law,         administrative law,     victim, offender, and
                       practice, crime           engaging partners           trying to solve or      community to increase
                       attack focus, rotated     to address local            mediate persistent      social cohesion
                       deployment                community needs,            problems, local
                                                 local deployment            deployment

 Range of police       Narrow crime focus        Broad crime, order          Narrow to broad         Broad, seeking to
 activities                                      fear, and quality-of-life   problem focus,          address harm and
                                                 focus                       depending on            accountability in a less
                                                                             problem                 threatening way

 Level of discretion    High and often           High and accountable        High and primarily      Intermediate but
 and accountability at unaccountable             to community                accountable to the      accountable to             25
 the line-officer level                                                      stakeholders.           victims, offenders, and
                                                                                                     communities

 Focus of police       Inward, distancing        Outward, building           Mixed, depending on     Externally focused on
 culture               the community and         partnerships                problem, but analysis   other groups in the
                       external others                                       focused                 healing process

 Locus of decision     Police directed,          Community-police            Varied, police- and     Community directed,
 making                minimizing the            co-production, joint        community-identified    with other agencies
                       involvement of others     responsibility and          problems                leading, police
                                                 assessment                                          following

 Communication flow Downward from                Horizontal between          Horizontal between      Upward from the
                    police to community          police and community        police and community    community to the
                    (asymmetric)                 (balanced)                  partners (balanced)     police (asymmetric)

 Range of community Low and passive              Intermediate and            Mixed, depending on     High and active
 involvement                                     active                      problem set

 Linkage with other    Poor and intermittent     High participation and High participation and Highly integrative
 agencies                                        integration with other integrative, depending across agencies serving
                                                 agencies               on the problem set     the same community

 Type of               Centralized command       Decentralized with          Decentralized, with     Highly decentralized,
 organizational        and control, low          community linkage,          local accountability    high accountability and
 accountability and    accountability and        accountability, and         and higher legitimacy   legitimacy
 legitimacy            legitimacy                legitimacy

 Measurement of        Arrest and crime rates,   Varied: crime, calls for    Varied, problems        Community reparation,
 success               particularly serious      service, fear reduction,    solved, minimized,      community social
                       crime                     community social            displaced, or           cohesion, fear
                                                 cohesion                    improved, and           reduction
                                                                             community quality of
                                                                             life enhanced




                                                                                     PART 1: CRIME, POVERTY AND THE POLICE
                                As shown in table 1, from an organizational perspective, community policing
                                involves opening police organizations and their policy apparatus to external
                                comment and review. It engages the “customer” of police services in a public safety
                                dialogue, while at the same time mandates that the police engage the community
                                rather than stand at a distance. For many, it is an overarching organizational
                                philosophy or strategy that identifies the police as part of and not apart from the
                                broader civic body. It also defines policing as a public service and collective good,
                                requiring police lawfulness and inclusiveness. For the most part, community and
                                problem-oriented policing have been widely adopted in the West, but aspects of
                                these police models have also migrated to many other parts of the world.



      BOX 7– Four Building Blocks for Community-Oriented Policing:

      1.	 Neighborhoods or small communities should serve as locations of police organization and operation.

      2.	 Urban policing should be organized and conducted at the community or neighborhood level.

      3.	 Police should work with communities to identify and respond to the unique and distinctive
          neighborhood problems that conventional police organizations and responses do not address.

      4.	 Community consensus should guide police response to the community’s law and order problems.
26    Source: Neild 2000.




                               PROBLEM-SOLVING POLICING IN URBAN NEIGHBORHOODS
                               Problems of crime, violence, and disorder have numerous roots, and certainly
                               the police are not responsible for most of them. Nonetheless, the police can be
                               seen as a key frontline government agency that has ongoing contact with local
                               communities, thereby creating government awareness of the needs and problems
                               at the community level. From this perspective, the police can play an important
                               advocacy and coordination role to assist others who bring non-police expertise to
                               bear on community problems. An important aspect of community and problem-
                               solving policing is building networks of partnerships for coordinated and more
                               substantive community intervention (see figure 6).

                               As early as 1979, Herman Goldstein called attention to the police failure to
                               understand the consequences (ends) of policing because of the usual concentration
                               on the efforts of the police (means). This means-ends inversion leaves the police
                               in a position of focusing on what they do rather than on what their efforts achieve,
                               such as solving or mediating community violence, crime, and disorder problems or
                               conversely producing community distrust of the police.

                               As an alternative to this means-ends inversion, the problem-solving model was
                               developed in the United States by the Police Foundation in collaboration with
                               police departments (Eck and Spellman 1987). This model provides police officers
                               with a series of questions and protocols that require more than a superficial
                               assessment of community problems and their genesis. The problem-solving
                               model emphasizes Scanning–Analysis–Response–Assessment (SARA) as the most




     Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
appropriate way to address persistent community safety problems. Although the
SARA model has been modified and improved over the years, its central features
have remained constant and are presented in figure 6 below.




FIGURE 6.	 The Police Problem-Solving Model




                     SCANNING
           Identify the Problem
          Describe the Problem
                                       1                                     4          ASSESSING RESULTS
                                                                                        Process Evaluation
                                                                                        Impact Evaluation
                                                                                        New Problem Assessment



                    ANALYSIS
     Identify Persons Involved
              Document Scope                                                            SCANNING
            Determine Causes                                                            Collaborate on Solutions
    Describe Physical Setting &
                Social Context         2                                     3          Community Involvement
                                                                                        Action Plan
                                                                                                                               27




                                           Source: Office of Community Oriented Policing Services, U.S Department of Justice




The problem-solving model of policing has been widely applied across most of
North America and Europe, as well as in several Asian countries and Australia
and New Zealand. The generalizability of this model across police and legal
systems is stressed to the extent that the model accommodates a wide array of
institutional and legal differences. In essence, the SARA problem-solving model
is the application of the scientific method to social problems and as such, it
adapts to differing social and legal systems. It is not a “one-size fits all” approach,
however; rather, it encourages the tailoring of solutions and interventions to the
problems encountered. The SARA model is not without its problems, especially
those associated with implementation in police agencies. All too often, the police,
seeking to address immediate problems, skip steps in the process or accomplish
them in less than a rigorous manner. This has led to concerns about “shallow
problem solving” (Braga and Bond 2008), that is, employing the “spirit” of the
process without its depth and structure. Nonetheless, by adopting a problem-
solving posture in law enforcement agencies, the police begin to actually focus
on addressing persistent community problems. Police responses to crime and
other safety problems are slowly transformed from reactionary or reflexive to more
analytic, thoughtful, and problem specific.




                                                                                PART 1: CRIME, POVERTY AND THE POLICE
     8.	 The Value Added of
         the New Approaches to Policing

                                 Although research on community policing shows some mixed results,
                                 improvements in police-community interactions and community satisfaction with
                                 the police are consistently found, as are reductions in fear of crime and disorderly
                                 behavior and in some cases, increased officer job satisfaction (Bayley19891994
                                 ; Brogden and Nijhar 2005; Chan 1997; Deosaran 2002; Feltes 2002; Manning
                                 1998; Mackenzie and Henry 2009; Shearing 1998; Moore 1992; Punch, van der
                                 Vijver, and Zoomer 2002; Neild 2000; Skogan and Hartnett 1999; Skolnick and
                                 Bayley 1988a, 1988b). The general aspects of community policing appear to have
                                 an ameliorative influence on police and public relations, perhaps setting the stage
                                 for improved problem solving. Community policing has not been associated with
                                 significant declines in crime necessarily but has succeeded in creating a police-
                                 public environment that will allow for this issue to be more successfully tackled in
                                 the long run.

                                 In contrast to community policing, problem-solving policing has been associated
                                 with 1) reducing specific crime types in specific places, 2) lessening the impact of
28
                                 crimes when they do occur, and 3) increasing the time between crime occurrences
                                 (Bullock and Tilley 2003; Skogan and Frydl 2004; Eck 2006; Braga 2014). Problem
                                 solving achieves these results due to its focus on discrete crimes in discrete places
                                 and to the way it focuses on the police role. Problem solving is also evidence based,
                                 in that it first measures the underlying dynamics of problems in community settings
                                 and then the results of police interventions to address these problems. Coupled
                                 with community policing, problem solving forms the basis of a coordinated police
                                 intervention system that 1) engages those affected by crime and disorder with
                                 the police to 2) focus on particularly persistent or troublesome crimes in clearly
                                 defined community settings. Community policing often sets the stage for problem
                                 solving in that both require the active engagement and trust of the community.

                                 Ideas imbedded in community policing suggest that people residing in close
                                 proximity to local institutions (schools, churches, and so forth) become the
                                 structures upon which social control is actually built. In this regard, communities
                                 have imbedded within them social mores and norms of behavior that guide and
                                 shape resident behaviors. In matters of social control, communities are the first
                                 line of defense against social disorder and crime. The power of community-based,
                                 informal social control is often latent, hidden from immediate public view but
                                 important in shaping and controlling community social life (Black 2014).


                                 POLICE AS FORMAL SOCIAL CONTROL ON THE COMMUNITY LEVEL
                                 The police should be taken as the second line of social control in communities, that
                                 is, the formal aspect of social control. Rarely are the police as intimately engaged
                                 in communities as are members of that community, yet they do have important
                                 observations and information about community life. When the police remain in
                                 communities over time, their understanding of community dynamics deepens and
                                 becomes more actionable. This can be seen as part of an acculturation experience
                                 for the police, who are learning the norms and mores of the community so that



       Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
they can engage with it on its own terms. This is in recognition of the fact that the
police must understand the nature, structure, and dynamics of that community
if they are to be effective and accepted. In this case, understanding the social
context is of prime importance for the police.

In part, police legitimacy comes from understanding the internal dynamics of
communities. The police must at once enforce the law and support the local
community ethos, most often strengthening and supporting those norms and
values that stress pro-social behavior as well as acceptance and adherence to
the law. Discussions of police legitimacy focus on how the community and its
residents perceive the police and their interventions. Where the police are viewed
as even handed and “fair” in the application of the law, communities can support
and affirm their interventions. Where such actions are perceived to be arbitrary
and unevenly applied, community support for the police recedes (Tyler 2006). As
previously suggested, absent such community acceptance, the police become
more like a standing army or external oversight process for the community,
often producing alienation from law enforcement and the law. This is a delicate
balance that cannot be over-emphasized. For the police to support community
development and informal social control, they must be seen as a legitimate source
of authority and service in that community. Although in some places the police
do manage communities through “fear,” they frequently lose community support,
leading these communities to revert to being dominated by crime and disorder
absent clear normative connections between the police and the public.
                                                                                                                    29

All communities are not the same, however. Crime-ridden districts require police
to reassert control before community building can occur. In Brazil’s community
pacification program, for example, police often engaged in pitched battles with
gangs for control of favelas that had been crime ridden for generations (Riccio
et al. 2013). Community pacification was a necessary component to enable a
community support and development environment to emerge. The Grupamento
Policial em Areas Especiais (Special Areas Police Group, GPAE) was created to
address the situation and remove the perception that the government was turning
a blind eye to the problem and therefore contributing to it. This mechanism of crisis
control was intended to reduce levels of crime and gang violence, and the police
originally sought to form positive relationships with citizens, reduce instances of
police abuse, and form social partnerships to address community problems (Da
Silva and Cano 2007). Residents in these favelas also recognized the changed
safety climate and responded accordingly. The police, however, withdrew too
early which impacted community trust negatively since it was felt the police were
withdrawing their commitment to safety in these communities (Riccio et al. 2013).

Typically, communication between the police and the public is asymmetric,
with the police generally talking more at than with the public. Redressing this
imbalance can improve the nature of the communication, as well as how the police
and the public view one another. Over time, if the police make efforts to talk to
people they know, respect, and trust, some of the barriers they face in conflicted
and marginalized communities can dissipate. This is a long and complicated
process, however, especially in urban communities that are experiencing rapid
migration. Nonetheless, a police service that regularly interacts with community
residents is less likely to violate the rights of individuals in that community; in
these cases, familiarity breeds a degree of civility, demonstrating the affinity
between community policing and the deepening of the rule of law (Mastrofski and
Greene 1993).



                                                                            PART 1: CRIME, POVERTY AND THE POLICE
                               Police engagement with civic leaders and their respective organizations also
                               magnifies the relationships between informal and formal social control. In most
                               communities, even those with complex problems, social institutions such as the
                               local church or other civic organizations become anchors for re-establishing
                               community viability and longer-term trust in the law and the police. As part of
                               such engagement, police often work with trusted community leaders to conduct
                               community meetings to discuss local problems, in order to, consistent with the
                               goal of problem solving, strategize the sources of these problems and how they
                               might be addressed. Here, the focus is on further building community trust in
                               the police by engaging the community and its informal leadership. These kinds
                               of activities are often not routine for the police, however, who have frequently
                               been independent authorities in matters of local crime and justice. By engaging
                               the community in such a discourse, the police must ultimately share authority
                               over community problems and what should be done to address them. For such
                               engagement to work, police will need training and support in building community
                               coalitions and in sharing power with the community over local definitions of crime
                               and disorder and the sources of community problems.


                               ROOTS OF CRIME REFLECT OTHER SOCIAL ILLS
                               Communities that struggle with disorder and crime invariably struggle with other
                               economic, employment, social, educational, health, and mental health issues as
                               well. Studies of poverty, inequality, and marginalization (Bhalla and Lapeyre 2004)
30
                               have repeatedly concluded that such communities suffer from numerous social,
                               economic, and political engagement issues. Although it is clear that the police do
                               not have a legal mandate or the resources to address all community problems,
                               they are often the first government actors in communities who can direct or
                               refer residents to other government services for assistance, and they ultimately
                               coordinate with such agencies to improve individual, family, and community agency
                               and social cohesion. Moreover, understanding an issue like violent crime from a
                               medical, social welfare, social interventionist, public health, and legal perspective
                               sheds light on possible government interventions to address the problem. It might
                               be said that though the manifestations of violence and crime have serious legal
                               implications, the roots of these problems typically lie elsewhere.

                               Marshalling the support of other government and private sector agencies, which,
                               more often than not, are also focused on improving marginalized and isolated
                               communities, can greatly assist the police and the community in improving
                               social cohesion and community order. Today, policing is often carried out by
                               law enforcement agencies in partnership with numerous civic, governmental,
                               and private organizations. Especially when access to other government services,
                               such as health, social services, and so on, are scarce, this civic-police partnership
                               provides for more effective service delivery overall. The police can accelerate the
                               connections they have with external agencies and organizations by building a
                               community matrix of service providers and having regular meetings to understand
                               the dynamics behind troubled individuals, families, and locations.

                               Such arrangements require some reorganization and reinvention of government
                               services from being independent of one another to being problem focused,
                               with individuals, families, and communities as potential targets for intervention.
                               Community and problem-oriented policing strategies can be seen as a subset of a
                               larger problem-solving government movement (Emerson, Nabatch, and Balough




     Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
2012), where the value of interagency coordination is recognized as a means to
get at the underlying dynamics of persistent community problems, whether crime
related or otherwise.

Coordinating committees composed of local government service providers,
together with community leaders, broaden the scope of community and
government interaction and have the potential of increasing public acceptance of
government and police services within these local groups. Like police interactions
with residents and local civic leaders, however, this involves some degree of “power
sharing” wherein at times, the police lead problem-solving efforts and at other
times, other agencies or individuals take the lead. However, programming to build
these kinds of networks and socialize service providers to develop coordinated
and complementary strategies and tactics to address what are often deep-seated
community problems requires considerable effort. All too often, the governance of
cities (and communities and neighborhoods) through power sharing is a complex
and difficult business (Bollens 2013).



  BOX 8 – Police-Community Collaboration in Sierra Leone

  Police reform efforts in Sierra Leone have focused on building Local Policing Partnership Boards
  (LPPBs), consisting of local leaders, businesspeople, farmers, and service workers. The role of the
                                                                                                                   31
  police in LPPBs involves participating in the security and justice decision-making process as well as
  serving as police proxies within their communities. This relationship between informal and formal
  methods of justice not only serves as a check on official police authority but also prevents the abuse
  of authority by local leaders.
  Source: Albrecht et al. 2014.




PRIVATE SECTOR HAS A ROLE
Lastly, although government has the potential to make a considerable impact
in troubled communities, so too does the private sector. Private sector actors,
such as shop owners, landlords, local businesses, and so forth, are rooted in these
communities. They often service, in full or in part, many of the community’s needs,
such as for housing or access to food or other services. Local businesses are both
social and economic anchors within communities and can play a role in helping
these areas become more socially cohesive. Creating a police liaison with local
businesses and landlords, for example, opens a dialogue about the quality of life
and community services. At the same time, police-business interaction can provide
an assurance that the police will help protect and preserve these businesses
so that they can continue to serve the public. In many places, police-private
partnerships are a way to serve the interests of the local community by bolstering
elements of its economic base while at the same time acting as a stimulus for
police reform (Bhanu and Stone 2004).




                                                                           PART 1: CRIME, POVERTY AND THE POLICE
     9.	 An Important Piece of the Puzzle:
         The Commitment to Restorative Justice

                                 In many parts of the world, justice system decisions and outcomes often exacerbate
                                 the injuries and losses already experienced. Justice system actors and rulings can
                                 sometimes lack grounding in ways to repair the damage that exists between those
                                 injured through some form of delinquent or criminal behavior and those who
                                 committed these offenses. Police, prosecutors, judges, and prisons can increase
                                 social disorganization in local communities when they focus primarily on control and
                                 punishment. This can happen on several levels. For example, area youth are often
                                 the target for police and justice system interventions in marginalized communities;
                                 they can be labeled as deviant, delinquent, or criminal, even when their offenses
                                 are minor. Such labeling can lead youth to accept this negative status, limiting
                                 their opportunities and inclination to participate in legitimate activities (such as
                                 education and work), thereby further distancing them from pro-social influences.

                                 Communities can be further destabilized through mass arrest and incarceration
                                 practices, and weakened yet again when offenders are returned to these
                                 communities without appropriate support services (Clear, Rose, and Ryder 2001).
32
                                 Those returning after incarceration often weaken normative bonds within the
                                 community by negatively influencing others, thereby further reducing community
                                 cohesion. Control and punishment are then seen as the only role and function of
                                 the law and its enforcers, and once formal justice systems move toward simply
                                 adjudicating guilt and meting out punishment, the interactions between victims
                                 and offenders are often distant and conflictual. Under such circumstances, the
                                 adversarial, risk-based justice models become ascendant, and community harm
                                 reduction and restoration are made more complicated.

                                 In contrast, the restorative justice movement recognizes the importance of repairing
                                 the harm done to victims by offenders, maintaining the dignity of both parties in
                                 the process, and improving community social cohesion through processes that
                                 reintegrate the offender back into the community. Restorative justice philosophies
                                 and practices seek to give voice and participation to victims in addressing the
                                 harm they encountered and to have offenders accept responsibility for the harm
                                 they caused (Braithwaite 2002). Rather than the state simply advocating for the
                                 victim and punishing the offender, restorative justice processes seek to engage the
                                 victim and the offender in a process of healing.

                                 According to the UNODC, restorative justice is “… any process in which the victim
                                 and the offender and, where appropriate, other individuals or community members
                                 affected by a crime participate together actively in the resolution of matters
                                 arising from the crime …” (2006, 7). Restorative justice processes are varied
                                 and include victim-offender mediation, family group conferencing, restorative
                                 conferencing, community restorative boards, restorative circles and systems, circles
                                 of support and accountability, and sentencing circles. Each of these methods
                                 seeks to engage victim and offender in a dialogue about harm experienced and
                                 responsibility accepted.




       Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
  BOX 9 – Restoring Community Peace after Conflict

  In some contexts, restorative justice practices may be crucial to repairing damage caused by extreme
  violence and societal conflicts. Community-level gacaca courts were historically predominant in
  Rwanda, but Western models of justice were imposed under Belgian rule. After 1994, the formal court
  system was flooded with attempts to adjudicate the hundreds of thousands of criminals imprisoned
  for their involvement in the genocide. Local gacaca courts quickly regained importance and were
  not only vital for the efficient processing of offenders but were also extremely important for the
  healing of a torn, conflicted society. The gacaca courts implemented community customs of citizen
  participation in the dispute-resolution and restitution process. These courts not only adjudicated
  offenders more quickly but also promoted solutions and reconciliation within the communities
  directly affected by their violent acts.
  Source: Westberg 2010.




These approaches emphasize social as opposed to legal intervention as the
first line of defense in securing community safety and order. At the same time,
restorative processes are meant to 1) be flexible responses to the circumstances
of the crime, 2) maintain the dignity of offenders, victims, and communities, 3)
be alternatives to traditional criminal justice interventions, such as arrest and
                                                                                                                   33
prosecution, 4) incorporate problem solving, 5) repair harm and ensure accepted
accountability for harm, and 5) occur within community settings so as to affirm the
prevention role communities play in addressing crime, violence, and disorder.

Such approaches have been successfully used not just after conflict but as an
alternative and sometimes more successful response to community-level crimes.
As shown in figure 7, restorative justice practices seek to balance the interests of
the victim and the offender, as well as the community in which the harm is suffered.
The overarching objectives are to improve community safety in which offender,
victim, and community all participate, improve the competency of the offender
for prosocial behavior, and create an accountability link between the victim,
the offender, and the community. All sides of this triangle intersect in restorative
justice practice.

These approaches were originally found in traditional, informal justice systems
in Africa, Australia, and the tribal nations in North America, among others, but
they have since been adjusted, systemized, and integrated into modern justice
system responses in many countries around the globe. For example, in 2013,
Jamaica, as a key component of implementing its National Restorative Justice
Policy, opened seven Community Restorative Justice Centers working officially in
11 communities. In their first phase of implementation, these centers have begun
to address community conflicts and complaints outside the formal justice system
(Wachtel 2014).




                                                                           PART 1: CRIME, POVERTY AND THE POLICE
     FIGURE 7.	 Restorative Justice Model



                                                      Community




                                                            Com
                                                      ty


                                                              p et
                                                     a fe



                                                                  e nc
                                                   yS




                                                                  yD
                                                nit




                                                                      eve
                                              mu
                                                      Restorative




                                                                         lop
                                            Co m        Justice




                                                                            m
                                                                          ent
                                                     Accountability

                                            Victim                  Offender

     Source: Worldpress.com.


34
                               Restorative justice processes align well with community and problem-oriented
                               policing in that each seeks to improve local social control, reduce harm, and
                               improve acceptance of the law and its enforcers, through transparent and
                               accountable government and criminal justice procedures. Restorative justice not
                               only benefits the victim and offender, it can also help increase the legitimacy of
                               the justice sector in developing nations by integrating community members into
                               discussions about justice reform and other government or political processes.
                               When citizens have been wronged or where especially powerful distrust exists,
                               restorative practices can foster discussions and develop solutions. These methods
                               help to enhance the quality of the justice system and the services it provides and
                               to improve perceptions of legitimacy (Braithwaite 2007). The police can play an
                               important role in restorative justice practices as a referral source for community
                               disputes and conflicts and as a means of improving community social cohesion.




     Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
10.	Investing in Police and Community Engagement


   Attached to a broader community crime prevention movement that began in
   the 1960s, current efforts involving police and citizen interaction attempted to
   make communities crime resistant first by mobilizing the community in its own
   defense (Hope 1995, 21–89) and second by organizing the community for greater
   surveillance of public places. This gives the community a “co-production” (Skolnick
   and Bayley 1986) role in crime prevention, while at the same time increasing
   community “guardianship” and management of public places, a cornerstone of
   the situational crime prevention movement (see Clarke 1995, 91–150).

   Strategies that attempt to engage the community in a dialogue about safety
   and security have now become imbedded in larger systems of more open forms
   of governance. The World Bank has been actively engaged in promoting open
   governance in numerous ways,6 and engaging the police in such governance reform
   is essential to dealing with violence and crime, particularly in impoverished areas.
   As crime and disorder are often correlated with community social and economic
   problems, the police are at the social coalface, in direct contact with struggling
                                                                                                                            35
   communities, over and above other government services or interventions.

   Organizationally, the police tend to be geographically rooted in districts, patrol
   areas, and beats, while at the same time differentiated by functions such as
   general patrol, youth work, and criminal investigation. Ideally, they regularly survey
   communities by virtue of their local presence, and they have the potential to be
   very knowledgeable about community dynamics. In much of what is known about
   the police worldwide, having “beat knowledge” (knowledge of the patrol beat to
   which the police officer is assigned) is an essential ingredient for good policing.
   Collecting and synthesizing this local knowledge is an important opportunity for
   the police to tailor their interventions to dynamic and changing local conditions, a
   critical element of community and problem-oriented policing, as well as restorative
   justice practice.


     BOX 10 – The World Bank’s Focus on Open and Participatory Government

       Open government—increased transparency, citizen participation, and collaboration between
     government and citizens—is a key driver of development in the 21st century. Citizen-centric
     governance, with open¬ness as a central pillar, improves the use of public resources, facilitates
     inclusive decision-making pro¬cesses, and increases trust between governments and citizens.
     Governments that are more open are better positioned to act effectively and efficiently, foster
     private sector growth, and respond to the true needs of all citizens.
     Source: World Bank 2015.




   6	 See World Bank Global Solutions Groups – Open Government at
      http://globalpractices.worldbank.org/governance/Knowledge%20Base/Global%20Solutions%20Group%20-%20Open%20Government
      %20Brief%20-%20FINAL.pdf.




                                                                                   PART 1: CRIME, POVERTY AND THE POLICE
                                         In many places, however, police have not taken full advantage of their local position
                                         and knowledge of community affairs, nor have they used what should be in-depth
                                         information about local conditions to calibrate their local interventions and
                                         support for the community. Instead, the police have often relied on a “uniform”
                                         approach to community engagement, one that is often asymmetrical with regard
                                         to information and power sharing and focused primarily on the interests of the
                                         police and not the community.


                                         THE IMPORTANCE OF HORIZONTAL AND VERTICAL INTEGRATION
                                         At the same time, effective engagement structures within disadvantaged
                                         communities are not easy to create, not just because of people’s often great
                                         distrust of police and other government actors, but because these communities
                                         are frequently neither horizontally nor vertically well integrated. They lose their
                                         horizontal connections between neighbors as they are often highly transient
                                         places with considerable population heterogeneity, and they are frequently unable
                                         to informally supervise social relations, including those that lead to crime and
                                         disorder. Vertical integration is often equally lacking, meaning that the connections
                                         between the local community and superordinate districts and institutions are
                                         insufficient to gain the needed support (social, political, economic) for local
                                         community life. These connections are often political in nature, meaning that
                                         when communities are successfully vertically integrated, they can and do lobby
                                         and leverage government resources for community development and support.7
36

                                         Furthermore, the poorest and most marginalized people in most societies feel the
                                         brunt of negative police attention. In many parts of the world, the history of policing
                                         in marginalized communities has resulted in great mistrust of government and the
                                         police. In Latin and South America, Africa, the Middle East, and many other parts
                                         of the world, the police are seen as part of an oppressive government system, and
                                         they are often corrupt and/or criminal in nature. Police services in many regions
                                         have direct links to the military and internal intelligence communities, and the idea
                                         of community-police engagement will likely take considerable time and institutional
                                         adjustment to develop. Under these circumstances, the actual security and safety
                                         needs of these communities have largely been ignored or only partially satisfied.
                                         Here, incorporating community or problem-oriented policing and/or restorative
                                         justice practices requires rebuilding the basic relationships between the justice
                                         system and the public, especially in terms of police-community communications
                                         and interactions.


                                         EXAMPLES OF SUCCESSFUL IMPLEMENTATION
                                         There are illustrations that such approaches can indeed be implemented in
                                         historically conflicted places. Evaluations of justice system reform in post-conflict
                                         Cambodia, for example, have been predominantly positive. Researchers found
                                         that both violent crime and crimes involving property theft have declined sharply
                                         since the implementation of policing reforms, and public fear of crime has
                                         declined as well. These indicators suggest that organizational and policy changes
                                         have generally been successful. The studies also point to the importance of



     7	 Vertically integrated communities have the political efficacy to demand and receive government resources and support; they are also able
        to make the government aware of their problems and have the political strength to ensure that government acts on their behalf for com-
        munity benefit. Simply put, they have the political and social leverage to get government responses when needed.




     Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
sufficient financial resources and organizational commitment to improving citizens’
confidence in the police. Although citizens were less fearful of crime, they did
report being disappointed in the persistent lack of equipment and police personnel
within law enforcement agencies. (Broadhurst and Bouhours 2009).

Continued reform efforts have also been undertaken in Bougainville, a now
autonomous region of Papua New Guinea, which was previously policed by the
Royal Papua New Guinea Constabulary (RPNGC). Following the establishment of
its autonomy, a hybrid approach to police reform was implemented. To alleviate
distrust in law enforcement created by the domineering approaches of the
RPNGC, police worked together with community leaders who had traditionally
been responsible for solving disputes and reducing tensions in times of state-level
conflict. With the assistance of the New Zealand government, Bougainville created
the Community Auxiliary Police (CAP), whose goal was to respect rather than
undermine traditional peacekeeping efforts of the villages. In this model, police
officers are elected by tribal elders and remain accountable to community leaders.
Citizens place a great deal of trust in those chosen by their leaders and have
confidence in their administration of justice. Working together, most disputes are
resolved at the community level and village courts are provided with resources for
their operation. Observational and interview data indicate that despite previously
high levels of distrust in the police, the CAP model is significantly increasing the
positive perceptions of law enforcement officers (Dinnen and Peake 2013).
                                                                                                                    37
For the police to reclaim marginalized communities, a long-term strategy is needed.
Many of these communities have witnessed severe isolation and deprivation,
sometimes spanning generations. Recasting a relationship between the police and
the public in these places will require that these historic experiences be overcome.
Trust and civic acceptance of the police are especially fragile, and police attention
to community needs requires a persistent and visible positive police presence
and outreach to disaffected individuals and families. Once such efforts have been
sustained over time, the legitimacy of the police and legal system can be reframed.


COMMUNITY MOBILIZATION ON ALL FRONTS
Community mobilization in the crime prevention arena can be seen as allied
with other community mobilization strategies in health care and education. For
example, research on alcohol and drug prevention programs shows “that in
programs that involve high levels of community participation and control, there
is greater participation in health improvement activities. Community engagement
builds social capital—social ties, networks, and support—which is associated with
better community health and well-being. [And], participatory decision-making can
uncover and mobilize community assets, strengths, and resources that would have
been otherwise overlooked” (Prevention by Design 2006).

The maintenance of order in communities with an existing consensus on the
subject creates many positive opportunities for the police and the community
to interact. Indeed, in communities with some level of social organization, there
is often the capacity and motivation for the community to work with the police.
“The more organized the neighborhood’s means of giving voice to its preferences,
the easier it is for the police to obtain input, deal with diversity of viewpoints
within the neighborhood, and mobilize the community to support and assist
police officers” (Mastrofski and Greene 1993, 89). Of course, the opposite is
equally true; communities without consensus make the policing of order more



                                                                            PART 1: CRIME, POVERTY AND THE POLICE
                               difficult. Communities with little or no social organization are often “occupied by
                               the police” as a means of preserving order, which is even seen as a central feature
                               of many community and problem-oriented policing initiatives (see Moore 1992),
                               yet once a modicum of order is achieved, the police must shift their focus toward
                               stabilizing the community, building social cohesion, and in doing so, having a more
                               organized community with which to form crime prevention partnerships.

                               Much thinking about community, problem-oriented, and restorative justice
                               practices contains imbedded assumptions about the nature of what constitutes
                               a community, how communities can be engaged, the linkages between informal
                               and formal social control, and the capacity of the police to effectively change their
                               organizational and service delivery models to accommodate these new approaches
                               (see Brogden and Nijhar 2005, ch. 3). Most of the criticism of community policing
                               has been aimed at its Anglo-American models (Brogden 1999), which have been
                               exported across the world (Pino and Wiatrowski 2006). The critique centers on
                               whether such exportation is useful in helping transitional countries in pursuit of
                               democratic governance and more effective policing. To expect that police can
                               take on social, economic, and political inequality as their central role would be
                               unrealistic, as the roots of these issues lie in other sectors of governance. In such
                               environments, the police must be careful not to raise public expectations that
                               they can indeed take on such fundamental governance and public service delivery
                               issues if the other parts of the government are not equally engaged. Police can
                               support facilitate these matters, but not be the sole solution to all government ills.
38

                               Taken together, experiences from the exportation of Anglo-American models
                               of community policing and its derivatives suggest that local legal traditions and
                               cultures, as well as the nature and structures of communities within these systems,
                               must guide any change process. Nonetheless, case studies in Northern Ireland
                               (Engel 2008), Iraq (Mullick and Nusrat 2008), South Africa (Shanafelt 2008), and
                               Kazakhstan (Snajdr 2008) all reveal that community engagement, as difficult as
                               it may be, is an important aspect of the movement toward a democratic police
                               service.




     Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
11.	Challenging Barriers to Implementing
    Effective Policing Methods

   When police are indifferent to communities and their problems or benefit from
   corrupt or brutal practices, broader social disruptions are often accelerated,
   sometimes resulting in riots and other violent government confrontations. A police
   service invested in community problems, on the other hand, has the potential
   to strengthen local community leadership and the social norms emphasizing law-
   abiding behavior. The police, when they are doing their job, are all too aware
   of local community problems, especially in impoverished and marginalized
   places. They patrol the streets and byways of these places, interact with people
   on the streets or local shop owners, and come to understand the rhythms and
   contradictions of community life.

   At the same time, the public is intimately aware of the police as either a source
   of support or comfort or as a yet another travail of community life, worsening
   social relations and either indifferent to or corrupt in the provision of public safety
   services. Although there is certainly an asymmetry between the police and the
   public, in struggling communities, both face the consequences of negative and
                                                                                                                         39
   often violent social behavior. Clearly the community feels the brunt of violence
   and other criminal acts more starkly, but the police also experience negative
   community behaviors. Whether they are arresting offenders or attending to
   victims, the police see the first-hand impacts of crime and violence in community
   settings. In this regard, the police and the community should be naturally allied,
   but unfortunately this is not always the case in many parts of the world.

   Crime-ridden and unstable communities with a weak police presence are
   problematic for law enforcement agencies worldwide. Often these locations are
   hotbeds of criminal activity, lack internal social cohesion and control, and are ripe
   for infiltration by criminal gangs. Social order, such as it is, is often enforced by
   criminal groups or gangs, where the threat and reality of violence is imminent.
   Residents in these communities are often faced with a choice: conform to social
   norms that emphasize fear, retribution, and loss of community voice and agency
   or be subject to aggression from the criminal underworld (Arias and Rodrigues
   2006). While many in these communities would most likely opt for police-enforced
   law and order, their experience is that the police have typically either turned a
   blind eye to the situation, are part of problem due to corruption, or are in other
   ways insufficient in creating and maintaining the long-term stability necessary for
   community cohesion and agency to flourish (Rodgers 2006). Absent a protectorate
   in the form of the local police, most residents are left to fend for themselves
   and are forced to capitulate to the demands of those threatening to commit
   violence (Jones and Rodgers 2015), effects are felt particularly among immigrant
   communities and minority ethnic and religious groups.


   TREATING ENTIRE COMMUNITIES AS CRIMINAL
   At times, the police often conflate dangerous areas with dangerous residents, to
   the extent that when a community is labeled crime-ridden, its residents, good
   and bad, often feel the brunt of aggressive police action. As described above, the



                                                                                 PART 1: CRIME, POVERTY AND THE POLICE
                                          police in many parts of the world have embraced a model of policing that empha-
                                          sizes “crime attack” and “crime suppression,” that is, aggressive police actions
                                          in public places, presumably to serve as a deterrent to potential criminals.
                                          Unfortunately, the police in these countries often cannot easily or clearly distinguish
                                          between those who need police intervention and those who do not; in a crime-
                                          ridden area, the entire community is often blamed. Aggressive police tactics,
                                          then, often contradict people’s expectations about being treated fairly before
                                          the law, further distancing them from the police and increasing insecurity about
                                          crime. This crime-attack model of policing has maintained popularity as the police
                                          have continued to narrow their professional role to dealing almost exclusively
                                          with criminal behavior. This stands in stark contrast to a broader set of roles and
                                          functions the police have historically fulfilled, when they were traditionally part of
                                          the fabric of local civic support or were at least a distant and perhaps more benign
                                          social force in community life.8

                                          From the perspective of the rule of law, these conditions immediately taint social
                                          expectations about government and judicial legitimacy. Where individual rights
                                          are suspended and/or where flagrant corruption is the expected social exchange
                                          medium, police-civic relations are damaged and usually very fragile. Moreover,
                                          if these circumstances have been in place for an extended period of time, the
                                          expectation that the police are present to protect and serve the community is
                                          often met with outright disdain. In either case, improving the police-community
                                          interface clearly requires an in-depth evaluation of the roots of social control in a
40
                                          given community and its decline.

                                          Chile offers a useful example. In contrast to many Latin American countries, citizens
                                          in Chile hold rather positive views of the police. Whereas most other countries in
                                          Latin America are struggling to implement extensive plans to increase the legitimacy
                                          of law enforcement agencies following decades of instability, corruption, militaristic
                                          policing, and high rates of crime, Chile has had no need to take special action.
                                          Instead, the people continue to maintain high levels of trust in the police, even in
                                          the face of rising crime rates. It has been argued that Chile’s divergent experience
                                          can be explained by the existence of a relatively stable government and a slow
                                          and gradual incorporation of community participation following the transition to
                                          democratic power since the late 1990s. The Chilean Carabineros, i.e. the police
                                          force responsible for patrolling the streets and maintaining public order, managed
                                          to rehabilitate its image and reestablished positive relationships with the Chilean
                                          society. Chilean policing also emphasizes community participation in formulation
                                          crime policy and a series of initiatives incorporated the community into policing
                                          (Malone 2013). Chilean citizens have held consistently favorable attitudes toward
                                          the police and trust that the police will do their best to protect their communities
                                          (Fruhling 2007). Conversely, surrounding countries have continued to experience
                                          instability and have focused on community policing efforts only during troubled
                                          periods when public scandals or conflicts with the police arise.




     8	 Dammert and Malone (2006) examined how crime, victimization, and other insecurities contribute to fear of crime in Latin America. In Bra-
        zil and Argentina, which both emphasize zero-tolerance approaches to crime, citizens were significantly more fearful of crime than citizens
        in Chile, whose police focus on community-oriented approaches toward crime and justice. The strategies of Brazilian and Argentinian
        police often involve heavy-handed, militarized tactics that intimidate community members and undermine trust in the police (Dammert
        and Malone 2006). At the same time, such practices are thought to also make these communities more criminogenic (Howell 2009), while
        incurring considerable financial and normative costs for the police.




     Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
THE SPECIAL PROBLEM OF CORRUPTION AND OTHER POLICE CRIMES
Particularly powerful barriers to reforming police services and improving police-
community interactions are criminal behavior and corruption on the part of the
police themselves. Concern about how the police use their authority is ever present
in many countries. Police misconduct and malfeasance can include many actions,
including, on the lower end of the corruption scale, misusing their authority to
secure material gain, such as free meals or free services, often from shopkeepers
happy to have the police remain in their area. This exploitation can be passive or
more aggressive, depending on whether the police officer takes what might be
seen as “gifts” or whether he demands and receives free or discounted services.
Kickbacks and shakedowns clearly involve the misuse of police authority; in these
“transactions,” the police are the equivalent of white collar criminals who misuse
their occupational positions for self-benefit.



  BOX 11 – Bribery in Law Enforcement

  Around the world, 31 percent of people who have come into contact with the police report having
  paid a bribe. Bribery rates of the police were highest (at 75 percent or more) in the Democratic
  Republic of the Congo, Ghana, Indonesia, Kenya, Liberia, Nigeria, and Sierra Leone.
  Source: Transparency International 2013.
                                                                                                                     41




Stepping up the corruption scale, when police officers fail to carry out their
duties, either by taking actions that violate their professional ethics or by failing
to act when clear law enforcement action is warranted, they are corrupt. Police
corruption can also be internal to the police process, such as when officers tamper
with evidence, make false arrests, plant false evidence, or lie in court proceedings,
or it can take the form of police protection for illegal or criminal enterprises,
such as the protection of forced slavery, drug dealers, prostitution rings, illegal
gambling enterprises, and so forth. It is also seen in police theft of property from
victims of crime, such as additional thefts by the investigating police from store-
or homeowners who experience a burglary. Moreover, officers are sometimes
directly involved in criminal enterprises, including the seizing and selling of drugs,
weapons, and other restricted or prohibited goods.

Police corruption can be found in the actions of individuals or entire units or
divisions, or may be systemic. The old adage of the “rotten apple” is generally
replaced with the idea of the “rotten barrel,” indicating that individual police
officer corruption often needs a supporting or at least an indifferent environment
in which to occur. Other police officers, police supervisors, and so on must either
turn a blind eye to police malfeasance or participate in it directly. In either case,
much of what is known about police corruption is that it is often on a larger scale
than that of an individual police officer (Agbiboa 2015). The worst case scenario is
when police are undermined by or taken over entirely by actual criminal elements.
Police forces in some countries in Latin and Central America, for example, have
long histories of themselves being part of organized crime networks, and such
connections have also been found in U.S. police agencies, most recently in Puerto




                                                                             PART 1: CRIME, POVERTY AND THE POLICE
                                          Rico (Pestano 2015). If these ties are broad and strong, reforming the agency
                                          can be very difficult and requires the highest-level commitment and community
                                          support.

                                          Corruption among the police also depends to a significant degree on social
                                          tolerance, not just within but outside the law enforcement agency. In other words,
                                          police corruption is at once contextual and cultural. At the point of the corrupt
                                          action or decision there is of course a context, that is, a scenario in which the police
                                          officer is presented with an opportunity or is subject to influences and choses
                                          to use his authority inappropriately or illegally. Situational circumstances matter,
                                          and how the police become engaged or react in those circumstances is critical
                                          to understanding police corruption and the police’s role in crime prevention in
                                          developing countries (Grant 2014). Widespread police corruption and criminality
                                          are therefore often rooted in broader cultural ideas about social exchange. In
                                          simple terms, corrupt police officers need the compliance of the community (either
                                          the local or broader community) and the police system to sustain the corruption.
                                          When paying for police protection becomes a norm in a community and when the
                                          police expect such payments, the cultural ground has shifted and the exchange has
                                          replaced the broader expectation that the police will provide services because the
                                          government uses its resources to carry out this duty (Jones and Newburn 1998).


                                          CONSEQUENCES OF POLICE CORRUPTION AND CRIME
42
                                          So what are the implications of these varying types of corruption and crime in a
                                          police agency? First, the presence of corruption challenges the idea that police
                                          services are expected to be a collective public good meant to benefit all citizens
                                          equally, regardless of wealth or status (Jones and Newburn 1998). Instead, those
                                          services go only to those who can pay for or otherwise influence police discretion
                                          and decision making. In a related way, when corruption becomes the norm in the
                                          provision of police services, it undermines the rule of law, in that influences other
                                          than the law affect law enforcement activities. Simply put, the law is supplanted by
                                          other influences on the police, and those without that influence become outsiders
                                          to the entire process or exchange, leaving the law itself undermined and the
                                          citizen’s connection to the law violated. Lastly, when corruption takes precedence
                                          over law in police decision making, individuals become legally disenfranchised, in
                                          that they can no longer expect to be protected by the law and its enforcers. In such
                                          circumstances, individuals and communities may feel obligated to create other
                                          social control mechanisms, such as vigilante groups, or they may simply withdraw
                                          from the law altogether, experiencing no personal attachment to or protection
                                          from the police and the legal system. Many people in poor communities across
                                          the world experience this, actually living “outside the law” because they do not
                                          enjoy the protections of the law or its enforcement agencies.9 Corruption saps the
                                          capacity of the state and the police to effectively bring law and order to these poor
                                          and marginalized communities, for whom the police are part of their larger crime
                                          and violence problem.



     9	 Nigerian police had historically been instituted as a political and paramilitary tool to protect the state rather than the interests of the
        citizenry. Consequently, Nigerian citizens developed great distrust and could not rely upon the formal police force to protect them from
        crime. Community members established informal policing structures within their villages to preserve and protect traditional norms and
        bring those who violated them to justice (Onwudiwe 2009). Similarly, nations like Afghanistan were traditionally policed by community
        networks and tribal elders along with other governmental hierarchies. Paramilitary approaches to policing have been met with great resis-
        tance because they undermine the traditional community-level approach toward justice (see From et al. 2010).




     Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
Addressing corruption requires strong government agency and overall commitment
to change. It also often requires external pressure and international support to
develop and maintain comprehensive investments in reform. That change is
possible has been demonstrated, for example, in Liberia, where ongoing work to
reduce police corruption has resulted in better internal accountability practices and
professional standards, and evaluators have seen some improvements in police
officers’ willingness to report corruption and abuse of power to the designated
authorities.10 However, most corrupt practices in developing countries remain
unaddressed and widespread, and additional support is needed to improve
training and education, raise police salaries, conduct independent investigations,
and develop stronger anti-corruption legislation (Human Rights Watch 2013).

Corrupt police systems clearly undermine the values and practices that are
imbedded in community and problem-oriented policing and restorative justice.
These approaches seek to form alliances between the police and communities
they serve, which requires shared expectations about the rule of law and the
protection of the vulnerable and also demands transparency and accountability
in police policy and decision making. Still, targeted interventions in select
communities where police leaders and communities are committed to change
can be a start if supported by a commitment to reform at the upper levels
of government.


                                                                                                                                                43




10	 Similar results have been found in Kenya, a country in which corruption has been rampant since colonial rule. Significant steps have been
    taken toward fighting corruption, including measures to improve government accounting, developing and enforcing stronger anti-cor-
    ruption laws, and encouraging public participation to demand accountability. Evaluations demonstrate that such measures have strongly
    reduced opportunities for corruption, but persistence and continued improvements are needed to continue to work toward success
    (Mutonyi 2002).




                                                                                              PART 1: CRIME, POVERTY AND THE POLICE
     12.	Community and Problem-Oriented Policing
         and Restorative Justice: Making a Human Rights
         Approach Central

                                  It is useful to think about the differences and similarities between community and
                                  problem-oriented policing and restorative justice practices as broad philosophical
                                  and ethical statements about human rights and the role of the police within the
                                  rule of law. Problem-oriented policing and restorative justice speak to how police
                                  strategies and tactics are made operational, transparent, and accountable to
                                  the public. Such changes often challenge the prevalent notion of the police as a
                                  semi-military organization that is almost exclusively focused on crime and highly
                                  aggressive in the design of strategies and tactics. Historically, the philosophy of
                                  policing has been intimately tied to ideas about community safety and lawfulness.
                                  Although the police do indeed address disorder and crime issues in community
                                  settings, they also, at least in theory, respond to calls for assistance for a wide array
                                  of community needs, including protecting children or other vulnerable people;
                                  caring for the indigent, dispossessed, or mentally incapacitated; protecting
                                  property; assuring for the safe movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
44
                                  responding to medical emergencies and natural catastrophes; caring for victims of
                                  violent crime; diverting youth from gang or other street-level negative activity; and
                                  today, dealing with concerns with security.

                                  In a broader sense, police interventions often follow paths similar to medicine.
                                  First, the police are expected to prevent community harm, including violence and
                                  crime. Absent such prevention, the police must then respond to crime incidents
                                  and at once protect the victims and hold the offenders to account, a central
                                  requirement of the rule of law. Third, the police must also restore communities
                                  once they have become victimized or harmed. Figure 8 presents a schema for
                                  understanding policing from a human rights perspective, wherein the police
                                  protect the vulnerable and others from harm, respond to harm when it occurs,
                                  remove the offenders, and restore community cohesion. These models of policing,
                                  which emphasize public safety first and foremost, require adherence to the rule
                                  of law. Simply put, this means that the police must enforce the law equitably,
                                  focused on ensuring procedural justice, that is, the evenhanded application of
                                  criminal sanctions.

                                  Community and problem-oriented policing as well as restorative justice are
                                  philosophies, strategies, and tactics that focus on all three intervention points
                                  depicted in Figure 8. These approaches seek to prevent and respond to crime
                                  by engaging and partnering with a wide array of individuals and organizations to
                                  make communities secure and to address persistent problems. At the same time,
                                  community and problem-oriented policing and restorative justice seek first to
                                  restore communities in the aftermath of trauma and/or victimization and then help
                                  communities and the police prevent and respond to future problems. All operate
                                  within the rule of law, and all seek to provide a broader sense of community safety,
                                  social cohesion, and agency. Moreover, all are rooted in the idea of partnership
                                  and engagement.




        Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
It would be naive to minimize and understate the range of criminal problems that
often beset troubled communities. At times and in many places around the world,
these communities resemble war zones, replete with high levels of violence and
retaliation for those who cooperate with the police, reinforced by an underground
ethic and economy that is often rooted in drugs, weapons, and human trafficking.
In these areas, resistance from gangs, organized crime or militant groups to any
law enforcement effort is often violent and substantial. As a result, police tactics
resembling those of a military force are often a necessary first step to deal with the
concentrated violence. But like in war zone locations, successes achieved through
military ends often require some form of community building to sustain them,
and in the same vein, winning the “hearts and minds” of the local community is
an underlying strategy in effective policing. For all practical purposes, the police
cannot maintain a long-standing, army-like presence in domestic communities,
since to do so requires overwhelming economic, social, and political resources.

An illustration of how the combined community forces can magnify the impact of
the police in securing public safety and promoting human rights is found in the
efforts of the International Justice Mission (IJM) in the Philippines (Haugen and
Boutros 2014, 242–57). There, the combined efforts of IJM lawyers, investigators,
social workers, and the Philippines Department of Justice and police, with
assistance from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, took on what was a
rampant child commercial sex trade. The program was focused on preventing
sexual victimization from occurring, but also on bringing the traffickers to account,
                                                                                                                                45
while restoring both individuals and communities that had been traumatized
from this crime. The Cebu City Justice System Transformation Project enlisted a
wide array of government, political, socio-cultural, and international and justice
system participants all focused on reducing the commercial child sex trade. All of
these combined efforts produced improved case management, law enforcement
training, prosecutorial understanding of the law, and care for the victims, creating
dramatic results. The project reported a substantial increase in the rescue of sex
trafficking victims and the successful prosecution of sex traffickers, and also a 79
percent reduction in the overall vulnerability of children to the commercial sex trade
(Haugen and Boutros 2014, 244). Collective purpose produced collective results.


FIGURE 8.	 Policing for Human Rights through the Intervention Continuum

      T1                                          T2                                          T3
           Primary Intervention                     Secondary Intervention                         Tertiary Intervention


               Prevention                                   Response                           Mitigation/ Rehabilitation

             Securing Rights                             Upholding Rights                           Reaffirming Rights
(Assembly, free speech, religious practice)       (Stopping, arresting, in custody           (Offender reintegration, victim
                                                      interrogation, use of force)              and community restoration
•	 Police as advocates for human dignity,
   protecting vulnerable groups, the          •	 Problem solving (signal crimes at the      •	 Participate in restorative and
   mentally ill, the homeless, victims, the      community level)                              mediation processes
   endangered                                 •	 Civil and culturally sensitive policing    •	 Reassurance policing
•	 Enforcing court orders                     •	 Protecting privacy                         •	 Victim and offender follow-up
•	 Community policing                         •	 Diversion, referral, and alternative       •	 “Out group” protection
•	 Community crime prevention                    dispute resolution                         •	 Reducing insecurity
•	 Building partnerships                      •	 Due process policing for                   •	 Building social capital
•	 Assuring free movement                        apprehension and investigation
                                              •	 Victim/witness assistance
Source: Adjusted from Greene 2010.

                                                                                     PART 1: CRIME, POVERTY AND THE POLICE
     13.	Conclusion

                                  Strengthening lawful police interaction with marginalized and violence-prone
                                  communities can become a means for stabilizing these communities, thus making
                                  them more able to successfully respond to development efforts. Evidence from
                                  around the globe has long shown that without a safe and stable environment,
                                  development interventions are likely to suffer. Effective, inclusive, and community-
                                  focused law enforcement is an essential element in creating or maintaining that
                                  safe environment, including by building citizen trust in government and developing
                                  sustainable mechanisms for successful government service delivery.

                                  The community policing approach seeks to 1) open police organizations and
                                  their internal cultures to external input and review, 2) increase the capacity of the
                                  police to address persistent and often debilitating community problems, either by
                                  acting alone or by working in partnership with others, and 3) reform police agencies
                                  such that they are more problem and community sensitive, accountable, less
                                  corrupt, and less willing to misuse police authority. Allied with problem-solving
                                  and restorative justice practices, this new model of policing helps to anchor the
                                  police in rule of law, open governance, and inclusiveness, while encouraging them
46
                                  to be more sensitive to community contexts and nuances.

                                  Focused on such ideas as consensus, community empowerment, public safety,
                                  and police reform, various forms of community policing programs have sprung up
                                  in many regions of the world (Brogden and Nijhar 2005). Some apply older police
                                  techniques such as foot patrols to the newer problems of urban decay. Others
                                  stress effective communication between the police and the people in setting
                                  the agenda for police activity locally. Still others are focused first and foremost
                                  on reforming the police, reducing corruption, and moderating police misuse of
                                  force as preludes to community engagement. Community policing, then, means
                                  a variety of measures depending on how it is designed and implemented. It is at
                                  once an ideology, an organizing framework for various police activities, and a set
                                  of individual programs. For some, the “flexibility” in meanings associated with
                                  community policing is seen as problematic, but as Moore (1994, 290) suggests, “…
                                  it is partly the ambiguity of the concept [community policing] that is stimulating the
                                  wide pattern of experimentation we are observing.”

                                  Allied with community policing, problem-oriented policing is more tactical, focused
                                  on persistent problems that continue to degrade communities. Problem-oriented
                                  policing is seen as 1) a way of broadening police thinking about problems and
                                  their roots and branches, 2) a way of moving the police from employing reactive
                                  social and legal interventions to applying proactive ones, 3) a vehicle for increasing
                                  other civic, government, and private agency engagement with social problems,
                                  including those of crime and disorder, and 4) a way for the police to better assess
                                  their effectiveness and accountability. Community and problem-oriented policing,
                                  taken together, are the philosophy and practice of open and inclusive government
                                  and police engagement with communities and other constituents and of problem
                                  resolution, reduction, or mitigation; they are also the means for assessing the
                                  effectiveness and lawfulness of police and other government interventions in an
                                  effort to stabilize communities.



        Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
Restorative justice practices also help confirm community identity and reduce the
tensions that arise between victimized communities and the offenders, particularly
with regard to youth crime. Restorative practices help communities mediate harm
and risk and provide a vehicle for community input into justice decision making.
As such, restorative justice practice is perhaps a normative way of bringing
communities closer together, thereby improving social cohesion as well as the
agency of individuals.

Community and problem-oriented policing as well as restorative justice practices
can be used to assist police in their efforts to provide safety and security to
marginalized and violence-ridden communities. They are also helpful in creating a
better environment for more effective service delivery. Collectively, these practices
show promise as strategies that can support World Bank investments focused on
professionalizing police services, grounding police philosophy and practice in the
rule of law, reducing corruption, and improving police-civic engagement.

Part 2 of this report provides more detailed information on building effective police
                                                                                                                    47
services that address the needs of poor communities as part of a stronger service
delivery and government accountability system. It also offers helpful ideas for
effective programming and entry points for improving police services in order to
enhance community quality of life and the prospects for community development
in struggling parts of the world.




                                                                            PART 1: CRIME, POVERTY AND THE POLICE
48




     Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
References


Aas, K. F. 2013. Globalization and Crime: Key Approaches to Criminology, 2nd ed. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
         Publications.

Agbiboa, D. E. 2015. “Protectors or Predators? The Embedded Problem of Police Corruption and Deviance in
       Nigeria.” Administration & Society 47 (3): 244–81.

Akyuz, K., and T. Armstrong. 2011. “Understanding the Sociostructural Correlates of Terrorism in Turkey.”
        International Criminal Justice Review 21 (2): 134–55.

Albrecht, P., O. Garber, A. Gibson, and S. Thomas. 2014. Community Policing in Sierra Leone – Local Policing
        Partnership Boards. DIIS Report 2014: 16. Copenhagen: Danish Institute for International Studies.

Alvazzi del Frate, A. 2002. “Criminal Victimization in Latin America.” In Crime Victimization in Comparative
         Perspective: Results from the International Crime Victims Survey, 1989–2000, ed. P. Nieuwbeerta,
         102–15. The Hague: Boom.
                                                                                                                      49

Alvazzi del Frate, A., and G. Mugellini. 2012. “The Crime Drop in ‘Non-Western’ Countries: A Review of
         Homicide Data.” In The International Crime Drop: New Directions in Research, ed. J. van Dijk, A.
         Tseloni, and D. Farrell, 134–58. New York: Palgrave MacMillan.

Anderson, E. 1999. Code of the Streets: Decency, Violence, and the Moral Life of the Inner City. New York: W.
       W. Norton.

Aning, E. 2006. “An Overview of the Ghana Police Service.” Journal of Security Sector Management 4 (2):
        1–37.

Arias, E. D., and C. Davis Rodrigues. 2006. “The Myth of Personal Security: Criminal Gangs, Dispute
          Resolution, and Identity in Rio de Janeiro’s Favelas.” Latin American Politics and Society 48 (4): 53–81.

Barrientos, A. 2007. Does Vulnerability Create Poverty Traps? CPRC Working Paper 76. Brighton, UK: Institute
        of Development Studies, University of Sussex.

Bayhan, K. 2011. “Testing the Impacts of Social Disorganization and Parochial Control on Public Order Crimes
        in Turkey.” PhD dissertation, University of North Texas (Unpublished).

Bayley, D. H. 1984. “Community Policing in Japan and Singapore.” Paper presented at the Australian Institute
         of Criminology, Canberra, August 2–3.

———.	1989. A Model of Community Policing: The Singapore Story. Darby, PA: Diane Publishing.

_______. 1994. “International Differences in Community Policing.” In Dennis P. Rosenbaum (ed.), The
        Challenge of Community Policing. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publishers, 1994.




                                                                            PART 1: CRIME, POVERTY AND THE POLICE
     Bahalla, A.S. & Lapeyre, F. (2004). Poverty and exclusion in a global world (2nd Edition). New York: Palgrave
              MacMillan.

     Bernburg, J. G. 2014. “Anomie and Crime.” In Encyclopedia of Criminology and Criminal Justice, ed. G.
            Bruinsma and D. Weisburd, 76–86. New York: Springer.

     Bhanu, C., and C. Stone. 2004. “Public-Private Partnerships for Police Reform.” Vera Institute of Justice, New
             York.

     Black, D., ed. 2014. Toward a General Theory of Social Control. New York: Academic Press.

     Body-Gendrot, S. 2012. Globalization, Fear and Insecurity. The Challenges for Cities North and South. New
            York: Palgrave Macmillan.

     Bollens, S. A. 2013. “Governing Polarized Cities.” In Power Sharing in Deeply Divided Places, ed. J. McEvoy
              and B. O’Leary. Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press.

     Braga, A. A. 2014. “Problem-Oriented Policing: Principles, Practice and Crime Prevention.” In The Oxford
             Handbook of Police and Policing, ed. M. D. Reisig and R. J. Kane, 101–21. New York: Oxford
             University Press.

     Braga, A. A., and B. J. Bond. 2008. “Policing Crime and Disorder Hotspots: A Randomized Controlled Trial.”
             Criminology 47 (3): 577–607.
50

     Braithwaite, J. 2002. Restorative Justice and Responsive Regulation. New York: Oxford University Press.

     ———. 2007. “Building Legitimacy through Restorative Justice.” In Legitimacy and Criminal Justice:
          International Perspectives, ed. T. Tyler, 146–62. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

     Braithwaite, J., and A. Gohar. 2014. “Restorative Justice, Policing and Insurgency: Learning from Pakistan.”
             Law & Society Review 48 (3): 531–61.

     Braudel, F. 1993. A History of Civilizations. New York: Penguin.

     Broadhurst, R., and T. Bouhours. 2009. “Policing in Cambodia: Legitimacy in the Making?” Policing and
            Society: An International Journal of Research and Policy 19 (2): 174–90.

     Brodgen, M. 1999. “Community Policing as Cherry Pie.” In Policing across the World, ed. R. I. Mawby.
            London: UCL Press.

     Brogden, M., and P. Nijhar. 2005. Community Policing: National and International Models and Approaches.
            Cullompton, UK: Willan Publishing.

     Bruinsma, G., J. Pauwels, F. Weerman, and W. Bernasco. 2013. “Social Disorganization, Social Capital,
            Collective Efficacy and the Spatial Distribution of Crime and Offenders.” British Journal of
            Criminology 53 (5): 942–63.

     Bullock, K., and N. Tilley. 2003. Crime Reduction and Problem-Oriented Policing. Cullompton, UK: Willan
              Publishing.

     Bursik, R. J., and H. G. Grasmick.1993. Neighborhoods and Crime: The Dimensions of Effective Community
              Control. New York: Lexington Books.




     Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
Chamratrithirong, A., B. Miller, H. Byrnes, O. Rhucharoenpornpanich, P. Cupp, M. Rosati, W. Fongkaew, K.
       Atwood, and M. Todd. 2013. “Intergenerational Transmission of Religious Beliefs and Practices and
       the Reduction of Adolescent Delinquency in Urban Thailand.” Journal of Adolescence 36 (1): 79–89.

Chan, J.T. (1997). Changing police culture: Policing a multicultural society. Melbourne: Cambridge University
        Press.

Chevigny, P. 1995. Edge of the Knife: Police Violence in the Americas. New York: New Press.

Choi, C., and S. Choi. 2012. “Collaborative Partnerships and Crime in Disorganized Communities.” Public
         Administration Review 72 (2): 228–39.

Chui, W., and H. Chan. 2012. “An Empirical Investigation of Social Bonds and Juvenile Delinquency in Hong
        Kong.” Child Youth Care Forum 41 (4): 371–86.

Clarke, R. V. 1995. “Situational Crime Prevention.” In Building a Safer Society: Strategic Approaches to Crime
         Prevention, ed. M. Tonry and D. P. Farrington. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Clear, T., D. Rose, and J. Ryder. 2001. “Incarceration and the Community: The Problem of Removing and
          Returning Offenders.” Crime & Delinquency 47 (3): 335–51.

Cohen, S. 1980. Folk Devils and Moral Panics. London: Routledge.
                                                                                                                 51
Cordaid. 2015. “Restoring the Social Contract through Results Based Financing.” Cordaid, The Hague.

Cornaglia, F., N. Feldman, and A. Leigh. 2014. “Crime and Mental Well-Being.” Human Resources 49 (1):
        110–40.

Crawford, A. 2008. “Plural Policing in the UK: Policing beyond the Police.” In Handbook of Policing, 2nd ed.,
        ed. T. Newburn. New York: Taylor and Francis.

———, ed. 2013. Crime Prevention Policies in Comparative Perspective. Cullompton, UK: Willan Publishing.

Da Silva, G., and I. Cano. 2007. “Between Damage Reduction and Community Policing: The Case of Pavão-
         Pavãozinho-Catagalo in Rio de Janeiro’s Favelas.” In Legitimacy and Criminal Justice: International
         Perspectives, ed. T. Tyler, 186–214. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Dammer, H., and E. Fairchild. 2006. Comparative Criminal Justice Systems, 3rd ed. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.

Deosaran, R. 2002. “Community Policing in the Caribbean: Context, Community and Police Capacity.”
       Policing: An International Journal of Police Strategies and Management 25 (1): 125–46.

DESA (United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs). 2014. “World Urbanization Prospects: The
       2014 Revision, Highlights.” Population Division, DESA, United Nations, New York.

Dickenson-Jones, G., D. Hyslop, and M. Vaira-Lucero. 2014. “Estimating the Global Costs of Violence.”
        Business, Peace and Sustainable Development 2: 6–27.

Dinnen, S., and G. Peake. 2013. “More than Just Policing: Police Reform in Post-Conflict Bougainville.”
        International Peacekeeping 20 (5): 570–84.

Eck, J. E. 2006. “Science, Values and Problem-Oriented Policing: Why Problem-Oriented Policing?” In
         Police Innovation: Contrasting Perspectives, ed. D. Weisburd and A. A. Braga, 117–32. New York:
         Cambridge University Press.


                                                                         PART 1: CRIME, POVERTY AND THE POLICE
     Eck, J. E., and W. Spellman. 1987. Problem Solving: Problem-Oriented Policing in Newport News.
              Washington, DC: Police Executive Research Forum, National Institute of Justice.

     Emerson, K., T. Nabatch, and S. Balough. 2012. “An Integrative Framework for Collaborative Governance.”
            Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory 22 (1): 1–29.

     Engel, S. T. 2008. “Human Rights and Democratic Reform in Northern Ireland.” In Democratic Policing in
             Transitional and Developing Countries, ed. M. D. Wiatrowski and N. Pino, 165–79. Hampshire, UK:
             Ashgate Publishing.

     EIGE (European Institute for Gender Equality). 2014. Estimating the Costs of Gender-Based Violence in the
             European Union. Luxembourg: European Union.

     Feltes, T. (2002). Community-oriented policing in Germany: Training and education. Policing: An International
              Journal of Police Strategies & Management, 25(1), 48-59.

     Ferdik, F., S. Wolfe, and N. Blasco. 2014. “Informal Social Controls, Procedural Justice and Perceived Police
              Legitimacy: Do Social Bonds Influence Evaluations of Police Legitimacy?” American Journal of
              Criminal Justice 39 (3): 471–92.

     From, J., J. Keefe, J. Cann, C. Ploszaj, and W. Simpkins. 2010. “Policing in Afghanistan– Reform that Respects
              Tradition: Need for a Strategic Shift.” Institute for Defense Analyses, Alexandria, VA.
52
     Fruhling, H. 2007. “Police Legitimacy in Chile.” In Legitimacy and Criminal Justice: International Perspectives,
              ed. T. Tyler, 115–45. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

     Gaines, L., V. Kappeler, and J. Vaughn. 2008. Policing in America. Cincinnati, OH: Anderson Publishing
             Company.

     Gannon, M. J., and R. Pillai. 2013. Understanding Global Cultures: Metaphorical Journeys through 34 Nations,
            Clusters of Nations, Continents, and Diversity. New York: Sage Publications.

     Garland, D. 2001. The Culture of Control: Crime and Social Order in Contemporary Society. Oxford: Oxford
             University Press.

     Geneva Declaration Secretariat. 2011. Global Burden of Armed Violence 2011. Cambridge: Cambridge
            University Press.

     Gibbs, J. T. 2000. “Gangs as Alternative Transitional Structures: Adaptations to Racial and Social Marginality in
             Los Angeles and London.” In Violence: Diverse Populations and Communities, ed. D. Deanda and R.
             M. Becerra, 71–100. Binghamton, NY: Haworth Press.

     Goldstein, H. 1979. “Improving Policing: A Problem-Oriented Approach.” Crime & Delinquency 25 (2):
             236–58.

     Goldstein, H. 1990. Problem-Oriented Policing. New York: McGraw-Hill.

     Gramckow, H., and F. Allen. 2011. “Justice Sector Reform in Mongolia: Looking Back, Looking Forward.”
            Justice Reform Practices Group, World Bank, Washington, DC.

     Grant, H. 2014. Social Crime Prevention in the Developing World: Exploring the Role of Police in Crime
             Prevention. New York: Springer.




     Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
Greene, J. R. 2000. “Community Policing in America: Changing the Nature, Structure, and Function of the
        Police.” In Criminal Justice 2000: Policies, Processes, and Decisions of the Criminal Justice System,
        vol. 3. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Justice, Office of Justice Programs.

———. 2010. “Policing through Human Rights.” Ideas in American Policing, no. 3, Police Foundation,
     Washington, DC.

Hanson, R., G. Warchol, and L. Zupan. 2004. “Policing Paradise: Law and Disorder in Belize.” Police Practice
        and Research: An International Journal 5 (3): 241–57.

Harrendorf, S., M. Heiskanen, and S. Malby, eds. 2010. International Statistics on Crime and Justice. European
       Institute for Crime Prevention and Control (Heuni) and United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
       (UNODC), Helsinki and Vienna.

Hartjen, C., and S. Kethineni. 1999. “Exploring the Etiology of Delinquency across Country and Gender.”
         Journal of Crime and Justice 22 (2): 55–90.

Haugen, G. A., and V. Boutros. 2014. The Locust Effect. New York: Oxford University Press.

Hirschi, T. 1969. Causes of Delinquency. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.

Hoeve, M., G. Stams, C. Put, J. Dubas, P. Laan, and J. Gerris. 2012. “A Meta-Analysis of Attachment to Parents
       and Delinquency.” Journal of Abnormal Psychology 40 (5): 771–85.
                                                                                                                   53

Hofman, K., A. Primack, G. Keusch, and S. Hrynkow. 2005. “Addressing the Growing Burden of Trauma and
       Injury in Low and Middle-Income Countries.” American Journal of Public Health 95 (1): 13–17.

Hope, T. 1995. “Community Crime Prevention.” In Building a Safer Society: Strategic Approaches to Crime
        Prevention, ed. M. Tonry and D. P. Farrington. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Howell, K. (2009). Broken lives from broken windows: The hidden costs of aggressive ordermaintenance
        policing. New York University Review of Law & Social Change, 33, 271329.

Hoyle, C. 2007. “Policing and Restorative Justice.” In Handbook of Restorative Justice, ed. G. Johnstone and
        D. Van Ness, 292–311. Cullompton, UK: Willan Publishing.

Hoyle, C., and R. Young. 2003. “Restorative Justice, Victims and the Police.” In Handbook of Policing, ed. T.
        Newburn, 680–708. Cullompton, UK: Willan Publishing.

Human Rights Watch. 2013. “No Money, No Justice: Police Corruption and Abuse in Liberia.” Human Rights
       Watch, New York.

IEP (Institute for Economics and Peace). 2015. “Global Peace Index 2015.” Institute for Economics and Peace,
          Sydney.

Jiang, S., K. Land, and J. Wang. 2013. “Social Ties, Collective Efficacy and Perceived Neighborhood Property
         Crime in Guangzhou, China.” Asian Criminology 8 (3): 207–23.

Jones, G. A., and D. Rodgers. 2015. “Gangs, Guns, and the City: Urban Policy in Dangerous Places.” In The
        City in Poverty, ed. C. Lemanski and C. Marx. London: Palgrave.

Jones, T., and T. Newburn. 1998. Private Security and Public Policing. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.




                                                                           PART 1: CRIME, POVERTY AND THE POLICE
     Junger-Tas, J., I. H. Marshall, D. Enzmann, M. Killias, M. Steketee, and B. Gruszczynska. 2012. The Many Faces
             of Youth Crime: Contrasting Theoretical Perspectives on Juvenile Delinquency across Countries and
             Cultures. New York: Springer.

     Kangaspunta, K., and I. H. Marshall. 2012. “Trends in Violence against Women: Some Good News and Some
            Bad News.” In The International Crime Drop: New Directions in Research, ed. J. van Dijk, A. Tseloni,
            and D. Farrell, 103–33. New York: Palgrave MacMillan.

     ———. 2014. “Surveys on Violence against Women.” In Encyclopedia of Criminology and Criminal Justice,
          ed. G. Bruinsma and D. Weisburd, 5104–17. New York: Springer.

     Kirk, D. S., and A. V. Papachristos. 2011. “Cultural Mechanisms and the Persistence of Neighborhood
              Violence.” American Journal of Sociology 116 (4): 1190–233.

     Kochel, T. 2012. “Can Police Legitimacy Promote Collective Efficacy?” Justice Quarterly 29 (3): 384–419.

     Kornhauser, R. 1978. Social Sources of Delinquency: An Appraisal of Analytic Models. Chicago: University of
            Chicago Press.

     Krug, E., L. Dahlberg, J. Mercy, A. Zwi, and R. Lozano. 2002. World Report on Violence and Health. Geneva:
              World Health Organization.

     Kurlychek, M. C. 2014. “Social Control.” In Encyclopedia of Criminology and Criminal Justice, ed. G. Bruinsma
54
             and D. Weisburd, 4899–908. New York: Springer-Verlag.

     LaFree, G., and G. Ackerman. 2009. “The Empirical Study of Terrorism: Social and Legal Research.” Annual
             Review of Law and Social Science 5: 347–74.

     Lederman, D., N. Loayza, and A. Menendez. 2002. “Violent Crime: Does Social Capital Matter?” Economic
            Development and Cultural Change 50 (3): 509–39.

     Leroy, A-M. 2012. “Legal Note on Bank Involvement in the Criminal Justice Sector.” World Bank, Washington,
              DC.

     Llorente, M. V., and A. Rivas. 2005. “Case Study. Reduction of Crime in Bogotá: A Decade of Citizen’s Security
              Policies.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

     Mackenzie, S., and A. Henry. 2009. “Community Policing: A Review of the Evidence.” The Scottish Center for
            Crime & Justice Research, Edinburgh.

     Malone, M.F. 2013. “Chile”. In: Community Policing in Indigenous Communities, ed. M.K. Nalla and G.R.
             Newman. Boca Raton: CRC Press

     Manning, P. 1988. “Community Policing as a Drama of Control.” In Community Policing: Rhetoric or Reality,
            ed. J. R. Greene and S. D. Mastrofski. New York: Preager.

     Manwaring, M. G. 2007. “A Contemporary Challenge to State Sovereignty: Gangs and Other Illicit
            Transnational Criminal Organizations in Central America, El Salvador, Mexico, Jamaica and Brazil.”
            Strategic Studies Institute, U.S. Army War College, Carlisle, PA.

     Mastrofski, S. D., and J. R. Greene. 1993. “Community Policing and the Rule of Law.” In Police Innovation and
             Control of the Police: Problems of Law, Order, and Community, ed. D. Weisburd, L. Green, and C.
             Uchida. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Messner, S., R. Teske, R. Baller, and H. Thome. 2013. “Structural Covariates of Violent Crime Rates in Germany:
        Exploratory Spatial Analyses of Kreise.” Justice Quarterly 30 (6): 1015–41.

Moore, M. 1992. “Problem Solving and Community Policing.” In Crime and Justice: A Review of Research, vol.
       15, ed. M. Tonry and N. Morris. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

———. 1994. “Research Synthesis and Policy Implications.” In The Challenge of Community Policing: Testing
     the Promise, ed. D. P. Rosenbaum. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Mullick, R., and B. Nusrat. 2008. “Policing and Institution Building in Iraq.” In Democratic Policing in
         Transitional and Developing Countries, ed. M. D. Wiatrowski and N. Pino, 131–48. Hampshire, UK:
         Ashgate Publishing.

Mutonyi, J. 2002. “Fighting Corruption: Is Kenya on the Right Track?” Police Practice and Research: An
        International Journal 3 (1): 21–39.

Neild, R. 2000. “Community Policy.” Themes and Debates in Public Sector Reform: A Manual for Civil Society,
         Washington Office on Latin America, Washington, DC.

Neumann, P. J. 2013. “(Un)exceptional Violence(s) in Latin America.” Latin American Politics and Society 55 (1):
      168–75.

Newburn, T., and R. Sparks, eds. 2004. Criminal Justice and Political Cultures. Cullompton, UK: Willan
                                                                                                                   55
      Publishing.

OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development). 2015. States of Fragility 2015: Meeting
      Post-2015 Ambitions. Paris: OECD.

Onwudiwe, I. 2009. “Community Policing: The Case of Informal Policing in Nigeria.” In Community Policing:
      International Patterns and Comparative Perspectives, ed. D. Wisler and I. D. Onwudiwe, 81–102. Boca
      Raton, FL: CRC Press.

Oosterbaan, S., and J. van Wijk. 2015. “Pacifying and Integrating the Favelas of Rio de Janeiro: An Evaluation
       of the Impact of the UPP Program on Favela Residents.” International Journal of Comparative and
       Applied Criminal Justice 39 (3): 179–98.

Ozbay, O., and Y. Ozcan. 2008. “A Test of Hirschi’s Social Bonding Theory: A Comparison of Male and Female
        Delinquency.” International Journal of Offender Therapy and Comparative Criminology 52 (2):
        134–57.

Pestano, A. 2015. “10 Puerto Rico Police Officers Indicted on Organized Crime Charges.” UPI, September
        29, 2015, at http://www.upi.com/Top_News/World-News/2015/09/29/10-Puerto-Rico-police-officers-
        indicted-on-organized-crime-charges/9501443541094/.

Pino, N. 2001. “Community Policing and Social Capital.” Policing: An International Journal of Police Strategies
         and Management 24 (2): 200–15.

Pino, N., and M. Wiatrowski, eds. 2006. Democratic Policing in Transitional and Developing Countries.
         Hampshire, UK: Ashgate Publishing.

Prevention by Design. 2006. “Community Engagement Strategies: Tip Sheet.” University of California at
        Berkeley, Berkeley.




                                                                          PART 1: CRIME, POVERTY AND THE POLICE
     Punch, M, K. van der Vijver, and M. Zoomer. 2002. “Dutch ‘COP’: Developing Community Policing in the
             Netherlands.” Policing: An Internal Journal of Police Strategies and Management 25 (1): 60–79.

     Reichel, P. 2012. Comparative Criminal Justice Systems: A Topical Approach, 6th ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ:
              Prentice Hall.

     Riccio, V., M. de Miranda, and A. Muller. 2013. “Professionalizing the Amazonas Military Police through
              Training.” Police Practice and Research: An International Journal 14 (4): 295–307.

     Rodgers, D. 2006. “Living in the Shadow of Death: Gangs, Violence, and Social Order in Urban Nicaragua,
            1996–2002.” Journal of Latin American Studies 38 (2): 267–92.

     Selke, C. R. 2014. “Gangs in Central America.” Congressional Research Service, Washington, DC.

     Serrano-Berthat, R., and H. Lopez. 2011. “Crime and Violence in Central America: A Development Challenge.”
             Poverty Reduction and Economic Management Unit, Latin America and the Caribbean Region, World
             Bank, Washington, DC.

     Shanafelt, R. 2008. “Crime, Power and Policing in South Africa: Beyond Protected Privilege and Privileged
             Protection.” In Democratic Policing in Transitional and Developing Countries, ed. M. D. Wiatrowski
             and N. Pino, 149–64. Hampshire, UK: Ashgate Publishing.

     Sampson, R.J., S.W. Raudenbush, and F. Earls. (1997). “Neighborhoods and Violent Crime: A Multi-level
56
           Study of Collective Efficacy”, Science, 277 (August), 5238: 918-924.

     Sassen, S. (2001). The global city. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

     Shaw, C., and H. McKay. 1942. Juvenile Delinquency and Urban Areas: A Study of Rates of Delinquents
             in Relation to Differential Characteristics of Local Communities in American Cities. Chicago, IL:
             University of Chicago Press.

     Shearing, C. 1998. “Changing Paradigms in Policing: The Significance of Community Policing for the
             Governance of Security.” Occasional Paper 34, Institute for Security Studies, Pretoria.

     Shechory, M., and A. Laufer. 2008. “Social Control Theory and the Connection with Ideological Offenders
            among Israeli Youth during the Gaza Disengagement Period.” International Journal of Offender
            Therapy and Comparative Criminology 52 (4): 454–73.

     Simon, J. 2007. Governing through Crime. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

     Skogan, W. G. 1990. Disorder and Decline: Crime and the Spiral of Decay in American Neighborhoods. New
             York: Free Press.

     Skogan, W. G., and K. Frydl, eds. 2004. Fairness and Effectiveness in Policing: The Evidence. Washington, DC:
             National Research Council.

     Skogan, W. G. and S. M. Hartnett. 1999. Community Policing, Chicago Style. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

     Skolnick, J., and D. Bayley. 1986. The New Blue Line. New York: The Free Press.

     ———. 1988a. Community Policing: Issues and Practices around the World. Washington, DC: National
          Institute of Justice.




     Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
———. 1988b. “Theme and Variation in Community Policing.” In Crime and Justice: A Review of Research,
     vol. 8, ed. M. Tonty and N. Morris. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Snajdr, E. 2008. “Creating Police-Partnerships with Civil Society in Kazakhstan through U.S.-Funded Domestic
         Violence Training: A Step toward Democratic Policing.” In Democratic Policing in Transitional
         and Developing Countries, ed. M. D. Wiatrowski and N. Pino, 179–98. Hampshire, UK: Ashgate
         Publishing.

Steenbeck, W., and J. Hipp. 2011. “A Longitudinal Test of Social Disorganization Theory: Feedback Effects
       among Cohesion, Social Control, and Disorder.” Criminology 49 (3): 833–71.

Transparency International. 2013. “Global Corruption Barometer 2013.” Transparency International, Berlin.

Tuller, L. 2015. “Social Consequences of Violence: Collective Trauma, Stigma and Resilience.” Field Statement
           in Conflict and Violence, Department of Sociology, Northeastern University, Boston.

Tyler, T. R. 2006. Why People Obey the Law. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

UN (United Nations). 1948. “The Universal Declaration of Human Rights.” United Nations, New York.

———. 2000. “Millennium Summit Goals.” United Nations, New York.

———. 2002. “Guidelines for the Prevention of Crime.” United Nations, New York.
                                                                                                                   57

———. 2009. “The Millennium Development Goals Report.” United Nations, New York.

———. 2015. “Themes of the Interactive Dialogue for the Summit, Transforming the World: Realizing the Post-
     2015 Development Agenda.” United Nations, New York.

UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). 2015. “Sustainable Development Goals, Goal 16: Peace,
       Justice and Stable Institutions.” UNDP, New York.

UNODC (United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime). 2006. “Custodial and Non-Custodial Measures:
     Alternatives to Incarceration.” UNODC, Vienna.

———. 2011. Global Study on Homicide: Trends, Contexts, Data. Vienna: UNODC.

van Dijk, J. 2008. The World of Crime. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

van Kesteren, J., J. van Dijk, and P. Mayhew. 2014. “The International Crime Victim Surveys: A Retrospective.”
        International Review of Victimology 20 (1): 49–69.

Villarreal, A., and B. Silva. 2006. “Social Cohesion, Criminal Victimization and Perceived Risk of Crime in
          Brazilian Neighborhoods.” Social Forces 84 (3): 1725–53.

Wachtel, J. 2014. “Jamaica on the Long Road to Social Restoration.” Community and Family, Justice (blog),
        June 25, http://restorativeworks.net/2014/06/jamaica-restorative-country.

Wacquant, L. (2008). Urban outcasts: A comparative sociology of advanced marginality. Cambridge: Polity
      Press.

Westberg, M. (2010). Rwanda’s use of transitional justice after genocide: The gacaca courts and the ICTR.
       Kansas Law Review. 331-367.



                                                                           PART 1: CRIME, POVERTY AND THE POLICE
     WHO (World Health Organization). 2013. Global and Regional Estimates of Violence against Women:
           Prevalence and Health Effects of Intimate Partner Violence and Non-Partner Sexual Violence. Geneva:
           World Health Organization.

     World Bank. 2003. “A Resource Guide for Municipalities: Community Based Crime and Violence Prevention in
            Urban Latin America.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

     ———. 2011a. “Crime and Violence in Central America: A Development Challenge.” World Bank,
          Washington, DC.

     ———. 2011b. Violence in the City. Understanding and Supporting Community Responses to Urban Violence.
          Washington, DC: World Bank.

     ———. 2011c. World Development Report 2011: Conflict, Security, and Development. Washington, DC:
          World Bank.

     ———. 2014a. “Avoiding Crime in Latin America and the Caribbean.” Latin America and the Caribbean
          Series, Note 7, World Bank, Washington, DC.

     ———. 2014b. “Criminal Justice Portfolio Review.” World Bank, Washington, DC (Unpublished).

     ———. 2014c. Governance Global Solutions – Open Government. Online Document. World Bank,
          Washington, DC.
58

     ———. 2014d. Inner City Basic Services for the Poor (ICBSP) Project. ICR. World Bank, Washington, DC.

     World Bank and UNODC. 2007. “Crime, Violence, and Development: Trends, Costs, and Policy Options in the
            Caribbean.” Washington, DC and Vienna, World Bank and UNODC.

     Zvekic, U., and A. Alvazzi del Frate. 1995. “Criminal Victimization in the Developing World.” Journal of
              Criminal Justice 23 (6): 573.




     Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, DC 20433, USA
