March 2016




         Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime:
         Investing in Public Safety, the Rule of Law
         and Local Development in Poor Neighborhoods

         PART 3: ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY



                                      Governance Global Practice




3                                                    Lisa Barão
© 2016 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org



Disclaimer

This work is a product of external consultants and staff of the World Bank. The findings,
interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views
of the World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the governments they represent. The
World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries,
colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply
any judgment on the part of the World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

Rights and Permissions

The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because the World Bank encourages
dissemination of its knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for
noncommercial purposes as long as full attribution is given. For permission to reproduce any
part of this work for commercial purposes, please send a request with complete information to
the Copyright Clearance Center Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA; telephone:
978-750-8400; fax: 978-750-4470; Internet: www.copyright.com. All other queries on rights
and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher,
The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2422; e-mail:
pubrights@worldbank.org.




Cover Photo: Simone D. McCourtie/World Bank
Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime:
Investing in Public Safety, the Rule of Law
and Local Development in Poor Neighborhoods




 3
PART        ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY
             Lisa Barão
Table of Contents




Foreword and Acknowledgements	                   IV
About the Authors	                               VI
Introduction	1
                                                      III
1.	 Global Impact of Crime	                       1
2.	 Social Disorganization and Social Control	    8
3.	 Police Corruption and Police Legitimacy 	    18
4.	 Reform Efforts and Restorative Justice	      31
     Foreword and Acknowledgements



                                          Justice is central to the World Bank’s core agenda of reducing poverty and boosting
                                          shared prosperity. It is an intrinsic goal of development overall and influences
                                          the achievement of many specific development outcomes. Well-functioning and
                                          inclusive justice institutions prevent and mitigate conflict, crime, and violence;
                                          ensure executive accountability and people’s meaningful access to services;
                                          give people legal identity and voice to protect their rights; enable investment
                                          and private sector growth; and promote equitable and inclusive development
                                          outcomes.

                                          The Bank’s 2011 World Development Report demonstrated that conflict, crime,
                                          and violence are major barriers to development, with direct economic costs that
                                          can add up to substantial proportions of GDP.1 Of the various dimensions of the
                                          rule of law, the basic control of violence has the strongest correlation to economic
                                          growth in developing countries. Moreover, crime and violence especially affect
IV
                                          the poor. High levels of criminality and widespread violence create fear that
                                          constrains mobility, erodes trust between people and communities and their trust
                                          in institutions, and reinforces stigmas toward and the exclusion of certain groups
                                          perceived to be dangerous, all of which impede long-term development. Effective
                                          and well-functioning justice systems can provide the critical legitimate processes
                                          that are needed for the resolution of grievances that might otherwise lead to
                                          conflict, crime, and violence.

                                          Implementing holistic approaches to violence, crime, and insecurity has become
                                          a part of the Bank’s work. These engagements have thus far been limited and
                                          led chiefly by two Global Practices (GPs), primarily in Latin America and the
                                          Caribbean. The Urban and Social Development GP focuses on urban design
                                          and social approaches to violence prevention,2 and the Governance GP’s justice
                                          team is collaborating with them on analytical work, operational design, and initial
                                          implementation and on initial engagements with ministries of justice to support
                                          police and other criminal justice sector agencies, especially in Latin America.
                                          Citizen security and violence prevention are currently a small area of the Bank’s
                                          work, but they have significant growth potential, primarily in Latin America and
                                          the Caribbean, though demand also exists in the Middle East and North Africa,
                                          Europe and Central Asia, and various fragile and conflict-affected states.




     1	 In El Salvador, for example, the value of lives lost due to death and disability reached approximately US$271 million, nearly 2 percent of
        GDP, in 2010. See World Bank, “Crime and Violence in Central America:
        A Development Challenge (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2011a). In Guatemala, violence cost the country roughly US$2.4 billion, or 7.3
        percent of GDP in 2005. See UNDP, “El Costo Economico de la Violencia en Guatemala” (New York: UNDP: 2006).
     2	 In the area of violence prevention and citizen security, there are six Development Policy Loans (DPLs) worth US$2.7 billion in Brazil, Colom-
        bia, and Honduras. In addition, the Bank’s portfolio includes 53 projects aimed at violence prevention (20 investments, two Institutional
        Development Funds (IDFs), 16 analyses, and nine technical assistance operations). Roughly 60 percent of violence-related investments are
        located in Latin America and the Caribbean, with the remaining 40 percent divided between East Asia and Africa.




     Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
This document was developed as a result of a request from World Bank President
Jim Yong Kim to the Governance GP for more information on the link between
crime and poverty and the Bank’s current and potential engagement to support
client countries in their efforts to counter crime in their communities. The resulting
review of the evidence base and the Bank’s response to date pointed to the need
to highlight the importance of law enforcement to counter crime as part of a holistic
approach, especially in poor communities, which not only suffer from economic
and social ills but also rarely have access to the government services needed to
address these problems. Effective policing services are also lacking, leading to a
serious enforcement gap in many poor communities that requires attention and
investment to allow these neighborhoods to recover and eventually prosper.

The authors would like to thank the World Bank’s internal and external reviewers
of an earlier concept note and a draft of this document: Rodrigo Serrano-Berthet
                                                                                                                    V
(Lead Social Development Specialist, Social, Urban, Rural, Resilience Global
Practice [GSURR]), David Hawkes (Lead Specialist, Integrity Vice Presidency,
Directorate of Operations [INTOP]), Jorge Luis Silva (Public Sector Specialist,
Governance Global Practice [GGODR]), Joan Hofman Serrano (Senior Social
Development Specialist, GSURR), Jimena Garotte (Senior Counsel, Legal Vice
Presidency), and Holly Burkhalter (International Justice Mission). Input was also
provided by Alexander Berg, Deborah Isser, Doug Porter, Jared Schott, and Nicolas
Menzies (GGODR). Their feedback and comments have helped shape this paper
into what we hope will be a useful contribution to the growing literature on crime,
poverty, and development and ways to address police reform in challenging
circumstances. We also thank Patricia Carley for her excellent and skilled editing.




                                                                                   PART 3: ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY
     About the Authors



                               The authors of Parts 1 and 2 of this publication are Dr. Heike Gramckow, Lead
                               Counsel with the Justice and Rule of Law Group in the Governance Global Practice
                               of the World Bank in Washington, DC, Dr. Jack R. Greene, professor at the School
                               of Criminology and Criminal Justice at Northeastern University in Boston, MA,
                               where he studies the police. Dr. Ineke Haen Marshall, professor of sociology
                               at the School of Criminology and Criminal Justice at Northeastern University in
                               Boston, MA, and Lisa Barão.

                               Lisa Barão is the author of Part 3. She is a doctoral student at Northeastern
                               University in Boston, MA, earning her degree in Criminology and Justice Policy.
                               She obtained her bachelor’s degree in criminal justice from the University of
                               Massachusetts Amherst and her master’s degree in criminal justice from the
                               University of Massachusetts Lowell. Her research interests are centered on police-
                               community relations, organizational policies, and law enforcement recruitment
VI
                               and selection processes.




     Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
                                 VII




PART 3: ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY
VIII




       Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
 Introduction

 This annotated bibliography reviews the literature used in parts 1 and 2 of this publication, with a special focus
 on the results of numerous research projects on police interventions in troubled and marginalized communities
 and the ways police address persistent crime and violence problems in these areas. It also reviews international
 efforts centered on community and problem-oriented policing as well as restorative justice practices. The
 bibliography is seen as a resource for those developing such programs in the future. References are grouped
 under subject headings to assist in the search for specific information on crime, police reforms, and barriers to
 reform efforts.




  Global Impact of Crime
1.	

                                                                                                                      1
 Alda, E., M. Buvinic, and J. Lamas. 2006. “Neighbourhood Peacekeeping: The Inter-
         American Development Bank’s Violence Reduction Programs in Colombia and
         Uruguay.” Civil Wars 8 (2): 197–214.

        Violence in Latin America has increased substantially in recent years as a
        result of high income inequality, social exclusion by ethnicity, and the growing
        drug and weapons trades. Because the infrastructure within communities has
        deteriorated, most criminal justice systems lack institutional legitimacy. Violence
        has proven to be a major obstacle to economic and social development in Latin
        America, with an estimated cost of about US$15 billion annually in lost wealth
        and income, or about 5–25 percent of GDP. It is also estimated that violence
        is the number one cause of loss of years of healthy life due to violence-related
        morbidity among men in Latin America. Other indirect effects include lower
        accumulation of human capital, decreased participation in the labor market,
        and lower incomes. Because of these deleterious effects in Latin American
        countries, the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) has implemented
        violence reduction programs in Colombia and Uruguay. The authors review the
        promising effects and suggest recommendations for future efforts.


 Altindag, D. 2012. “Crime and Unemployment: Evidence from Europe.” International
        Review of Law and Economics 32 (1):145–57.

        This study seeks to explore the effect of unemployment on crime in an
        international context. It examines all European countries and uses consistently
        measured rates of crime from the European Sourcebook of Crime and Criminal
        Justice. Results indicate that a 1 percent increase in the unemployment rate
        results in a 2 percent increase in property crimes. In France, Italy, and the
        United Kingdom, it is estimated that a 1 percent increase in the unemployment
        rate causes about $1.2-1.4 billion in annual losses due to property crime.



                                                                                  PART 3: ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY
                        Brush, J. 2007. “Does Income Inequality Lead to More Crime? A Comparison of Cross-
                                Sectional and Time Series Analyses of United States Counties.” Economics
                                Letters 96 (2): 264–68.

                               The study investigates the relationship between income inequality and crime
                               in the United States using cross-sectional data. The researcher uses census
                               and crime data reported to the police in 1994 and 2000, acknowledging that
                               underreporting may affect results. The researcher failed to find any significant
                               relationship between crime and income inequality. He explains that the null
                               results may have been due to other significant contextual events that occurred
                               during the time period examined.


                        Dickenson-Jones, G., D. Hyslop, and M. Vaira-Lucero. 2014. “Estimating the Global
                               Costs of Violence.” Business, Peace and Sustainable Development 2: 6–27.

                               The researchers attempt to estimate violence containment spending, or the
                               economic activity that is related to the consequences or prevention of violence
                               where the violence is directed against people or property. The less a nation
                               spends on the prevention of violence the more resources it will have for
                               other more productive expenditures. To estimate the global cost of violence
                               containment, the researchers used estimates of the costs of criminal justice
                               personnel, assault and terrorism-related injuries, homicide, prisoners, military
2
                               expenditures, peacekeeping missions, public fear, refugees, and lost output
                               due to internal or external conflict. Results suggested an estimated cost of
                               US$9.46 trillion, or 11 percent of world GDP. The results also estimated the 10
                               countries with the highest violence containment spending as a proportion of
                               GDP, which included North Korea, Syria, and Liberia as the top three countries.
                               This study demonstrates the benefits of reduced violence containment
                               spending and resources that would be saved for other uses through more
                               peaceful environments.


                        Fanjzylber, P., D. Lederman, and N. Loayza. 2000. “Crime and Victimization: An
                                Economic Perspective.” Economia 1 (1): 219–78.

                               Citing several sources, this article reviews the previous literature on the
                               estimated costs of crime for several different regions. The researchers use crime
                               data from the United Nations world crime surveys and mortality data from
                               the World Health Organization. Results indicate that past incidence of violent
                               crime significantly predicts future rates of crime. Using GDP as a variable,
                               the researchers find that stagnant economic activity induces more criminal
                               activity, and that a 1 percent increase in GDP growth is associated with a 2.4
                               percent decrease in the homicide rate. Results also suggest that higher income
                               inequality is associated with a rise in criminal activity. Additionally, the higher
                               levels of trust among community members has a significant and robust effect
                               on reducing levels of violent crime. The researchers further review individual-
                               level variables and personal characteristics related to crime victimization in Latin
                               America.




    Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
Fuentes, J. 2005. “Violent Conflict and Human Development in Latin America: The
       Cases of Colombia, El Salvador, and Guatemala.” Occasional Paper, Human
       Development Report Office, United Nations Development Programme, New
       York.

       The paper aims to identify the main costs of violent conflict for human
       development in Colombia, El Salvador, and Guatemala. Due to conflict within
       these regions, it is reported that annual GDP rates have been lower than in
       other regions, and due to the length of those conflicts, cumulative losses have
       been very high. It is estimated that the annual GDP losses as a result of conflict
       are within the range of 0.3 and 2 percentage points. The author argues that the
       impacts of violent conflict include damage to infrastructure; reduced economic
       expenditure and increased military spending; increased opportunities for
       corruption and drug trafficking; the abandonment of schools due to danger,
       mortalities, and injuries; and damage to psychological health.


Higginson, A., L. Mazerolle, J. Davis, L. Bedford, and K. Mengersen. 2013. “The
       Impact of Policing Interventions on Violent Crime in Developing Countries.”
       3ie Systematic Review SR3.1277, International Initiative for Impact Evaluation,
       Washington, DC.

       This article is a systematic review protocol and provides an overview of the
                                                                                                                  3
       state of research regarding the impact of crime interventions in developing
       countries. These countries are especially vulnerable to the costs associated with
       violence and crime, including costs linked to health care, rehabilitation, physical
       and property damage, law enforcement personnel, prosecution of offenders,
       and lost work productivity. In weak developing states, the effects of crime can
       significantly suppress growth and stability. The authors suggest that developing
       countries are especially in need of policing interventions because they lack the
       infrastructure, governance mechanisms, social norms, and professionalization of
       the police present in other, more stable countries.


Hofman, K., A. Primack, G. Keusch, and S. Hrynkow. 2005. “Addressing the Growing
      Burden of Trauma and Injury in Low- and Middle-Income Countries.” American
      Journal of Public Health 95 (1): 13–17.

       The authors’ goal is to further the understanding of how trauma and
       injury contribute to the global burden of disease. The article reports that
       interpersonal violence is the leading cause of death and disability in the 15–44-
       year age group among low- and middle-income countries of the Americas. Due
       to the inadequate systems of hospital and community-based emergency care,
       this trauma leaves them with a much greater burden. The authors continue
       by explaining how medical resources, continued research, and advanced
       technologies may help these countries alleviate the burdensome effects of
       physical trauma.




                                                                                 PART 3: ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY
                        Kelly, M. 2000. “Inequality and Crime.” Review of Economics and Statistics 82 (4):
                                500–39.

                               This article seeks to examine the relationship between inequality and crime in
                               urban counties in the United States using uniform crime reporting (UCR) data
                               from all metropolitan counties in 1991. Because factors like poverty, ethnic
                               heterogeneity, and residential mobility are predicted to weaken social control
                               and undermine collective efficacy, it is projected that higher levels of inequality
                               and poverty will be associated with higher rates of crime. The researchers find
                               that property crime is strongly affected by measures of poverty, and violent
                               crime is strongly affected by measures of inequality.


                        Krug, E., L. Dahlberg, J. Mercy, A. Zwi, and R. Lozano. 2002. World Report on Violence
                               and Health. Geneva: World Health Organization.

                               This report highlights the causes, risk factors, and extent of the problem of
                               various types of violence. In summarizing this global health problem, the
                               authors define a typology of violence that includes self-directed, interpersonal,
                               and collective violence. The report estimates that in 2000, 1.6 million people
                               worldwide died as a result of violence. Over half of these deaths were due
                               to self-inflicted and one-third to interpersonal violence, and one-fifth were
                               war-related. Most occurred in low- to middle-income countries. The authors
4
                               recognize that violence is the result of several individual, community, and
                               societal factors, and its prevention requires complex, multifaceted solutions.


                        Krug, E., J. Mercy, L. Dahlberg, and A. Zwi. 2002. “The World Report on Violence and
                               Health.” Lancet 360 (9339): 1083–88.

                               This article summarizes the major findings of the World Report on Violence
                               and Health. The authors emphasize the role that families and communities
                               play in exerting protective and risk-inducing influences on a person’s likelihood
                               of turning to violence. They also explain that the effects of interpersonal
                               violence and war are far-reaching, as they can impede economic development
                               by increasing the costs associated with health, human, and criminal justice
                               services. They can also disrupt the establishment and viability of businesses.
                               The authors argue that national plans of action involving a variety of relevant
                               governmental agencies and nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) must be
                               developed to address the complex causes of violence.


                        Meloni, O. 2014. “Does Poverty Relief Spending Reduce Crime? Evidence from
                               Argentina.” International Review of Law and Economics 39: 28–38.

                               This article examines the impact of poverty alleviation programs on crime in
                               Argentina. The relationship between welfare assistance to alleviate poverty
                               and crime has been investigated, and though many studies have found that
                               it reduces crime, some recent research has found the opposite. The author
                               tested the impact of Argentina’s poverty relief program on the total crime
                               rate, property crime, robbery, larceny, aggravated assault, and murder. Results
                               suggested that welfare spending and the alleviation of poverty helped reduce




    Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
       total crime and especially affected property crimes, robbery, and aggravated
       assault. These effects are thought to be the result of increased opportunity cost
       for committing crimes, increased social control, and decreased levels of strain.


Moser, C., and J. Holland. 1997. “Urban Poverty and Violence in Jamaica.” World
       Bank, Washington, DC.

       The authors examine violence in Jamaica, which has heavily increased over the
       past several decades. It is important to study the costs of violence because
       they can include weak investor confidence, higher health and police costs,
       the disaffection and migration of the urban middle class, higher mortality and
       morbidity rates, reduced access to social services, dysfunctional families, the
       deeper oppression of women, and an overall climate of fear. The researchers
       used a Participatory Urban Appraisal (PUA) methodology to determine
       community perceptions of the causes of violence; the interrelationship between
       violence and poverty; the impact of violence on employment, the economic
       and social infrastructure, and social institutions; and the perceived means by
       which government, communities, households, and individuals could work to
       reduce violence. Citizens expressed resentment toward politicians, negative
       relations with the police, a perceived link between economic insecurity and
       levels of crime/violence, and a perception that increased violence was due to a
       breakdown of the moral and behavioral fabric of their society.
                                                                                                                 5



Moser, C., and C. McIlwaine. 2006. “Latin American Urban Violence as a Development
       Concern: Towards a Framework for Violence Reduction.” World Development
       34 (1): 89–112.

       The article argues that poverty, inequality, and exclusion related to the unequal
       distribution of economic, political, and social resources have led to increases in
       violence in Latin American countries. Consequently, high levels of violence have
       negatively affected micro- and macro-economic growth and have undermined
       the functioning of health services, the security forces, judicial systems, and
       housing and social services. The authors suggest that violence affects physical,
       financial, human, social, and natural capital. Specifically, it directly erodes
       social capital by reducing trust and cooperation within communities. Violence
       prevention strategies should work to address the multiple ways in which
       violence erodes the legitimacy of government institutions and the relationships
       between citizens and within communities.


Pare, R., and R. Felson. 2014. “Income Inequality, Poverty and Crime across Nations.”
        The British Journal of Sociology 65 (3): 434–58.

       This article examines the positive association between income inequality
       and homicide rates and the cross-national variation in crime. To assess the
       association, the researchers used the Gini index as a measure of poverty and
       inequality and the International Crime Victimization Survey to measure crime
       occurrence. Their results suggest that income inequality was unrelated to the
       variation in crime across countries, but countries with higher levels of poverty,
       or absolute deprivation, were more likely to experience homicide, robbery, and
       burglary and other thefts.



                                                                                PART 3: ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY
                        Seedat, M., A. Niekerk, R. Jewkes, S. Suffla, and K. Ratele. 2009. “Violence and Injuries
                               in South Africa: Prioritizing an Agenda for Prevention.” Lancet 374 (9694):
                               1011–22.

                               This article outlines the proliferation of violence in South Africa and its leading
                               causes. Violence and related injuries are the second leading cause of death and
                               disability in South Africa. Of the 3.5 million people per year who seek health
                               care for non-fatal injuries, over half are related to violence. The authors suggest
                               that increased rates of crime are due to social dynamics such as poverty
                               and income inequality, as well as specific factors such as constructions of
                               masculinity, intergenerational cycling of violence, misuse of drugs and alcohol,
                               and the availability of firearms.


                        Soares, R. 2004. “Development, Crime and Punishment: Accounting for the
                                International Differences in Crime Rates.” Journal of Development Economics
                                73 (1): 155–84.

                               The researcher explores the differences in crime rates as they relate to
                               development across countries. The paper provides a useful summary of the
                               previous research on inequality and crime, listing the unit of analysis, type of
                               crime studied, and conclusions. By using a novel economic analysis, the results
                               suggest that previous studies linking development to crime are incorrect and
6
                               are actually due to the correlation between development and crime reporting
                               rates. Although the analyses do not show a link between development and
                               crime, inequality has a positive effect on thefts and contact crimes. Additionally,
                               as education increases, the number of thefts and contact crimes decreases. This
                               study suggests that the use of official data in international studies may lead to
                               incorrect conclusions.


                        UNODC (United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime). 2005. “Crime and Development
                             in Africa.” UNODC, Vienna.

                               In part II, the report summarizes the impact of crime on the society, business,
                               and governance of Africa. It specifically addresses the high levels of health-
                               related problems in Africa as well as the fact that the continent experiences the
                               highest levels of violence and homicide in the world. It also outlines the effects
                               of crime on corruption and organized crime in Africa.


                        ———. 2007. “Crime and Development in Central America.” UNODC, Vienna.

                               In part III, this report summarizes the extensive, multifaceted impact of crime on
                               society, business, and governance in Central America. Crime can have extreme
                               impacts on individuals, especially victims of crime who may find it difficult to
                               cope amid limited access to health and social services. Crime and fear of crime
                               can also paralyze social relations and trust, erode social and human capital, and
                               interfere with economic and educational interaction. High levels of crime can
                               also affect the economy by preventing foreign investments, raising the costs
                               of doing business, decreasing tourism, and increasing the risk of corruption.




    Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
       Finally, crime has the power to undermine relations between citizens and
       governments. The report provides an extensive summary of these effects and
       outlines the particular experiences in Central America.


Waters, H., Y. Rajkotia, S. Basu, J. Rehwinkel, and A. Butchart. 2004. The Economic
       Dimensions of Interpersonal Violence. Geneva: World Health Organization.

       This report reviews the impact of interpersonal violence and the effects of
       interventions and policies on this type of violence. Interpersonal violence is
       caused by a variety of complex factors, and at the community level, these
       risk factors include poverty, high residential mobility, unemployment, social
       isolation, the local drug trade, and weak institutions. The authors list the
       potential direct and indirect costs of interpersonal violence; they also describe
       several attempted interventions and assess their effectiveness.




                                                                                                                 7




                                                                                PART 3: ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY
    2.	Social Disorganization and Social Control

                          Akyuz, K., and T. Armstrong. 2011. “Understanding the Sociostructural Correlates of
                                 Terrorism in Turkey.” International Criminal Justice Review 21 (2): 134–55.

                                 The authors use social disorganization theory as a potential explanation of
                                 terrorist activity, suggesting that the sources of motivation for both terrorism
                                 and crime and delinquency may be the same. Terrorists may assume that
                                 citizens will not intervene in problematic social situations because weak social
                                 ties exist due to poverty, population mobility, and ethnic heterogeneity. The
                                 authors examine the relationship between terrorism and the sociostructural
                                 correlates of terrorism in 81 provinces of Turkey. Results suggest that there
                                 are strong effects of poverty, mobility, and heterogeneity on the occurrence of
                                 terrorism. Because many studies of the correlates of terrorism in Turkey have
                                 been inconsistent, the authors suggest that further research is necessary.


                          Bruinsma, G., J. Pauwels, F. Weerman, and W. Bernasco. 2013. “Social Disorganization,
                                 Social Capital, Collective Efficacy and the Spatial Distribution of Crime and
8
                                 Offenders.” British Journal of Criminology 53 (5): 942–63.

                                 The goal of this study was to examine six different versions of social
                                 disorganization theory within 86 small neighborhoods in The Hague,
                                 Netherlands. The small city is multicultural and consists of large minority groups
                                 and many different nationalities. The researchers conducted a community
                                 survey to measure offenses and offenders per neighborhood as well as several
                                 indicators of social disorganization, such as neighborhood mobility, family
                                 disruption, concentrated disadvantage, collective efficacy, and local friendship
                                 networks. Results indicated that the strongest indicator of offender rates was
                                 residential mobility. Contrary to social disorganization theory, local friendship
                                 networks, organizational participation, and unsupervised groups had no effect
                                 on offender or offense rates. The researchers argue that none of the six versions
                                 of social disorganization theory apply well to the Netherlands context. They
                                 posited that crime may be more related to the opportunity structure for criminal
                                 activity than social disorganization variables.


                          Buonanno, P., D. Montolio, and P. Vanin. 2009. “Does Social Capital Reduce Crime?”
                                Journal of Law and Economics 52 (1): 145–70.

                                 This study examined whether social capital in the form of civic norms and
                                 associational networks decreases the occurrence of crime. The researchers
                                 conducted a survey in Italian communities and used recreational and voluntary
                                 associations, referenda turnout, and blood donation as measures of social
                                 capital and their effects on crimes such as property thefts, robberies, and car
                                 thefts. Findings revealed that blood donations and recreational and voluntary
                                 organizations were all significantly associated with reductions in property crime
                                 rates. This indicates that the promotion of civic norms and associational life
                                 likely has very strong benefits for crime reduction.



      Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
Chamratrithirong, A., B. Miller, H. Byrnes, O. Rhucharoenpornpanich, P. Cupp, M.
      Rosati, W. Fongkaew, K. Atwood, and M. Todd. 2013. “Intergenerational
      Transmission of Religious Beliefs and Practices and the Reduction of Adolescent
      Delinquency in Urban Thailand.” Journal of Adolescence 36 (1): 79–89.

       Social control theory suggests that strong bonds in the form of attachment,
       involvement, commitment, and belief reduce the risks of delinquency. The
       authors of this study specifically examine the relationship between religiosity
       and delinquency in Thailand. They argue that according to social control theory,
       religiosity may decrease delinquency by strengthening bonds with parents
       and spiritual beliefs and fostering attachments to conventional norms and
       values. The study uses a survey conducted by the Thai Family Matters Project,
       which questioned 420 pairs of parents and teens in the same household.
       The researchers found that the results supported social control theory.
       Intergenerational transmission of religious beliefs decreased delinquency,
       probably by increasing adherence to conventional morality. They furthermore
       found that parental spirituality, regardless of whether specific religiosity was
       transmitted to the child, decreased delinquency. The authors posit that this may
       be because spiritual families may have stronger ties, increased socialization,
       and more positive influence on adolescents.


Choi, C., and S. Choi. 2012. “Collaborative Partnerships and Crime in Disorganized
                                                                                                                 9
       Communities.” Public Administration Review 72 (2): 228–39.

       This article explores the effects of collaborative partnerships on crime with a
       specific focus on the effects within disorganized neighborhoods. The authors
       argue that collaborative partnerships may draw community resources into crime
       prevention and increase informal social controls by facilitating the emergence
       of collective efficacy. The researchers explain that police partnerships would
       allow citizens to express their needs and concerns to law enforcement and
       allow police to keep citizens informed of crime issues. The study used a
       2004 sample of 414 municipal police departments with a minimum of 30,000
       residents and collected information on neighborhood demographics, crimes
       reported to the police, and a number of problem-solving partnerships. Results
       indicated that police departments in disorganized communities tended to
       experience higher rates of crime and collaborative partnerships substantially
       reduce crime rates. Furthermore, the researchers found an interactive effect,
       indicating that the magnitude of the influence of collaborative partnerships was
       much stronger in highly disorganized communities.


Chui, W., and H. Chan. 2012. “An Empirical Investigation of Social Bonds and Juvenile
       Delinquency in Hong Kong.” Child Youth Care Forum 41 (4): 371–86.

       This study aims to discover the effect of different social bonds on theft and
       violent delinquency among male and female adolescents in Hong Kong.
       Surveys were completed by 1,377 male and female students in nine different
       secondary schools. Students answered questions that measured different
       social bonds as well as self-reported participation in theft and violent crime.
       Students who had weak beliefs in the legal system were significantly more
       likely to commit theft. Those who were less bonded with their parents and
       less committed to their studies were more likely to commit violent crime.



                                                                                PART 3: ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY
                                Conversely, higher involvement in organizational activities was significantly
                                related to more occurrences of violent crime. These relationships were
                                generally found to persist in spite of differences in age.


                         Ferdik, F., S. Wolfe, and N. Blasco. 2014. “Informal Social Controls, Procedural Justice
                                 and Perceived Police Legitimacy: Do Social Bonds Influence Evaluations of
                                 Police Legitimacy?” American Journal of Criminal Justice 39 (3): 471–92.

                                Social bonds, specifically attachment and commitment components, are
                                said to strongly affect individuals’ psychological and social processes. The
                                researchers posit that if social bonds can influence a multitude of social
                                behaviors, they may also influence individual perceptions of law enforcement.
                                Studies that have previously tried to examine this relationship have primarily
                                used middle and high school–aged students, and many have found a positive
                                relationship between social bonds and perceptions of police legitimacy. Using
                                a survey of 300 college-age students, this study investigated whether parental
                                attachment and commitment to school affect evaluations of police legitimacy.
                                The analysis revealed no significant relationship between parental and school
                                attachment and perceptions of legitimacy. The researchers explain that this may
                                indicate that the effects of attachment begin to diminish in early adulthood,
                                but additional research is necessary. The analysis also revealed a moderate
                                relationship between levels of parental attachment and the effect of procedural
10
                                justice on perceptions of legitimacy. This may occur because individuals who
                                are bonded are socialized to believe in the morality of officers and expect
                                certain forms of behavior, while those with weak attachments do not learn what
                                behaviors are expected or to respect law enforcement officers.


                         Hartjen, C., and S. Kethineni. 1999. “Exploring the Etiology of Delinquency across
                                 Country and Gender.” Journal of Crime and Justice 22 (2): 55–90.

                                The researchers sought to investigate whether criminological theories of crime
                                were generalizable across social-cultural boundaries, particularly focusing on
                                social learning, strain, and social control theories of crime. The study uses data
                                from a self-reported survey conducted with high school students in Madras,
                                India as well as a subsample of the National Youth Survey conducted in the
                                United States. The authors specify that their intention is not to compare
                                levels of delinquency across contexts but rather the correlates of delinquency.
                                Regarding social control variables, findings revealed that such variables
                                operated in the same manner to influence behavior in all social-cultural
                                situations.


                         Hoeve, M., G. Stams, C. Put, J. Dubas, P. Laan, and J. Gerris. 2012. “A Meta-Analysis
                                of Attachment to Parents and Delinquency.” Journal of Abnormal Psychology
                                40 (5): 771–85.

                                This meta-analysis investigates the link between attachment to parents and
                                adolescent delinquency using 74 manuscripts that matched the established
                                search criteria. The authors also sought to examine potential moderators such




     Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
       as gender and age differences. Findings confirmed that across the sample of
       studies examined, poor attachment to parents was associated with increased
       delinquent behaviors. Although theoretical factors were investigated, results
       indicated that the method of measuring attachment had an impact on its
       relative influence. Those who used parent reports to measure attachment
       found stronger links than those who relied on youth self-reports. Findings also
       revealed that parental discipline and supervision had strong negative effects on
       delinquency. Finally, parental attachment had similar effects for both males and
       females, but the effects diminished in strength as youth grew older.


Jiang, S., K. Land, and J. Wang. 2013. “Social Ties, Collective Efficacy and Perceived
        Neighborhood Property Crime in Guangzhou, China.” Asian Criminology 8 (3):
        207–23.

       This study explores perceptions of property crime and their correlates and
       the applicability of collective efficacy in urban China. The authors note that
       few studies have been conducted in non-Western contexts, though one study
       conducted in the city of Tianjin, China found that social disorganization theory
       helps predict burglary victimization risk. The researchers interviewed a sample
       of 1,199 residents from approximately 30 different communities. The outcome
       variable was measured as the perception of neighborhood crime for crimes
       with a property component, and a variety of social disorganization variables
                                                                                                                 11
       such as poverty, residential stability, social ties, and social trust were also
       measured. Results revealed that higher levels of community residential stability
       and lower levels of poverty were associated with lower levels of property
       crime. Furthermore, results demonstrated that measures of collective efficacy
       mediated the relationship between poverty and crime but not residential
       stability and crime.


Kochel, T. 2012. “Can Police Legitimacy Promote Collective Efficacy?” Justice
       Quarterly 29 (3): 384–419.

       This article investigated the role of policing in promoting collective efficacy
       in the developing nation of Trinidad and Tobago. The researcher argues that
       this is especially important because evidence indicates that collective efficacy
       can decrease crime even within structurally disadvantaged communities,
       and that high levels of legitimacy could foster the building of shared values
       and norms and increase collective efficacy. She further argues that a lack of
       legitimacy diminishes collective efficacy because when legal institutions are
       not trusted or respected, the conventional values that they represent will also
       be less respected. The researcher surveyed 2,969 individuals in 74 different
       neighborhoods in 13 different police districts, in addition to demographic data
       collected from the national census. Results indicated that when individuals
       observe police officers delivering higher-quality services, they also tend to
       grant more legitimacy to institutions. Neighborhoods with higher levels of
       collective efficacy also view police services and police behavior more positively.
       Finally, though collective efficacy influenced views of the quality of police
       services, the author did not find any direct links between police behaviors and
       their ability to foster social ties and collective efficacy.




                                                                                PART 3: ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY
                         Lederman, D., N. Loayza, and A. Menendez. 2002. “Violent Crime: Does Social Capital
                               Matter?” Economic Development and Cultural Change 50 (3): 509–39.

                                The concept of social capital consists of several different elements that
                                arguably decrease crime by allowing for the peaceful resolution of conflicts
                                and enabling communities to better organize themselves for collective action.
                                The researchers seek to examine the effects of social capital across 39 different
                                contexts in developed and developing countries. The study uses indicators of
                                social capital as measured in the World Values Survey as well as the incidence
                                of homicide as collected by the World Health Organization. Results suggest
                                that a sense of trust among community members significantly reduces homicide
                                occurrence even while controlling for income inequality and economic growth,
                                but the effect of other indicators of social capital was less clear.


                         Maguire, E., W. Wells, and C. Katz. 2011. “Measuring Community Risk and Protective
                                Factors for Adolescent Problem Behaviors: Evidence from a Developing
                                Nation.” Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency 48 (4): 594–620.

                                The researchers seek to examine the effects of risk and protective factors in
                                the context of Trinidad and Tobago. Although the nation is one of the more
                                prosperous of the Caribbean, crime increased about 315 percent from 1999
                                to 2005. Although some risk and protective factors have been linked to crime,
12
                                gang membership, and gun availability in developed nations, there has been
                                little examination of how these factors may affect communities in developing
                                nations. A Trinidad and Tobago Youth Survey was administered to 2,552
                                students from 22 urban public schools in five districts in 2006. The researchers
                                found that two community protective factors (i.e., opportunities and reward
                                for pro-social involvement) had no significant effects. Furthermore, only the
                                perceived availability of drugs and firearms had a statistically significant effect
                                on the number of respondents who reported using drugs, owning a gun, and
                                belonging to a gang. These results suggest that any investigation of community
                                risk and protective factors likely needs further examination in the context of
                                developing nations.


                         Messner, S., R. Teske, R. Baller, and H. Thome. 2013. “Structural Covariates of Violent
                               Crime Rates in Germany: Exploratory Spatial Analyses of Kreise.” Justice
                               Quarterly 30 (6): 1015–41.

                                This article examined whether rates of robbery and assault in Germany were
                                patterned by district (kreise) and different structural characteristics such as
                                resource deprivation, population structure, and family structure. Because
                                Germany’s historical circumstances left it divided into eastern and western
                                divisions, it was previously hypothesized that different crime rates would
                                be patterned according to these divisions. Instead, the research found that
                                differences follow a northwestern versus southeastern divide. The researchers
                                analyzed 413 different kreise to examine rates of robbery and assault as well as
                                socioeconomic and demographic factors. Results indicated that both robbery
                                and assault showed distinctive geographical patterns, but the patterning
                                of both crimes did not completely overlap. They also indicated that as
                                deprivation, urbanism, divorce, and the relative size of the young population




     Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
       increased, robbery also increased. The researchers therefore concluded that
       the criminogenic effects of structural characteristics like urbanism and pervasive
       deprivation could be generalized to the German context.


Morenoff, J., R. Sampson, and S. Raudenbush. 2001. “Neighborhood Inequality,
      Collective Efficacy, and the Spatial Dynamics of Urban Violence.” Criminology
      39 (3): 517–58.

       This study seeks to examine how inequality, social processes, and structural
       characteristics interact to increase or decrease rates of homicide. Specifically,
       the authors are interested in how social capital and collective efficacy affect
       homicide victimization. To examine these effects, the study used a subsample
       of 343 neighborhoods from the Project on Human Development in Chicago
       Neighborhoods (PHDCN) to measure concentrated disadvantage, inequality,
       parental supervision, population density, residential stability, and concentrated
       immigration. Results indicated that collective efficacy, neighborhood inequality,
       and spatial proximity to violence are significant predictors of homicide
       variation. Because collective efficacy diminishes rates of violence, the authors
       suggest that future research investigate conditions that may foster trust, social
       control, and strong social ties.


                                                                                                                 13
Odabasi, M. 2014. “Linking Community Policing Activities with Social Disorganization
      Theory: Examples from Turkish National Police.” International Journal of Human
      Sciences 11 (1): 1149–62.

       This article examines community policing activities in Turkey and identifies
       those guided by social disorganization theory, which assumes that crime occurs
       in certain neighborhoods because of an absence of community-based social
       control. Community policing initiatives are aimed at improving citizens’ quality
       of life, enhancing the efficient and effective allocation of resources within
       communities, and creating social bonds with citizens. The authors suggest
       that most departments, including the police in Turkey, take part in a wide
       variety of community policing activities, and training and officer investment
       could be improved if the purposes of such activities were explained by police
       administrators. In Turkey, the Turkish National Police (TNP) is the only policing
       authority, and almost all city departments have created community policing
       units. Police hold peace meetings in which citizens are invited to participate,
       listen, and share their opinions. Community police officers also patrol their
       jurisdictions and note abandoned construction sites and buildings whose
       owners are then notified that they must either complete construction or limit
       entry. Units also assign particular officers to each neighborhood so that citizens
       can be familiar with and confident in those working to maintain community
       order.


Ozbay, O., and Y. Ozcan. 2008. “A Test of Hirschi’s Social Bonding Theory: A
       Comparison of Male and Female Delinquency.” International Journal of
       Offender Therapy and Comparative Criminology 52 (2): 134–57.

       The authors seek to test the applicability of social bonding theory among both
       male and female adolescents as well as across international contexts. Although



                                                                                PART 3: ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY
                                social bonding theory has been tested extensively, few studies have attempted
                                to discover whether the effects of types of bonds differ between males and
                                females. This study surveyed a sample of 1,710 high school students in Ankara,
                                Turkey to examine the contextual and gendered effects of social bonds.
                                Results indicated that the effects of social bonds in Turkey mirrored those in
                                Western contexts. That is, stronger bonds had a negative effect on reported
                                delinquency. Although the effects of bonds operated similarly among males
                                and females, the effects were slightly stronger among male respondents. This
                                effect may be at least partially due to cultural differences, in that education is
                                valued much more for males than for females.


                         Pino, N. 2001. “Community Policing and Social Capital.” Policing: An International
                                Journal of Police Strategies and Management 24 (2): 200–15.

                                The author argues that consideration and examination of social capital will
                                aide in the implementation and evaluation of community policing by allowing
                                officials to use benchmarks other than crime rates. He explains that there are
                                several different forms of social capital, including trust, that support pro-social
                                behavior, leadership, and voluntary organizations. The establishment of one
                                form of social capital will then lead to the creation of additional forms. The
                                researcher conducted several focus groups with neighborhood citizens in a
                                small city in Iowa and found that when the community and police worked
14
                                together through community meetings and collaborative initiatives, the results
                                were positive, in that citizens grew closer and felt more confident in police
                                efforts. However, some problems remained, including residual distrust, lack
                                of police resources, and lack of police enthusiasm. The author suggests that
                                more trust, social capital building, and leadership are needed within police
                                departments as well.


                         Sampson, R., and W. B. Groves. 1989. “Community Structure and Crime: Testing Social
                               Disorganization Theory.” American Journal of Sociology 94 (4): 774–802.

                                The goal of this article was to examine Shaw and McKay’s formulation of
                                social disorganization theory, which posits that structural barriers impede the
                                development of the formal and informal ties needed for community-level
                                problem solving. The researchers use data from the 1982 British Crime Survey
                                to measure community-level structural factors, mediating factors of social
                                disorganization and self-reported criminal offending and criminal victimization.
                                Results showed that communities in England and Wales with sparse friendship
                                networks, unsupervised teenage groups, and low organizational participation
                                were also plagued by high rates of crime and delinquency.


                         Shechory, M., and A. Laufer. 2008. “Social Control Theory and the Connection with
                               Ideological Offenders among Israeli Youth during the Gaza Disengagement
                               Period.” International Journal of Offender Therapy and Comparative
                               Criminology 52 (4): 454–73.

                                The researchers examined whether illegal activities committed by Israeli
                                teenagers during the Gaza disengagement period could be explained by
                                social control theory. Although social control theory has frequently been found



     Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
       to at least partially explain delinquent behaviors, it has not been tested as an
       explanation of ideologically based illegal activity. The researchers collected
       a convenience sample of 262 adolescents from 56 settlements in Judea and
       Samaria. All participants engaged in some sort of legal or illegal activity
       in opposition to the evacuation. They asked questions related to personal
       background, participation in opposition to the disengagement process,
       and control theory variables. About 60 percent of those questioned had
       participated in some illegal activity, and those individuals tended to have
       higher levels of ideological obligation. Those who took part in illegal activities
       were found to have a lower sense of belief in institutions and a higher level of
       involvement with friends. Such results do not fully support social control theory,
       but rather, they highlight differences that are likely present in the emergence of
       ideological delinquency. Illegal activity in ideologically motivated cases is more
       likely to be heavily influenced by close relationships with friends and family who
       hold similar religious beliefs.


Shoff, C., and T. Yang. 2012. “Untangling the Associations among Distrust, Race, and
        Neighborhood Social Environment: A Social Disorganization Perspective.”
        Social Science & Medicine 74 (9): 1342–52.

       This article examines whether elements of disorganization in a neighborhood
       social environment explain distrust in institutions such as the health care
                                                                                                                 15
       system. Specifically, the researchers aimed to discover whether racial
       differences or neighborhood social environments played a more important role
       in levels of distrust. Social environment may affect levels of distrust because
       social disorganization theory suggests that socially disorganized communities
       will produce and experience more crime, which then makes citizens feel
       vulnerable and threatened. The researchers use data from a 2008 health
       survey conducted by the Philadelphia Health Management Corporation. The
       authors find that African-American respondents have greater levels of distrust
       compared to white respondents; however, neighborhood social stability and
       property crime rates mediated any racial effect. Results lent some support
       to social disorganization theory, but several disorganization variables were
       insignificant.


Steenbeck, W., and J. Hipp. 2011. “A Longitudinal Test of Social Disorganization
      Theory: Feedback Effects among Cohesion, Social Control, and Disorder.”
      Criminology 49 (3): 833–71.

       The researchers seek to test social disorganization theory using a survey sample
       of 37,637 respondents from 74 different neighborhoods in Utrecht, Netherlands
       over a period of 10 years. Although many studies test whether social
       disorganization variables, such as residential instability, lower socioeconomic
       status, and more ethnic heterogeneity, result in more crime, few studies
       have assessed these variables longitudinally in different neighborhoods.
       Furthermore, the researchers argue that it is important to distinguish between
       feelings of responsibility for one’s community and actual social control actions.
       To assess these relationships, the researchers used individual survey responses
       from 1996 to 2006 that were aggregated at the neighborhood level. Results
       suggested that disorder is cyclical, in that it continues to lead to residential




                                                                                PART 3: ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY
                                instability and a breakdown of social control over time. Findings also indicated
                                that ethnic heterogeneity led to lower levels of social cohesion and that higher
                                socioeconomic status and higher social cohesion increased the potential
                                for social control. The authors suggested that the longitudinal, time-lagged
                                analysis indicates that neighborhood processes that lead to disorder are
                                difficult to turn around.


                         Takagi, D., K. Ikeda, and I. Kawachi. 2012. “Neighborhood Social Capital and Crime
                                 Victimization: Comparison of Spatial Regression Analysis and Hierarchical
                                 Regression Analysis.” Social Science & Medicine 75 (10): 1895–902.

                                It has been noted that neighborhoods plagued by high crime rates also have
                                higher rates of mortality and illness. The level of social capital in a community
                                affects levels of crime and health within neighborhoods by affecting the
                                community’s ability to exercise informal social control. This study examines the
                                relationship between social capital and self-reported crime victimization by
                                uniquely modeling perceptions of social capital and each resident’s exposure
                                to community social capital via other residents. The researchers used a 2009
                                survey of 1,000 residents in the Arakawa Ward of Tokyo, Japan to assess these
                                variables. The results of the survey demonstrated that there was a geographical
                                concentration of crime victimization. Risks of crime victimization were lower in
                                areas with higher reported levels of social capital. Where supportive networks
16
                                existed, crime rates were also lower.


                         Takagi, D., K. Kondo, N. Kondo, N. Cable, K. Ikeda, and I. Kawachi. 2013. “Social
                                 Disorganization/Social Fragmentation and the Risk of Depression among Older
                                 People in Japan: Multilevel Investigation of Indices of Social Distance.” Social
                                 Science & Medicine 83: 81–89.

                                Social disorganization theory suggests that racial heterogeneity, as well as
                                heterogeneity in other characteristics, leads to difficulties in realizing common
                                values and exercising effective informal social control. Social disorganization
                                can have deleterious effects on community crime and health. However,
                                some research has suggested that social capital may act as the glue that
                                bonds otherwise diverse and socially distant residents. The researchers
                                examined 9,147 responses to a 2010 Aichi Gerontological Evaluation Study.
                                All respondents were age 65 or older and lived on the Chita peninsula. The
                                analysis used variables such as age, education, household income, duration
                                of residency, and feelings of trust and reciprocity to examine their effect on
                                residents’ depressive symptoms. It was discovered that several measures of
                                social distance were associated with an increase in depressive symptoms in
                                respondents. The authors argue that this relationship exists because individuals
                                cannot form effective supportive networks and do not perceive collective
                                efficacy. Results also demonstrated that district-level social capital buffered the
                                negative effects of social distance, supporting the proposition that social capital
                                can promote positive outcomes and well-being in heavily heterogeneous
                                neighborhoods.




     Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
Villarreal, A., and B. Silva. 2006. “Social Cohesion, Criminal Victimization and Perceived
         Risk of Crime in Brazilian Neighborhoods.” Social Forces 84 (3): 1725–53.

       The authors examine the effects of social disorganization and social cohesion
       in Brazilian neighborhoods because many impoverished, disorganized
       communities in Latin America experience very strong, dense social networks.
       They conducted a survey of 3,873 respondents from 197 different Brazilian
       neighborhoods and used neighborhood-level statistics from the 2000
       Demographic Census. Results indicated that even in neighborhoods with
       high levels of social cohesion, social disorganization had a stronger effect and
       these communities experienced higher rates of crime. These neighborhoods
       also experienced greater perceived risk of crime, which may be due to the
       wider spread of information about criminal incidents through the dense social
       networks.




                                                                                                                  17




                                                                                 PART 3: ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY
     3.	Police Corruption and Police Legitimacy


                           Agbiboa, D. E. 2015. “Protectors or Predators? The Embedded Problem of Police
                                 Corruption and Deviance in Nigeria.” Administration & Society 47 (3): 244–81.

                                  This article reviews how the police in Nigeria have failed to act as guardians of
                                  society and how their corrupt practices have become deeply embedded and
                                  acceptable within Nigerian culture. The author states that because the military
                                  and the police were often one and the same, the primary interest of officers
                                  was the security of the state rather than the well-being of the community. Under
                                  several different dictatorships, this role was reinforced. Over time, corruption
                                  in government and policing was consistently treated as an acceptable and
                                  excusable act. The continued weakening of the state led to a further decrease
                                  in government accountability.


                           Ackerman, G., B. Anderson, S. Jensen, R. Ludwig, D. Montero, N. Plante, and V.
18
                                 Yanez. 2001. “Crime Rates and Confidence in the Police: American’s Changing
                                 Attitudes toward Crime and Police. 1972–1999.” Journal of Sociology and
                                 Social Welfare 28 (1): 43–54.

                                  This study examines public attitudes toward the police and crime in the United
                                  States by conducting interviews with 1,000 individuals in 350 different random
                                  sampling locations over two decades. Findings revealed that despite significant
                                  declining crime rates in the 1990s, nearly half of Americans believed that crime
                                  was the most important problem facing the country. Additionally, many still
                                  believed that crime in their area was worse than in previous years. In examining
                                  attitudes toward the police, results indicated that about 90 percent had some
                                  level of confidence in the police and only 10 percent reported having little
                                  confidence. Furthermore, white citizens were more likely than minorities to
                                  believe that the police had high levels of honesty and ethical standards.


                           Albrecht, P., O. Garber, A. Gibson, and S. Thomas. 2014. Community Policing in Sierra
                                  Leone – Local Policing Partnership Boards. DIIS Report 2014: 16. Copenhagen:
                                  Danish Institute for International Studies.

                                  This article reviews recent police reforms in Sierra Leone, specifically focusing
                                  on Local Policing Partnership Boards (LPPBs). Each board consists of local
                                  leaders, businesspeople, farmers, and service workers. Community leaders
                                  work together with the police to make security and justice decisions and to act
                                  as police proxies within their communities. Although the reforms seem to have
                                  been implemented with success, the roles of LPPB members and the boards
                                  themselves have yet to be officially or legally defined.




       Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
Albrecht, S., and M. Green. 1977. “Attitudes toward the Police and the Larger Attitude
       Complex: Implications for Police-Community Relationships.” Criminology 15
       (1): 67–86.

       The researchers propose that attitudes toward the police are strongly correlated
       with a set of attitudes toward broader political systems. Using a survey of U.S.
       citizens in four different types of communities (rural, semirural, urban poor, and
       urban non-poor), the researchers confirmed that those who expressed negative
       views toward the police were more likely to feel alienated from the legal and
       political process. They were also more likely to express cynicism and the belief
       that access to justice is dependent upon one’s wealth and power.


Andvig, J., and O. Fjeldstad. 2008. Crime, Poverty and Police Corruption in
       Developing Countries. Bergen, Norway: Chr. Michelsen Institute.

       Police may take part in corruption through pure extortion, extortion with the
       involvement of the courts, corrupt transactions, bribery, and/or embezzlement.
       The authors argue that in most high-income countries, politicians are
       considered most corrupt while police are not. However, in most low-income
       countries, the police are perceived as one of the most corrupt public entities,
       if not the most corrupt. They suggest that this perception may be due to the
       prevalence of street-level corruption in low-income countries. The emergence
                                                                                                                   19
       of police corruption these countries is likely due to their low wages and
       education levels. The authors argue that the economic effects of police
       corruption may include the stifling of the growth of small businesses due to the
       illegal taxation, the hindering of the growth of rural areas due to illegal taxation
       of transport, and the negative impact on foreign direct investments. It is also
       suggested that police corruption leads to greater inequality, which increases
       the rate of crime and creates fertile ground for the growth of organized crime.


Arias, E., and C. Davis Rodrigues. 2006. “The Myth of Personal Security: Criminal
        Gangs, Dispute Resolution, and Identity in Rio de Janeiro’s Favelas.” Latin
        American Politics & Society 48 (4): 53–81.

       This article reviews how drug traffickers in the favelas of Brazil became a
       resource for dispute resolution. Because the government and the police were
       so severely distrusted, the community turned to drug traffickers because
       they had authority, a stable presence, and an investment, albeit criminal,
       in the community. In some cases, however, the manipulative and self-
       interested intentions of the drug traffickers were extremely apparent. Despite
       understanding these intentions, citizens were more fearful of the police and
       government officials and had few other authorities to whom they could turn.


Beck, A., and Y. Chistyakova. 2004. “Closing the Gap between the Police and the
       Public in Post-Soviet Ukraine: A Bridge Too Far?” Police Practice & Research 5
       (1): 43–65.

       In an effort to discover the most effective approach toward reforming the police
       in post-Soviet states, this study seeks to examine attitudes toward and the




                                                                                  PART 3: ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY
                                willingness to cooperate with the police. The researchers collected data from
                                2,000 citizen interviews throughout Ukraine. About 42 percent of respondents
                                reported that they did not trust the police. About a third of respondents could
                                not answer questions regarding the performance of the police, indicating
                                distance between the authorities and the public. Of those who could answer,
                                nearly half reported negative assessments of police performance. Those who
                                had negative encounters with the police believed that the police were less
                                effective, and those who were members of the lower class or unemployed
                                expressed low levels of trust in officers.


                         Ben-Porat, G., F. Yuval, and S. Mizrahi. 2012. “The Challenge of Diversity Management:
                                Police Reform and the Arab Minority in Israel.” Policy Science 45 (3): 243–63.

                                This article suggests that the implementation of police reform should consist
                                of a bottom-up approach that focuses on attitudes of and toward minority
                                groups. The authors examined perceptions of over- and under-policing as
                                well as perceptions of different police reform approaches. Arab citizens in
                                Israel have experienced long-lasting tension with the police. In Israel, they
                                are also more impoverished, receive lower quality public services, and are
                                underrepresented in the public and political sector. The researchers conducted
                                four small focus groups with local Arab citizens consisting of 16 women and 14
                                men. Additionally, they administered a survey of 1,006 adult Arabs. Findings
20
                                indicated that Arabs perceive under-policing to be a greater problem than
                                over-policing, and only 30 percent of Arabs believed that the police provided
                                security to their minority group. Most Arabs in the focus groups expressed
                                extreme reluctance to join the police due to their negative perceptions of law
                                enforcement. However, they were strongly open to policies that focused on
                                involving Arabs in policing and policy-making actions.


                         Bowels, R., J. Akpokodje, and E. Tigere. 2005. “Evidence-Based Approaches to Crime
                                Prevention in Developing Countries.” European Journal on Criminal Policy and
                                Research 11 (3): 347–77.

                                The purpose of this article is to examine the literature on the effectiveness of
                                crime prevention programs in developing countries. The researchers conducted
                                a keyword search of scholarly databases and reviewed 91 qualifying articles
                                regarding crime prevention program implementation. They found that reviews
                                of approaches in developing countries rarely included an empirical evaluation
                                of the intervention, which is likely due to severe data limitations, low capacity
                                for experimental design, and the sensitive political environments of the
                                targeted nations. Of those studies that met the criteria for inclusion, 49 studies
                                included community-based crime prevention approaches. Of all 91 studies, 50
                                indicated that interventions had positive effects on crime prevention.


                         Bradford, B., A. Huq, J. Jackson, and B. Roberts. 2014. “What Price Fairness
                                When Security is at Stake? Police Legitimacy in South Africa.” Regulation &
                                Governance 8 (2): 246–68.

                                This study examines whether procedural justice functions to increase police
                                legitimacy in the context of a high-crime, socially divided society like South



     Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
       Africa. To examine this issue, interviews were conducted with citizens to assess
       trust in the criminal justice system. Perceptions of fairness were significantly
       linked to trust in the fairness of police. Perhaps an even stronger effect,
       however, was that citizens’ perceptions of police as ineffective at decreasing
       crime significantly weakened their perceptions of police legitimacy.


Broadhurst, R., and T. Bouhours. 2009. “Policing in Cambodia: Legitimacy in the
      Making?” Policing and Society: An International Journal of Research and Policy
      19 (2): 174–90.

       Many international aid organizations have assisted post-conflict Cambodia in
       reforming its justice sector. The authors examine several sources of violent and
       property crime indicators to determine the effectiveness of the police. They
       find that crime has strongly decreased and that overall fear of crime has been
       declining as well. Most citizens, however, felt unsatisfied with police services.
       Although police corruption has declined according to citizen victimization
       surveys, the police lack the resources, equipment, and personnel needed to
       fully gain public confidence.


Da Silva, G., and I. Cano. 2007. “Between Damage Reduction and Community
        Policing: The Case of Pavão-Pavãozinho-Catagalo in Rio de Janeiro’s Favelas.”
                                                                                                                 21
        In Legitimacy and Criminal Justice: International Perspectives, ed. T. Tyler,
        186–214. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

       The authors examine the effects of the Grupamento Policial em Areas Especiais
       (GPAE), or Police Group in Special Areas, program in some of the most
       historically violent villages in Brazil. The goals of the GPAE included reductions
       in the use of force by police, respect for human rights, reductions in violent
       and drug-related crime, and alleviation of tense police-community relations.
       Under dedicated leadership, the police force succeeded in increasing positive
       perceptions of the police and managing conflicts. However, when a transfer
       of leadership and a decline in resources occurred, evidence demonstrated a
       significant reduction in the program’s positive effects.


Dammert, L., and M. Malone. 2006. “Does it Take a Village? Policing Strategies and
     Fear of Crime in Latin America.” Latin American Politics & Society 48 (4): 27–51.

       This article examines zero tolerance and community-based strategies to reduce
       fear of crime in Argentina, Brazil, and Chile. Brazil and Argentina primarily
       emphasize zero tolerance approaches, while Chile concentrates more on
       a community-oriented approach to crime and justice. The researchers use
       responses from a 2001 International Labour Organization (ILO) survey to
       examine how crime, victimization, and other insecurities contribute to public
       levels of fear of crime. Results indicated that Brazilian and Argentinian cities
       registered significantly higher levels of public insecurity than Chilean cities.
       The authors argue that because the justice sector lacks funding in those
       two countries, it also lacks the police training to effectively implement some
       zero tolerance–based strategies of policing. Thus, implementation of such
       approaches often involves oppressive and militarized tactics that intimidate
       communities and undermine support of the police.



                                                                                PART 3: ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY
                         Deosaran, R. 2002. “Community Policing in the Caribbean: Context, Community and
                               Police Capability.” Policing: An International Journal of Police Strategies &
                               Management 25 (1): 125–46.

                                The authors examine how community policing is implemented in Trinidad and
                                Tobago and whether the police services possess the organizational readiness,
                                learning ability, and team cohesion to effectively implement the strategy.
                                Survey results indicate that much more work needs to be done for community
                                policing to be effective. The public is still concerned about widespread
                                complaints about the use of force, and only 70 percent of the public held
                                favorable views toward the police. Results also suggest that the police have
                                great room for improvement in organizational readiness and management-
                                officer relationships in order for community policing initiatives to be successful.


                         Dinnen, S., and G. Peake. 2013. “More than Just Policing: Police Reform in Post-
                                Conflict Bougainville.” International Peacekeeping 20 (5): 570–84.

                                The researchers recommend that police reform take a broader scope and
                                work with additional actors and agencies rather than just focus on law
                                enforcement and law enforcement policies. This article specifically examines
                                the hybrid reform approach taken in post-conflict Bougainville, Papua New
                                Guinea. In these communities, local community chiefs customarily resolve
22
                                everyday disputes, and the chiefs have helped to reduce tensions between
                                citizens during several conflicts. Many citizens held very negative views of the
                                police due to abuses by and distrust toward the Royal Papua New Guinea
                                Constabulary that policed them previously. In a hybrid community-policing
                                model, reformers have aimed to integrate local community leaders with the
                                official police. Police officers in the Community Auxiliary Police (CAP) unit are
                                elected by community leaders and are accountable to them as well as the
                                citizens. This has led to a high degree of trust in those officers. Additionally,
                                officers work together with community leaders and elders to police
                                neighborhoods and ensure adherence to rules. Observations and community
                                feedback indicate that this model is working extremely favorably despite prior
                                distrust in the police. The police and the citizens are seen as working toward
                                the same goals.


                         Ellison, G., P. Shirlow, and A. Mulcahy. 2012. “Responsible Participation, Community
                                  Engagement and Policing in Transitional Societies: Lessons from a Local Crime
                                  Survey in Northern Ireland.” The Harvard Journal 51 (5): 488–502.

                                This study examines views of policing and police effectiveness amid reform
                                efforts in Belfast, Ireland. Surveys were conducted with 300 individuals
                                throughout New Lodge. Many respondents surveyed believed that the police
                                were ineffective in decreasing crime and disorder, which significantly impacted
                                perceptions of the police force. The researchers suggest that dedicating more
                                time and resources to addressing local crime problems as well as strengthening
                                police-public relationships could significantly improve attitudes toward the police.




     Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
Feltes, T. 2002. “Community-Oriented Policing in Germany: Training and Education.”
        Policing: An International Journal of Police Strategies & Management 25 (1):
        48–59.

       This article examines data on the restructuring of the police services in
       Germany. The author notes that although surveys indicate that the public
       trusts the police, the conception among local police officers is that there
       are extremely high levels of distrust. This perception leads to defensive
       attitudes among officers that hinder their ability to implement effective
       community policing. The author explains that one of the primary challenges in
       implementing new strategies like community policing is the need for greater
       coordination between agencies in order to increase officer investment in and
       understanding of the communities they police. Although there have been
       several attempts to use community policing, few training endeavors have
       worked to develop individual approaches for individual neighborhoods.


Fruhling, H. 2007. “Police Legitimacy in Chile.” In Legitimacy and Criminal Justice:
        International Perspectives, ed. T. Tyler, 115–45. New York: Russell Sage
        Foundation.

       The author reviews the practices in Chile that have made its experiences
       with corruption and legitimacy so different from the experiences of other
                                                                                                                 23
       Latin American countries. Specifically, the author argues that the stability in
       Chile, along with the strong integration of the police into the transition to
       a democratic government, has led to a resilient confidence in the police. In
       other Latin American countries, however, citizens perceive that the police make
       efforts to work with the community only when controversies and conflicts arise.
       Additionally, most other countries have been unstable and highly corrupt,
       leading to pervasive distrust in government authorities.


Gurucharri, A., and A. Saudek. 2008. “Justice for All: Mexican Communities Take
      Policing into Their Own Hands.” Harvard Kennedy School Review 8: 83–92.

       Because the police were so strongly distrusted and corruption has been so
       clearly integrated into official justice structures, communities in Mexico have
       developed their own policing groups and taken law enforcement into their own
       hands. These community police have been in existence for nearly two decades,
       and municipal authorities have allowed them to work as an extralegal force that
       apprehends suspects and now, through its own judicial system, administers
       punishments. Shortly after their development, the community police sharply
       reduced crime, and they are trusted and seen as legitimate by the public where
       the municipal police are not. Learning from the corruption problems present
       in the official sector, the community police and their judicial boards have also
       implemented several anti-corruption measures, such as rotating leaders and
       ensuring community-level accountability.




                                                                                PART 3: ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY
                         Human Rights Watch. 2013. “No Money, No Justice: Police Corruption and Abuse in
                               Liberia.” Human Rights Watch, New York.

                                Although efforts have been made to reduce corruption in the justice sector,
                                it is still extremely prevalent in Liberia. Most efforts involve increased internal
                                accountability and professional standards, and though some officers are more
                                willing to report corruption and abuse of power by others, most issues remain
                                unaddressed and corruption is still widespread. The authors recommend that
                                much more work and support are needed for Liberia to be able to combat
                                corruption. Recommendations include stronger legislative and legal support
                                for anti-corruption policies, improved recruitment and training protocols,
                                better assurance that officers and supervisors do not interfere in investigations
                                or punishments and that officers have equal opportunities for advancement
                                and adequate pay, and continued international and organizational support in
                                combating higher-level corruption.


                         Jackson, J., M. Asif, B. Bradford, and M. Zakar. 2014. “Corruption and Police
                                Legitimacy in Lahore, Pakistan.” British Journal of Criminology 54 (6): 1067–88.

                                In Pakistan, the police historically had the role of quelling rebellions against
                                British rule, and even after gaining independence, the justice system
                                remained the same. The public still consider the police to be the most corrupt
24
                                government organization, and more than half of the population states that they
                                had felt compelled to pay a bribe. The researchers surveyed citizens of Lahore
                                to examine attitudes about procedural justice and police fairness. Results
                                demonstrated that experiences of corruption by the police were widespread.
                                Findings also indicated that citizens’ perceptions of police procedural fairness
                                were influenced by whether the police seemed to be effectively controlling
                                crime and whether they acted according to the rule of law. Furthermore, and as
                                expected, police corruption and inefficiency were strongly linked to mistrust in
                                the police and reduced perceptions of legitimacy.


                         Kratcoski, P. 2002. “International Perspectives on Institutional and Police Corruption.”
                                Police Practice and Research: An International Journal 3 (1): 73–78.

                                The author summarizes the effects of corruption on developing countries,
                                including weakening economic development, reducing the ability to
                                alleviate poverty, undermining state infrastructure, and causing social unrest,
                                lawlessness, insecurity, and the inefficient uses of resources. Over time,
                                corruption has become more widespread and entrenched and has led to
                                more deeply ingrained distrust of police and government officials, as well as
                                organized crime, economic losses, and the suppression and unfair treatment
                                of vulnerable populations. It is suggested that corruption can be reduced
                                by creating and implementing new legislation, establishing firm codes of
                                conduct for police and government officials, encouraging the mass media to
                                report instances of corruption, assisting the education of developing countries
                                regarding how to properly identify and control corruption, and providing
                                appropriate salaries and resources for law enforcement and other officials.




     Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
Kwak, D., C. San Miguel, and D. Carreon. 2012. “Political Legitimacy and Public
       Confidence in Police: An Analysis of Attitudes toward Mexican Police.”
       Policing: An International Journal of Police Strategies & Management 35 (1):
       124–46.

       This study seeks to determine how confidence in the police has been affected
       by political and regime changes in Mexico. The authors use responses from
       two World Value Surveys conducted with nearly 4,000 citizens in 1996 and
       2005. When respondents were more satisfied with political institutions, they
       were also more likely to report higher levels of confidence in the police. When
       respondents also reported more satisfaction with their life circumstances (e.g.,
       marriage and general happiness or satisfaction), they were also more likely to
       report higher levels of confidence in the police. The researchers suggest that
       when governing agencies seek to improve institutions as well as the quality of
       life for their citizens, it is likely to result in improvements in attitudes toward the
       police.


Manning, R. 2009. “Exploitation of Poor Communities in Sierra Leone.” Justice and
      Development Working Paper Series 1, no. 3, World Bank, Washington, DC.

       In Sierra Leone, many communities have been promised development projects
       and other benefits, and after providing registration fees and other monetary
                                                                                                                      25
       contributions, no action is taken within their neighborhoods. Such deceptive
       practices and failed projects have eroded citizens’ trust in outsiders, including
       aid workers and development organizations. The author argues that in order
       to trust outsiders and work together with aid organizations, communities must
       be given the tools to protect themselves. They must be encouraged to ask
       for details, keep logbooks of visitors, enact formal justice measures against
       deceivers, and hold practitioners accountable.


Mazzerolle, L., E. Antrobus, S. Bennett, and T. Tyler. 2013. “Shaping Citizen Perceptions
      of Police Legitimacy: A Randomized Field Trial of Procedural Justice.”
      Criminology 51 (1): 33–63.

       This study evaluated a community engagement tool implemented in
       Queensland, Australia. The tool utilized four different components of
       procedural justice (citizen participation, dignity and respect, neutrality, and
       trustworthiness) and examined how these components shaped more general
       attitudes and orientations toward the police. Results indicated that perceptions
       of legitimacy and general attitudes toward the police improved alongside
       increases in the four components of procedural justice.


Minnaar, A. 2009. “Community Policing in a High Crime Transitional State: The Case
       of South Africa since Democratization in 1994.” In Community Policing:
       International Patterns and Comparative Perspectives, ed. D. Wisler and I. D.
       Onwudiwe, 1–100. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.

       In South Africa in the period prior to 1994, communities typically took part in
       “self-policing” because the established police were concerned with control




                                                                                     PART 3: ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY
                                rather than the safety of citizens. When subsequent community policing
                                programs were initiated post-Apartheid, most citizens believed they would
                                entail formal police supervision of continued community self-policing. Original
                                formulations of community policing in South Africa largely failed because of
                                inattention to the desires and traditions of most neighborhoods in addition
                                to lingering distrust. Citizens were reluctant to work with police even when
                                attempts at community cooperation were made. Consequently, police have
                                abandoned most community policing efforts and returned to more traditional
                                methods. The author suggests that broader implementation and additional
                                efforts toward working with the community are necessary for police reforms to
                                be successful.


                         Mutonyi, J. 2002. “Fighting Corruption: Is Kenya on the Right Track?” Police Practice
                               and Research: An International Journal 3 (1): 21–39.

                                The author examines anti-corruption strategies used in Kenya, a country
                                in which corruption has long been deeply entrenched. Weak government
                                legitimacy, monopolies over services, and low levels of accountability help
                                foster this state-level corruption. In the 1990s, Kenya took substantial steps
                                toward fighting corrupt practices by strengthening government accounting,
                                implementing and enforcing strong anti-corruption laws, and encouraging
                                civil society to exercise checks on the government and demand legitimate
26
                                practices. These strategies have strongly reduced opportunities for corruption;
                                however, more efforts and improvements are needed in order for Kenya to
                                continue to work toward a more official legitimacy. Especially in areas like Africa
                                where corruption has existed since colonial rule, eradication will take long-term
                                efforts and international support.


                         Neto, P. 2005. “Public-Private Partnerships for Police Reform in Brazil.” In Public
                                 Security and Police Reform in the Americas, ed. J. Bailey and L. Dammert,
                                 44–57. Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press.

                                The author reviews police reform measures taken in São Paulo, Brazil beginning
                                in the 1990s when business owners had become especially concerned with
                                community levels of crime and violence. The police in Brazil had historically
                                been an extremely corrupt and distrusted entity, and businesses often took
                                part in the corrupt activities because they were financially benefiting. However,
                                once violence and corruption reached extreme levels, business leaders banded
                                together to work toward police reform.


                         Neumann, P. 2013. “(Un)exceptional Violence(s) in Latin America.” Latin American
                              Politics and Society 55 (1): 168–75.

                                The author reviews published works that discuss the presence and progression
                                of violence in Latin America. She explains that violence is deeply embedded
                                within communities and is exacerbated by the corruption of officials and the
                                blurring of legal and illegal activities due to cooperation between police
                                and drug traffickers. These studies have further argued that violence against
                                women is especially problematic because there is an increased importance




     Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
       placed upon hyper-masculine values, and violence has become acceptable as
       a method of conflict resolution. Because violent acts against women often go
       unpunished, there has been an increase in impunity in such crimes.


Onwudiwe, I. 2009. “Community Policing: The Case of Informal Policing in Nigeria.” In
      Community Policing: International Patterns and Comparative Perspectives, ed.
      D. Wisler and I. D. Onwudiwe, 81–102. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.

       The Nigerian police were originally developed to serve the authorities rather
       than the interests of the people, and their relationship with citizens has been
       characterized by violence and distrust. As a result, many informal policing
       groups have formed in order to protect communities that have little faith in the
       ability of official agencies to do so. Such informal organizations provide a sense
       of security and fit the needs of community members. There has been a call for
       a decentralized Nigerian police force that will be better able to work together
       with communities and support their needs and to respect and cooperate with
       the informal structures that have developed to police different villages.


Reisig, M. J. Tankebe, and G. Mesko. 2014. “Compliance with the Law in Slovenia:
        The Role of Procedural Justice and Police Legitimacy.” European Journal on
        Criminal Policy and Research 20 (2): 259–76.
                                                                                                                 27

       The authors seek to discover whether procedural justice measures work to
       increase legitimacy in contexts outside the United States. The study uses a
       survey of 683 young adults in Slovenia to examine compliance with the law,
       components of procedural justice, police effectiveness, and measures of
       legitimacy. The results indicate that procedural justice shapes perceptions of
       police legitimacy, which are also associated with an increased likelihood to
       comply with the police. The researchers argue that focusing on procedural
       justice and a process-based model is likely to increase police legitimacy outside
       U.S. contexts as well.


Riccio, V., M. de Miranda, M. Rys, and A. Muller. 2013. “Professionalizing the Amazonas
        Military Police through Training.” Police Practice and Research: An International
        Journal 14 (4): 295–307.

       The authors examined the outcomes of a new professional education program
       for military police officers in Brazil. The program was implemented after it was
       found that the police were perceived as having very low legitimacy, primarily
       due to corruption and abuses of power. The history of the former authoritarian
       regime in Brazil particularly taints the view of the police forces. In interviews
       with Amazonas military officers who had taken part in the training program, the
       researchers found that the officers felt the public did not know much about the
       non-coercive aspects of police work. In addition, the officers had few ideas of
       how to establish relationships with the community and were not educated on
       the daily lives, customs, values, and problems of the communities in which they
       would work. The authors suggest that training programs should evolve to focus
       specifically on the realities of policing and the communities that officers will
       face when they begin work.




                                                                                PART 3: ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY
                         Riccio, V., M. Ruediger, S. Ross, and W. Skogan. 2013. “Community Policing in the
                                 Favelas of Rio de Janeiro.” Police Practice and Research: An International
                                 Journal 14 (4): 308–18.

                                This article examines community policing approaches implemented in two
                                neighborhoods of Rio de Janeiro. Not only were these neighborhoods
                                previously plagued by criminal gangs, but the police were distrusted due to
                                widespread corruption. The researchers administered surveys to 300 residents
                                in each of the neighborhoods to assess perceptions of this new approach.
                                Results indicated that the interventions were well received and that citizens
                                reported feeling safer, saw decreases in police violence, and perceived
                                decreases in criminal violence and drug crimes.


                         Ruteere, M., and M. Pommerolle. 2003. “Democratizing Security or Decentralizing
                                Repression? The Ambiguities of Community Policing in Kenya.” African Affairs
                                102 (409): 587–604.

                                To address increasing violence and police corruption, justice officials in Kenya
                                have begun experimenting with the implementation of community policing.
                                Within the African context, it has been found that citizens and police officers
                                often disagree on the most effective form of policing. Although citizens wanted
                                to be included in the policing of their communities, officers often found zero
28
                                tolerance, “tough on crime” approaches to be more effective and necessary in
                                combating increasing rates of violence. In Kenya specifically, the police have
                                also been tied to the implementation of political agendas. Justice officials have
                                struggled with community policing because some communities suffer from such
                                deteriorated infrastructures that community policing is interpreted as helping
                                to supply goods and services to neighborhoods. In other areas, it is meant to
                                alleviate distrust between citizens and the police. The authors suggest that
                                officials from various agencies must work closely with the police to help clarify
                                their mission and ensure that officers understand the need—and are willing—to
                                engage with community members.


                         Service, T. 2012. “From Belfast to Bishkek: An International Perspective on
                                 Neighbourhood and Community Policing.” International Journal of Police
                                 Science and Management 14 (4): 362–72.

                                The author explains that genuine willingness and collaboration are necessary
                                in order for community policing to succeed, though these are difficult to
                                find in many locations. In certain contexts, citizens may be reluctant to assist
                                police because close relationships may be seen by others as collaboration
                                and may lead to distrust within the community. In locations like Kosovo, the
                                environmental, social, and infrastructure problems undermine the ability of the
                                police to improve communities. In Kyrgyzstan, the fact that law enforcement
                                was viewed to have been involved in extremely violent conflicts fostered
                                distrust in the police. Even when police are trusted and have the willingness to
                                work with communities, a lack of financial resources means that neighborhood
                                officers are among the first positions cut in order to leave a sufficient number
                                of officers available for response policing. In these fragile communities, having




     Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
       stable, unchanging neighborhood officers, as well as officers who live in and
       respect the communities they police, goes a long way in aiding the success of
       community policing.


Tankebe, J. 2011. “Explaining Police Support for the Use of Force and Vigilante
      Violence.” Policing and Society: An International Journal of Research and Policy
      21 (2): 129–49.

       Throughout Africa, widespread corruption has affected police practices and
       citizen attitudes toward the police. Officers who perceive corruption within and
       outside the justice system may become cynical toward the system’s ability to
       arrest and punish offenders. They may resort to excess use of force and the
       acceptance of bribes, undermining citizens’ perceptions that the police can
       effectively provide security. The author surveyed police officers in Ghana and
       found that officers believed that it was sometimes acceptable to use levels
       of force higher than legally allowable. The officers also strongly disapproved
       of citizen use of vigilante violence. Those who experienced corruption were
       more likely to support the use of vigilante violence. Those officers who had
       higher levels of organizational commitment were less likely to support vigilante
       violence or police use of force. By better understanding the factors that
       increase organizational commitment, leaders can help develop a police force
       strongly committed to democratic values.
                                                                                                                29



———. 2013. “Viewing Things Differently: The Dimensions of Public Perceptions of
    Police Legitimacy.” Criminology 51 (1): 103–35.

       The researcher argues that an assessment of legitimacy will rely on perceptions
       of police lawfulness, distributive justice, procedural justice, and police
       effectiveness. To examine these hypotheses, the study uses a sample of
       5,120 London residents. Perceptions of police lawfulness and effectiveness
       significantly increased legitimacy, and those reporting stronger assessments
       of legitimacy reported an increased willingness to cooperate with the police.
       However, minorities and members of the lower classes were less willing to
       cooperate with the police.


Tyler, T. 2004. “Enhancing Police Legitimacy.” Annals of the American Academy of
         Political and Social Science 593 (1): 84–99.

       The author examines the causes and effects of the legitimacy of law
       enforcement. When evaluating legitimacy, the author suggests that individuals
       consider the degree to which members of their social group are treated fairly
       by the police, fair treatment that leads different groups to feel important and
       respected. It is suggested that legitimacy may be enhanced when different
       social groups are treated respectfully and as valued members of society.
       Additionally, legitimacy may increase when individuals see members of their
       own group in authoritative roles.




                                                                               PART 3: ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY
                         Tyler, T., and J. Fagan. 2008. “Legitimacy and Cooperation: Why do People Help the
                                  Police Fight Crime in their Communities?” Ohio State Journal of Criminal Law
                                  6: 231–74.

                                This study examines the antecedents to legitimacy using a telephone
                                survey of New York City residents. Results revealed that procedural justice
                                and the manner in which officers treated citizens were the most important
                                factors shaping perceptions of legitimacy. When individuals were treated
                                fairly, respectfully, and justly, they were more likely to obey, trust, and have
                                confidence in the police, even when there were negative outcomes (e.g.,
                                infractions) in their interactions. These findings indicate that the police can
                                be more effective and gain more cooperation when they focus on legitimacy-
                                based approaches.




30




     Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
4.	Reform Efforts and Restorative Justice


  Aning, E. 2006. “An Overview of the Ghana Police Service.” Journal of Security Sector
         Management 4 (2): 1–37.

         This article examines problems faced by those working to reform the police
         in Ghana. Citizens have long distrusted the police, and various leaders’
         recommendations for reform have been ignored or forgotten. The police force
         has been vastly understaffed, and those who have been granted positions are
         extremely unqualified. In addition, it was discovered that many promotions
         were occurring unfairly and that candidates regularly did not meet the required
         qualifications. Furthermore, the police do not have resources, are ill-equipped,
         and have been found on multiple occasions to have acted outside their
         operational guidelines. The author argues that effective reform will only occur
         alongside reform of the broader political and social institutions in Ghana.
         Additionally, it is absolutely necessary that reform be undertaken by working
         closely with communities and involving them in the process.
                                                                                                                      31

  Azimi, A., and C. Tah. 2011. “Justice Development Programming in Fragile and
          Conflict-Affected Areas: Perspectives of Two Leaders in Justice Administration.”
          Justice and Development Working Paper Series 14/2011, World Bank,
          Washington, DC

         Two state officials from Afghanistan and Liberia review measures taken
         in their respective countries to reform the justice sector. In Afghanistan,
         the government has taken major steps to ensure that judicial appointees
         are properly screened and educated. However, increasing educational
         qualifications are only effective if training curricula are comprehensive and
         effective. As a result, officials are now attempting to restructure educational
         curricula to ensure that all officials receive proper training. Officials are
         also attempting to ensure that legal codes are properly translated and
         communicated to the citizens so that rules are widely understood. Finally,
         judges and other justice officials must be paid adequate salaries to remain
         at their posts and avoid corrupt practices. Corruption has also been a large
         problem in Liberia, and many citizens have turned to informal structures and/
         or vigilante justice due to distrust in the government. Officials are now working
         to integrate official rule of law structures with traditional norms and customary
         justice practices. To do so, government officials and development workers have
         integrated stakeholders from many various areas into the reform discussion
         process.


  Braithwaite, J. 1999. “Restorative Justice: Assessing Optimistic and Pessimistic
         Accounts.” Crime and Justice 25: 1–127.

         The author summarizes the many benefits seen as a result of restorative justice
         processes. Evidence demonstrates that victims are more likely to be satisfied



                                                                                     PART 3: ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY
                                with the mediation process than other Western approaches to criminal justice,
                                and the symbolic restitution they receive from the offender is often more
                                important than any monetary restitution. Studies also indicate that offenders
                                who take part in restorative justice processes are less likely to reoffend.
                                Importantly, restorative justice also serves the needs of the community and
                                often allows for the integration of local values and customs. Where corruption
                                has been rampant and distrust of authorities is widespread, these practices can
                                also maintain the legitimacy of rules and laws.


                                ———. 2007. “Building Legitimacy through Restorative Justice.” In Legitimacy
                                and Criminal Justice: International Perspectives, ed. T. Tyler, 146–62. New York:
                                Russell Sage Foundation.

                                The author argues that restorative justice practices are not only beneficial
                                for the immediate victim and offender but can also help build legitimacy in
                                historically corrupt developing nations. He argues that restorative justice
                                implements checks on power both at higher and lower levels of the social
                                and political structures and can help foster discussions with community
                                members and integrate citizens into justice reform and other government
                                processes. Restorative justice can also be used to help address political wrongs
                                and arguments about justice. Finally, seeing checks and balances on the
                                government and other powerful populations helps to increase the quality of the
32
                                justice system and improve citizen perceptions of legitimacy.


                         Braithwaite, J., and A. Gohar. 2014. “Restorative Justice, Policing and Insurgency:
                                Learning from Pakistan.” Law & Society Review 48 (3): 531–61.

                                The authors argue that Pakistan is a setting in which hybrid legal systems that
                                combine formal and traditional rules may be effective. In societies in which
                                traditional norms have been deeply trusted, the enforcement of formal rules is
                                likely to be rejected. In Pakistan especially, the official government is constantly
                                challenged by the attempted rule of the Taliban. One way the authorities can
                                prevent citizens from turning to and trusting in the authority of the Taliban is
                                to make justice both accessible to and respectful of communities. The authors
                                discuss how Muslahathi Committees in Pakistan implement restorative justice
                                principles and attempt to create a hybrid form of justice that will be accepted
                                and trusted by the local residents.


                         Chopra, T. 2009. “Justice versus Peace in Northern Kenya.” Justice and Development
                               Working Papers Series 2, no. 1, World Bank, Washington, DC.

                                The author examines the challenges of implementing justice reforms in post-
                                conflict environments like Northern Kenya. Some justice reforms are both
                                physically and culturally inaccessible and may overlook the local value systems.
                                Magistrate courts form the formal justice system in Kenya, but such courts are
                                often located in cities far away from local villages and the costs of travel and
                                services are extremely high. Thus, village citizens are unlikely to seek justice in
                                magistrate courts unless special circumstances make it possible and extremely
                                worthwhile. Additionally, the formal laws implemented by the magistrate courts
                                are not always aligned with the values and ideas of justice in the isolated, arid



     Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
       lands. Definitions of criminal offenses as well as the appropriate punishments
       for each are often very different. Large segments of the population are unlikely
       to view magistrate courts or practices as legitimate, and such divergent views
       toward the legal system limit perceptions of fairness and justice in these
       contexts.


Du Plessis, A., and A. Louw. 2005. “Crime and Crime Prevention in South Africa: 10
       Years After.” Canadian Journal of Criminology and Criminal Justice 47 (2):
       427–46

       The goal of this article is to discuss the crime and justice reforms implemented
       in South Africa in the post-Apartheid era, along with their successes and
       failures. South Africa has implemented several different crime prevention
       policies, including legislation aimed at combating specific problems such as
       terrorism, sexual offenses, domestic violence, and corruption. Despite data that
       show that crime rates have decreased since 1994, the majority of the public
       feel unsafe. The government has not made it a priority to tackle the extremely
       negative perceptions of the police that exist throughout communities.
       Additionally, a broad-based approach to reform has lost momentum, and there
       is minimal involvement of other government agencies in the justice reform
       process. The authors argue that though South Africa has achieved several
       successes in its reform process, they must now focus on long-term goals,
                                                                                                                   33
       creating a positive perception of the police and fostering national coordination
       and a common vision of justice.


From, J., J. Keefe, J. Cann, C. Ploszaj, and W. Simpkins. 2010. “Policing in Afghanistan:
       Reform that Respects Tradition: Need for a Strategic Shift.” Institute for
       Defense Analyses, Alexandria, VA.

       Within local communities in Afghanistan, the maintenance of order has been
       the responsibility of tribal elders and other governmental hierarchies. The
       attempted development of a paramilitary police force with state security has
       significantly undermined this tradition of community policing. Police reformists
       have had great trouble recruiting qualified officers, since those who are well-
       qualified are turned away by the lack of pay and resources as well as the fear
       of fighting the Taliban. Therefore, the majority of recruits joining the police
       are those who are uneducated, unskilled, and do not have money for food.
       Furthermore, the majority of the force is illiterate, which prevents officers from
       being trained effectively in many skill areas. Even when police work effectively
       to arrest suspected criminals, there are rarely enough resources in prosecution,
       courts, and prisons to sufficiently continue the justice process.


Gauri, V. 2009. “How do Local-Level Legal Institutions Promote Development?” Policy
        Research Working Paper 5108, World Bank, Washington, DC.

       In most developing countries, Western models of justice have been imposed
       on local and traditional customs of criminal justice. Traditional systems of justice
       are beneficial in that they adhere to local customs and economic changes
       and can more quickly and efficiently adapt to social changes. Citizens are
       more likely to respect and abide by the decisions of local judges because



                                                                                  PART 3: ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY
                                they are also the individuals making local rules and providing resources to the
                                community. The author suggests that government institutions and systems
                                of justice will be more powerful and effective when they initiate and maintain
                                relationships with local leaders and work to integrate traditional customs and
                                elements of collective, restorative justice.


                         Gramckow, H., and F. Allen. 2011. “Justice Sector Reform in Mongolia: Looking Back,
                               Looking Forward.” Justice Reform Practices Group, World Bank, Washington,
                               DC.

                                The authors review justice sector reform undertaken amid Mongolia’s
                                transition from communism to a democratic state. Although justice reform
                                was initially successful, positive changes slowed after two years, and negative
                                public perceptions of the justice system have persisted and grown. Because
                                Mongolian officials experience extremely low wages, a lack of benefits, and a
                                lack of institutional resources, corruption and greed seem to have increased
                                steadily. Citizens perceive that court decisions differ greatly between judges,
                                locations, and cases, and this had led to sharply reduced perceptions
                                of legitimacy. The authors suggest continued work toward consistent
                                implementation of laws, reviews of staffing needs, continued education
                                of justice officials, improvements in the justice infrastructure, improved
                                communication strategies, and continued attention to public perceptions of the
34
                                courts.


                         Hanson, R., G. Warchol, and L. Zupan. 2004. “Policing Paradise: Law and Disorder in
                               Belize.” Police Practice and Research: An International Journal 5 (3): 241–57.

                                Belize is a country with a high crime rate due to many different social, political,
                                and economic problems. Despite criminal and economic difficulties, Belize
                                has been a stable Central American country in that it has not experienced
                                civil wars or insurrections as have many of its neighbors. The police in Belize
                                suffer difficulties and high attrition rates because they are subjected to low
                                pay, difficult working conditions, counter-productive job requirements, public
                                criticism, and extreme lack of respect. The authors argue that reform of the
                                police in Belize primarily requires financial resources to adequately manage
                                crime control, investigations, and other services. It is further required that
                                the police not only try to work together with the community but also work
                                proactively to manage their image using media to promote positive stories of
                                success.


                         Holt, D., A. Armenakis, H. Field, and S. Harris. 2007. “Readiness for Organizational
                                 Change: The Systematic Development of a Scale.” Journal of Applied
                                 Behavioral Science 43 (2): 232–55.

                                The researchers attempt to develop and test a quantitative scale measuring
                                organizational readiness for change. The scale results from a review of multiple
                                studies and measurement tools and is tested using a sample of employees
                                and managers by means of interviews and questionnaires. Results suggested
                                that the most significant readiness factors included a belief that change was
                                necessary, possible, and organizationally and personally beneficial, and also



     Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
       that organizational leaders were committed to reform. The scale appeared
       to be a strong indicator of organizational readiness and should be used and
       tested in additional businesses and agencies.


Kirke, P. 2010. “Culture-Based Justice Architecture: Building Community Wellbeing
         through Deeper Cultural Engagement.” Justice and Development Working
         Paper Series 10/2010, World Bank, Washington, DC.

       The author reviews the process of reconciling official formal law with Aboriginal
       customs in Western Australia. He explains that official courts have sought to
       accommodate cultural diversity. Officials designated one day each week on
       which an Aboriginal sentencing would be administered. The court administers
       mainstream law but adjusts the settings and customs to accommodate the
       diverse cultural values and practices. Elders and other respected persons
       participate in the justice process in an advisory capacity, dialogue is
       encouraged, and court officials, offenders, and victims sit on equal levels so
       that discussions can occur in the absence of symbolic power imbalances. The
       author also reviews the effects that the architecture of justice-related buildings
       may have on the levels of comfort and respect for various cultures.


Llewellyn, J., B. Archibald, D. Clairmont, and D. Crocker. 2013. “Imagining Success
                                                                                                                  35
        for a Restorative Approach to Justice: Implications for Measurement and
        Evaluation.” The Dalhousie Law Journal 36 (2): 281–316.

       This article reviews the principles of restorative justice and the methods by
       which researchers and justice officials should evaluate these approaches.
       Instead of measuring success by reductions in crime rates or recidivism,
       evaluators must pay close attention to how restorative justice approaches
       affect and improve social relations. The authors emphasize that each approach
       must appreciate the diversity of the respective society and mold its practices
       to the context of the culture. Where contextually sensitive restorative justice
       approaches have been implemented, most studies did find lower levels of
       recidivism, and citizens generally evaluated the process as being fair and
       legitimate.


Manning, R. 2009. “Challenging Generations: Youths and Elders in Rural and Peri-
      Urban Sierra Leone.” Justice and Development Working Paper Series 1, no. 2,
      World Bank, Washington, DC.

       The author notes that justice and governance in villages in Sierra Leone have
       traditionally been controlled by male elders. Youths, however, are typically
       barred from any leadership positions within their communities. In Sierra Leone,
       “youths” are typically considered those in their teens to adults in their 50s. That
       such a large segment of the population is denied a voice in local governance
       and justice matters has become a large source of civil unrest. The author
       suggests that although traditional justice systems have many benefits, they may
       also perpetuate inequality and unfair and unjust historical customs.




                                                                                 PART 3: ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY
                         Maru, V. 2009. “Access to Justice and Legal Empowerment: A Review of World Bank
                                Practice.” Justice and Development Working Paper Series 9/2009, World Bank,
                                Washington, DC.

                                This article reviews recent development projects undertaken by the World
                                Bank. The author finds that many court reforms have been effective in
                                enhancing legitimacy, but improvements are still necessary. Specifically, there
                                should be better case management and efforts to further enhance access to
                                justice interventions. Projects should seek to investigate the specific needs
                                of poor and vulnerable populations, and services should seek to empower
                                community members and enhance citizen agency. Most important is that
                                intervention cater to the specific contextual needs of each country and
                                community, ensuring that reforms are accepted as effective and legitimate.


                         Onoma, A. 2014. “Transition Regimes and Security Sector Reforms in Sierra Leone and
                              Liberia.” The Annals: The American Academy of Political and Social Science
                              656: 136–53.

                                The author examines why Sierra Leone and Liberia, countries with extremely
                                similar histories, have had such different results in justice reform. He argues
                                that Sierra Leone has been successful because the post-conflict ruling regimes
                                closely resembled the distribution of power throughout the country. In Liberia,
36
                                however, reforms and ruling regimes were developed without consultation with
                                different groups and important societal actors.


                         Pimental, D. 2010. “Rule of Law Reform without Cultural Imperialism? Reinforcing
                                Customary Justice through Collateral Review in Southern Sudan.” Hague
                                Journal on the Rule of Law 2 (1): 1–28.

                                The author acknowledges the importance of the rule of law in implementing
                                higher standards of justice and respect for human rights, though Western
                                rule of law may not always respect local, indigenous customs. In developing
                                countries, it is often important that restorative justice play a stronger role. After
                                gaining independence, justice remained the responsibility of local communities,
                                not only because of local customs but also because a formal court would be
                                physically inaccessible to the majority of citizens. In areas like Southern Sudan,
                                reform to implement the rule of law must strike a balance between Western
                                ideals and customary cultural concepts.


                         Roth, F. 2007. “Traditional Society and Urban Democratic Policing in Botswana.” Police
                                 Practice and Research 8 (1): 63–78.

                                As a former British colony, Botswana faced a difficult economic history, as it
                                was required to find a reliable source of income to pay taxes to the British
                                government. Upon gaining its independence, the people of Botswana
                                experienced severe underdevelopment, with the third-lowest GDP per capita
                                in the world. They worked toward a democratic government and were able
                                to rapidly increase their economic standing; however, the justice system of
                                Botswana remained in need of reform. Many communities continued to rely on
                                community leaders and traditional norms of conduct, sometimes committing



     Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
       illegal acts in order to maintain a source of income. The police force has
       demonstrated that it is willing to accept this tradition and a certain degree of
       public disorder by overlooking these offenses so long as they do not threaten
       the authority of the state. As their society evolves and the economy continues
       to improve, the police and the state must now find a way to police their
       communities to prevent disorderly conduct and petty crimes while continuing
       to acknowledge and respect traditional customary norms.


Sage, C., N. Menzies, and M. Woolcock. 2009. “Taking the Rules of the Game
       Seriously: Mainstreaming Justice in Development: The World Bank’s Justice for
       the Poor Program.” Justice and Development Working Paper Series 7/2009,
       World Bank, Washington, DC.

       This article reviews the development programs implemented under the
       World Bank’s Justice for the Poor Program. The authors argue that most other
       agencies undertake aid and reform that are not guided by theory, context,
       or local concepts of justice. In doing so, agencies can undermine rather than
       enhance the process of development. Justice reform through the Justice for
       the Poor Program, however, appears to be much more promising. The authors
       review several practices, including the peace committees in Kenya and the
       Cambodian Arbitration Council. The authors emphasize that agencies should
       expect development projects to spark some conflict between government
                                                                                                                   37
       institutions and community members, but that citizen participation and the
       voicing of diverse interests will help societies progress toward a more equitable
       justice process.


Stern, V. 2001. “An Alternative Vision: Criminal Justice Developments in Non-Western
        Countries.” Social Justice 28 (3): 88–104.

       The author argues that although Western ideas of justice tend to dominate
       the criminal justice field, restorative justice ideals in non-Western countries are
       highly valued and should be respected in development efforts. These values
       are characterized by several alternative views, including that the problem of
       crime belongs to the whole community, not just those immediately involved.
       They also emphasize that reconciliation and the restoration of harmony should
       be the goal of the justice process. Such values are especially important in
       African countries, where restorative justice models have frequently been
       implemented. The author suggests that these models can gain respect and
       legitimacy throughout the world by establishing more explicit policies and
       legislative frameworks, and agencies should carry out frequent evaluations
       to examine their effects. Models executed in Africa demonstrate that
       restorative practices and public involvement in the punishment process can be
       accomplished rationally and successfully.


Westberg, M. 2010. “Rwanda’s Use of Transitional Justice after Genocide: The Gacaca
      Courts and the ICTR.” Kansas Law Review 59: 331–67.

       The gacaca courts in Rwanda had been the historical approach to justice and
       reconciliation. Under Belgian rule, Western systems of justice were imposed
       over local community justice in gacaca courts. Following the genocide in 1994,



                                                                                  PART 3: ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY
                                the government did not have the resources to adjudicate the 120,000 criminals
                                it had imprisoned. Gacaca courts regained importance and legitimacy following
                                the conflict in the effort to process offenders and help the Rwandan transition
                                toward a just and healing society. Lower-level offenders who participated in
                                genocide-related violence were called on most often to participate in dispute-
                                resolution and restitution processes. Not only is this a system with which
                                Rwandan citizens are comfortable, but it is easily accessible from within villages
                                and communities and it brings about opportunities for reconciliation. The more
                                formalized system for handling genocide offenders is less efficient and cost
                                effective and is far removed from the communities upon which damages were
                                inflicted.


                         Wheeldon, J. 2010. “Learning from Latvia: Adoption, Adaptation, and Evidence-Based
                               Justice Reform.” Journal of Baltic Studies 41 (4): 507–30.

                                Because police abuse, official corruption, and inefficient legal structures can
                                undermine the efforts of development projects, the author investigates the
                                establishment of a probation service in Latvia from 2002 to 2004. Since its
                                emergence as an independent state, Latvia has faced several political and
                                economic challenges. Program developers and trainers sought to implement a
                                probation service that would respect local context and customs. Interviews with
                                Latvian staff members indicated that contextually based justice reform efforts
38
                                like the probation service were much more successful than previous “cookie-
                                cutter” strategies. It was also emphasized that such programs must focus on
                                data collection to establish the value and progress of development strategies.
                                As developing and transition countries face ongoing challenges and economic
                                struggles, government officials are often quick to cut resources from new, more
                                beneficial justice strategies.




     Addressing the Enforcement Gap to Counter Crime
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, DC 20433, USA
