                                                        105177

                                       Serbia
Modernization and Optimization of Public Administration Program


                                 Fiduciary Assessment




April 20, 2016



Global Governance Practice

Europe and Central Asia Region




Document of the World Bank
                          CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

                 (Exchange Rate Effective as of February 29, 2016)

                                 RSD 113.44=US$ 1
                                     FISCAL YEAR
                               January 1 – December 31
                     ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

ACA      Anticorrupion Agency
ACG      Anticorruption Guideline
AFCOS    Anti-Fraud Coordination Service
APML     Administration for the Prevention of Money Laundering
BES      Budget Execution System
BSL      Budget System Law
CTA      Consolidated Treasury Account
CTAS     Consolidated Treasury Account System
DBB      Direct Budget Beneficiary
DLI      Disbursement-linked Indicator
EU       European Union
F&C      Fraud and Corruption
FM       Financial Management
FMC      Financial Management and Control
FMIS     Financial Management Information System
IBB      Indirect Budget Beneficiary
INT      Integrity Vice Presidency
IPSAS    International Public Sector Accounting Standards
IT       Information Technology
MoF      Ministry of Finance
MPALSG   Ministry of Public Administration and Local Self Government
MTEF     Medium-term Expenditure Framework
NA       National Assembly
NES      National Employment Service
OGP       Open Government Partnership
PIFC      Public Internal Financial Control
PEFA      Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability
PforR     Program-for-Results
PPL       Public Procurement Law
PPO       Public Procurement Office
RC        Republic Commission
SAI       State Audit Institution
SIGMA     Support for Improvement in Governance and Management
TA        Treasury Administration


               Regional Vice President:       Cyril E. Muller
         Global Practice Vice President:      Jan Walliser
        Senior Global Practice Director:      Deborah L. Wetzel
                      Country Director:       Ellen A.Goldstein
                      Practice Manager:       Adrian Fozzard
                  Task Team Leader(s):        Raymond Muhula/Srdjan Svircev
                                                                     Serbia

            Modernization and Optimization of Public Administration Program
                                                             Table of Contents

                                                                                                                                             Page

I.        Introduction ........................................................................................................................... 1
II. Financial Management Arrangements ............................................................................... 1
     A. Planning and Budgeting Arrangements ............................................................................... 1
     B. Transparency ........................................................................................................................ 3
     C. Accounting and Financial Reporting ................................................................................... 4
     D.         Treasury Management and Flow of Funds ....................................................................... 6
     E. Internal Controls and Internal Audit .................................................................................... 7
     F. Program Audit .................................................................................................................... 10
III. Procurement Assessment.................................................................................................... 13
     A. Legislative and Regulatory Framework ............................................................................. 13
     B. Institutional Framework ..................................................................................................... 14
     C. Procurement Processes and Procedures ............................................................................. 15
     D.         Procurement Planning and Overall Value ...................................................................... 18
     E. E-procurement.................................................................................................................... 18
IV. Integrity and Transparency of the Public Procurement System .................................... 19
     A. Public Access to Procurement Information ....................................................................... 19
     B. Complaints Receiving and Handling Mechanisms ............................................................ 20
     C. Control Mechanisms .......................................................................................................... 21
     D.         Civil Supervision of Procurement Processes ................................................................. 22
V.        Institutional Capacity ......................................................................................................... 23
     A. Public Procurement Professionals...................................................................................... 23
     B. Public Procurement Office ................................................................................................. 24
     C. Republic Commission for the Protection of Rights ........................................................... 25
VI. Conclusions on Program-for-Results-specific Procurement Arrangements ................. 25
     A. Overall Risk Assessment ................................................................................................... 25
   B. Procurement Profile of the Program .................................................................................. 25
   C. Procurement Capacity ........................................................................................................ 26
VII. Governance and Anticorruption Arrangements .............................................................. 27
   A. Overview of the Fraud and Corruption Legal and Institutional Framework ..................... 27
   B. Alignment with Anticorruption Guidelines ....................................................................... 30
   C. Conclusion ......................................................................................................................... 31
Annex 1: Key Provisions of the 2012 Public Procurement Law .................................................. 33
Annex 2: Key Actors in Public Procurement in Serbia ................................................................ 35
Annex 3: Program Action Plan ..................................................................................................... 37

List of Figures
Figure 1. Structure of Concluded Contracts by Type of Procedure in Q3 2012 ........................... 17
Figure 2. Structure of Concluded Contracts by Type of Procedure in Q3 2013 ........................... 17

List of Tables
Table 1. Summary of Key FM Risks and Mitigation Measures ................................................... 12
Table 2. Average Number of Bids Submitted Per Tender ............................................................ 16
Table 3. Usage of the Public Procurement Portal, 2013–2014 ..................................................... 20
I.       INTRODUCTION

1.      An integrated fiduciary systems assessment has been undertaken that incorporates
financial management (FM), procurement, and governance issues. The assessment concludes
that there is reasonable assurance that Serbia’s FM systems for the Program (planning,
budgeting, accounting, internal controls, funds flow, financial reporting, and auditing
arrangements) and procurement will ensure appropriate use of Program funds and will safeguard
Program assets. This note is divided as follows. Part one of this assessment covers FM
arrangements; part two covers procurement arrangement; and part three covers governance and
anticorruption assessment. The Program will be implemented by the Ministry of Public
Administration and Local Self Government (MPALSG); the Treasury Administration and the
Public Procurement Office (PPO). The capacity of these entities in the abovementioned areas
was assessed particularly in the scope of a broader assessment of country public FM systems.
Combined fiduciary risk after mitigation measures is rated as substantial.

II.      FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS
      A. Planning and Budgeting Arrangements
2.      Planning and budgeting capacity in the Program implementing entities is assessed to
be sufficient, and the government is committed to including Program expenditures in the
budget. The MPALSG, the Treasury Administration (TA), and other involved entities prepare
financial and medium-term plans. Staff qualified and with substantial experience in budget
preparation process are in charge of these tasks. In the process, they adhere to the provisions of
the Budget System Law (BSL) and prescribed budget calendar, sequence of steps, and content of
budget documentation. Program expenditures are included in financial plans of Program
implementing entities for the coming year. Also, Program expenditures have been included in the
Annual Budget Law for 2016, as well as in medium-term expenditure ceilings for the two
following years. The government is committed to implementation of the Public Administration
Reform Strategy and allocation of funds to Program activities in the coming years.

3.       The calendar for preparation of the annual budget is outlined in the BSL. The
calendar provides clarity and comprehensiveness of the budget preparation process. The calendar
specifies the timing and involvement of relevant stakeholders. However, deviations from the
prescribed deadlines in some steps of the process have been noted in past years. Combined with
limited staffing of the Budget Department of the MoF, the delays in adherence to the deadlines
meant that there was insufficient time for thorough analysis of budget users’ requests and setting
of adequate annual appropriation levels by the MoF. This is reflected in the variance in
expenditure composition between the actual and budgeted figures for the principal spenders,
reported as ranging from 10 percent to 40 percent annually during the years 2011, 2012, and
2013. Further, identification of priority areas for financing (including national investment
priorities) early in the process is rendered ineffective by subsequent MoF instructions for the
preparation of the draft annual budget, which are usually not referenced to the priority areas for
financing indicated by the budget users. Effective management of budget negotiations to decide
upon priority budget allocations is hampered by unclear separation of costs of the existing and
new policies in the budget requests. The government has introduced a new bylaw (April 2015) to
improve the assessment of the impact of new policies, but it is too early to assess its results.
Moreover, the MoF Budget Department negotiates with a large number of direct budget

                                                1
beneficiaries (DBBs), each of whom submits a separate budget request. The number of
entities/DBBs was standing at 54 entities in 2014, but the number varies each year.1

4.      Implementing entities have submitted their financial plans to the MoF on time and
in line with the budget calendar over the past three years. Track record for timeliness in
submission by the government of the annual budget proposal and its approval by the National
Assembly (NA) is overall solid. While the submission of the budget proposal to the NA has been
on time in 2013 and 2014, submission of the budget proposal for 2015 was delayed and limited
the time available for legislative review. On a positive note, budgets for the coming year in the
recent past have consistently been adopted by the parliament before the current year end. Annual
Budget Law for 2016 will be adopted by December 11, 2015. Financial plans that implementing
entities prepare are subject to the MoF’s scrutiny when it comes to specific entity’s budget, and
this process lacks better two-way communication. This risk is mitigated by the fact that the
government has committed to inclusion of Program expenditures in the budget. Severance cost
adds up to 80 percent of the expenditures to be financed by the loan and their inclusion in the
budget in the next three years is rather certain. The Budget Department of the MoF, which is in
charge of preparing the budget, is understaffed and should be strengthened in the coming years to
ensure quality of the budget process.

5.      Medium-term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) estimates and ceilings are generally
ineffective in providing the starting point in preparation of the following years’ budgets.
There is a three-year Expenditure Framework in place, articulated in the government’s Fiscal
Strategy, which is reviewed but not adopted by the NA. In the absence of procedures for its
enforcement, budget beneficiaries largely do not operate within the MTEF and the projections
for two years following the budget year are not observed. The actual outturns of past projected
figures imply that the MTEF-set ceilings are indicative and largely inconsequential as a medium-
term planning instrument. The Program will mitigate this risk by targeting key
Programs/Program activities as indicated in the Expenditure Framework, with relatively high
certainty of being included in the budget over the implementation period and with realistic cost
estimates available.

6.      Revenue outturn is not necessarily in line with the budgeted forecasts. Government
domestic revenues, as referred to in the Annual Budget Law, include tax revenues, nontax
revenues, and grants. All revenues, including the own generated revenues from DBBs and IBBs,
are deposited in the Treasury, registered in the Treasury system, and reported on the year-end
budget execution report as well as on its institutional or sectoral reports when applicable.
However, variance between budgeted and actual domestic revenues has been reported in recent
years, illustrating an uneven trend. None of the entities involved in the Program are directly
charged with revenue collection and any generated own-source revenues are not earmarked.
Revenue shortfall to the budgeted figure can lead to decreasing budgeted expenditures through
supplementary budgets and hence, pose a risk to the Program Expenditure Framework being


1
 Beneficiaries of the Budget of the Republic of Serbia are classified into DBBs and IBBs. The TA maintains a
publicly available registry of all DBBs and IBBs.



                                                        2
implemented; however, this has not happened frequently as reaching toward other sources of
financing, such as debt increase was the most common measure of addressing this issue.

7.      Implementing entities do not have a track record of extensive budget changes in line
with rules and procedures for in-year changes to the budget appropriations. The rules for
such changes are clearly outlined in the legislation and adhered to. This includes procedures
requiring approval of the legislature as well as those managed by the executive. In recent years,
in-year changes to budget appropriations have been undertaken in a transparent and predictable
manner. On the executive side, decisions for reallocations of annual appropriations require prior
approval by the MoF. Any reallocations are capped at 5 percent of the annual appropriation
approved for a particular type of expenditure or expense by the DBB or up to 10 percent within a
Program appropriation. The government may also use the contingency fund current budget
reserve, whose value is capped at 2 percent of the total revenues and income from the sales of
nonfinancial assets for the budget year, for unplanned purposes for which no appropriations have
been foreseen or for the purposes where the appropriations prove to be insufficient in the course
of the year. Decisions on the use of this contingency fund are made by the government upon
proposal of the MoF.

8.      The NA decides on any supplementary budgets in the course of the year.
Supplementary budgets have been a regular feature of the public FM system in Serbia in the past
years. Variances of actual expenditures compared to originally approved budget exist and are
assessed to be of moderate levels. The Program will mitigate this risk by focusing on Programs
of relevance and, therefore, certitude with regard to being included in the budget. Additionally,
selected Programs will be those with cost estimates, which are based on solid ground and
rationale, as confirmed by the assessment.

9.      The structures and procedures for review of the annual budget proposal are firmly
established and respected. Legislative review of the Fiscal Strategy and the annual budget
proposal is prescribed in the BSL and parliamentary Rules of Procedure. There is no
requirement, and accordingly no deadline, for the MTEF to be approved by the NA. For the
annual budget proposal, the legislation foresees a 45-day window (November 1–December 15)
for legislative review and approval. The technical part of the legislature review, before plenary
deliberation of the annual budget proposal, is carried out by the parliamentary Committee on
Finance, State Budget, and Control of Public Expenditure. Insufficient staffing in the Committee
Secretariat poses a challenge for a detailed fiscal analysis of the budget proposal. This is partly
offset with the information available from analyses of the Fiscal Strategy and proposal of the
Annual Budget Law carried out by the Fiscal Council of Serbia. The Annual Budget Law
(budget proposal) does not present comparison of the previous year’s outturn with the budgeted
figures for the current year, making it difficult for the legislature to easily identify expenditure
trends over time.

B.     Transparency
10.    The availability of budget and budget execution documentation to the public is
reported as overall partial, although principal documents such as annual budget and year-
end financial statements are readily available to the public. Documentation that must be
submitted to the NA for review and approval of the annual budget is specified in the Budget
System Law. Nonfinancial performance targets have been included in the budget for the first

                                                 3
time in 2015, following the transition to the Program budgeting format aimed at ensuring greater
transparency and higher degree of accountability for results. With the exception of a monthly
Public Finance Bulletin, which presents aggregate expenditure figures, availability of in-year
budget execution reports to the public is partial. The monthly Public Finance Bulletin is
published on the website of the MoF, but other official in-year budget execution reports are only
available upon request from the relevant institutions (the MoF, government, and NA). In line
with the regulation, implementing entities prepare quarterly budget execution reports which
include Program expenditures. Although foreseen as a measure in the Anticorruption Strategy,
Budget Inspection Annual Report is not yet being made publicly available by the MoF. Financial
statements for the budget of the Republic are easily accessible to the public in the form of the
proposal of the Law on the Final Account that is submitted by the government to the NA for
approval. All external audit reports are widely accessible through the website of the State Audit
Institution (SAI). The reports are posted on the website without delay upon their finalization.

C.     Accounting and Financial Reporting
11.     Adequate capacity of the accounting system is in place to track and report actual
Program expenditures against a comprehensive budget classification system. Budget control
and monitoring are managed by the TA through a centralized transaction processing system and
captured in the Treasury Main Ledger (TML). The TML, running on the SAP platform, captures
all revenue and expenditure transactions with relevant coding structures, which follow the
organizational, functional, Program, three-digit economic, six-digit economic, and source-of-
funds classification. The accounting arrangements facilitate detailed analysis, as necessary. All
the entities involved in the Program use the standard government classifications and their
transactions are captured in the TML. This is why the budget execution system operated by the
TA through the financial management information system (FMIS) application is in the center of
accounting and financial reporting assessment of the Program. The system is assessed to be
reliable. Budget beneficiaries, maintain additional accounting records and auxiliary ledgers,
which they reconcile with the TML in the course of preparation of their budget execution reports.
Accounting and financial reporting in the entities involved in the Program is of acceptable level.
Relevant departments of those institutions employ qualified and experienced staff working on
accounting and financial reporting. There are written accounting policies and procedures which
are applied in practice. They maintain the prescribed accounting records and submit the statutory
in-year budget execution reports and annual financial statements.

12.     The government’s accounting and financial reporting is performed on cash basis,
with additional information on assets and liabilities. The reporting meets the World Bank’s
requirements of Program financial reporting. Under the Decree on Application of International
Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS), the officially prescribed accounting standards for
DBBs and IBBs, users of funds of mandatory social insurance organizations and budgetary funds
of the Republic as of 2010 are the cash-based IPSAS. All entities involved in the Program are
subject to this regulation. However, since there are bylaws issued by the MoF that prescribe
specific accounting policies and reporting template, the implication is that IPSAS
implementation continues to be indirect (that is, applied within the limits imposed by the
National Framework).




                                                4
13.     A number of in-year budget execution reports of differing level of detail are issued
regularly in the course of the year. Additionally, the deadlines which regulate their preparation
in the BSL are observed. The MoF publishes the monthly Public Finance Bulletin, compiled
using Treasury data and aggregately reporting on central government revenue and expenditure
cash flows, within eight weeks from the end of the respective period. The bulletin does not
provide data about individual budget organizations and future commitments. Likewise, the
bulletin does not furnish explanation for the variations.

14.     Program expenditures will be reported through quarterly reports on budget
execution prepared by the implementing entities. All DBBs prepare and deliver budget
execution reports to the Treasury within 20 days from the end of the quarter (except for the first
quarter) on the level of categories of expenditure in line with the Chart of Accounts. Such reports
relating to the abovementioned entities on which the Program will focus will be considered as
financial reports used for monitoring the Program expenditures. The MoF produces reports on
budget execution in the course of the budget year, which are submitted to the government and
the NA 15 days after the end of the second and third quarters. No such report is generated for the
first quarter. They are aggregated on the highest level of economic classification and thus
comparable to aggregate figures contained in the annual budget. The MPALSG and other
assessed entities deliver prescribed reports in line with the legislation with no exception and the
reports are assessed with reasonable assurance to be reliable. In-year budget execution reports
are prepared and submitted in one of the forms that are included also in the final account, namely
the Budget Execution Report (Form 5), which ensures consistency between in-year reports and
the final account.

15.     Lack of disaggregated data in different types of classification in government in-year
reports may restrict monitoring and hinder identification of situations which require
attention. The assessment of objective compliance and of the adequate use of public funds is
also limited because of this weakness, even if the reports are prepared using the budget structure
and figures. From the perspective of accuracy of data on budget execution to date in the MoF in-
year reports, there is no evidence that it contains inaccuracies or omissions. The SAI has not
made any objections to the quality of information contained in the in-year budget execution
reports. The Treasury has the necessary capacity to generate customized reports on budget
execution for any specified parameters and for any required period, with sufficient level of
disaggregation capturing both the registered commitments and pending payments from the
Budget Execution System (BES).

16.     Annual financial statements are prepared by the TA and made available for audit in
June, within six months from the end of the relevant period. Implementing entities prepare
annual financial statements using their accounting records and auxiliary ledgers, after reconciling
such information with the TML. The Treasury consolidates and prepares based on such inputs
and data in the TML—the government’s annual financial statements (final account). Annual
financial statements are submitted to the MoF who submits them for the SAI’s audit in June.
Financial information is provided by the DBBs in their financial statements, together with their
respective IBBs by the end of March of the current year for the previous year. The deadline for
submission is fixed in the BSL and is consistently observed, with a minor slippage of several
days in 2013 and 2014. The format of the final account is comparable to that of the approved
budget and shows the budget allocation, executed budget figures, and the differences between

                                                5
the two. The final account is subject to the audit and it includes the following financial
statements: balance sheet, revenue and expenditure statement, statement of capital expenditures
and receipts, cash flow statement, and the budget execution report.

17.     Annual financial statements are generally reliable. The quality of financial statements
is assessed to be adequate as it pertains to budget execution, revenues, and expenditures;
therefore, providing reliable information about Program expenditures. Quality and reliability of
balance sheet items is somewhat questionable as the cash basis accounting and information
system impedes maintaining quality financial information for accrual-based financial items;
however, prevailing local regulation prescribes preparation of a balance sheet practically based
on a chart of accounts aligned with that of the corporate sector.

18.     Program expenditures are an integral part of the government’s annual financial
statements (final account). Separate financial statements of the implementing entities have not
been included in the SAI’s risk-based audit Program in 2015. The final account of the budget of
the Republic received a qualified opinion from the SAI for FY2013, both for audit of financial
statements and for audit of compliance. The main reasons for a qualified opinion from the audit
of the financial statements for FY2013 refer to financial and nonfinancial assets in the balance
sheet. Main findings in the audit of compliance for the same year refer to the unsatisfactory
establishment of financial management and control (FMC) and internal audit as well as the
accounting and information technology (IT) systems.

D.     Treasury Management and Flow of Funds
19.     The Consolidated Treasury Account System (CTAS) has comprehensive coverage
and functions efficiently; hence, it will be relied upon for expenditure payments under the
Program. All Program implementing entities are integrated within the CTAS. It includes all
relevant cash resources of the government and captures cash flows related to government
revenue and expenditure. The CTAS is the single account of the consolidated treasury accounts
(CTAs) of the Republic of Serbia and the local government treasuries for Serbian dinars (RSD).
It is managed by the TA. It is used for execution of payments between beneficiaries of budget
funds, beneficiaries of Mandatory Social Security Insurance Organizations, and other
beneficiaries of public funds included and not included in the CTAS, accounting for interbank
payments. All entities involved in the Program are operating within the RSD CTAS. Foreign
currency funds have not yet been integrated within the CTA, so foreign currency transactions are
consolidated in Treasury reports only in certain intervals. Integration of these funds within the
CTA is one of the next steps in the government’s reform and it is expected to be implemented by
2016.

20.     Annual budget execution for DBBs, including the Program implementing entities, is
orderly. Annual budget is executed through the BES, that is, the software application FMIS
which is managed by the TA. As of 2015, it covers the DBBs but not the IBBs. Although the
treasury does process their payment requests since IBBs do make part of consolidated treasury
account, they are not part of budget execution system in FMIS, and their budget execution is not
monitored timely. Implementation of earlier plans to extend the coverage to IBBs has been
progressively postponed. PFMRP also includes expanding the coverage of the FMIS to IBBs
among its reform measures. All the entities involved in the Program are categorized as DBBs and
are subject to Treasury-administered controls integrated in the BES.

                                                6
21.     Ex ante commitment controls are exercised by the implementing entities and
subsequently channeled through the TA in the commitment and payment approval stages.
The decision and responsibility (ex ante controls) for assuming any commitments rests with the
management of individual budget beneficiaries, including the Program implementing entities.
Commitments created by the Program implementing entities must conform to the appropriation
approved for such purpose in the budget year. The BES has rigorous application controls that
prevent any payments that would exceed the determined quotas or overall annual budget
appropriations. Within the year, budget entities respect the limits set by budget appropriations in
terms of payments, and the FMIS has integrated hard controls not allowing payments to exceed
appropriations. However, entities may assume liabilities without entering it in the FMIS, thus
creating liabilities exceeding budget appropriations and accumulating arrears. There is not
sufficient monitoring and control over recording commitments in the FMIS by budget
beneficiaries after liabilities have been assumed. In addition, it is possible for the budget
beneficiaries to assume commitments within the budget appropriation but not be able to execute
them against the subsequently set lower monthly quotas. In such cases, the budget beneficiary
may apply to the TA for a change of the quota. The legislation requires the TA to decide upon
such requests guided by a projection of budget revenue and income, by budget execution of a
budget beneficiary in the previous period, and by the appraisal of financial planning
performance. If the increase of the quota is not approved, this could potentially lead to
outstanding payments.

22.      Cash management practices exercised by the TA are sound. The TA manages cash
liquidity, prepares a cash flow forecast for the fiscal year, and updates it monthly on the basis of
actual cash inflows and outflows. In practice, cash planning is on a month-to-month basis, where
the DBBs estimate monthly cash requirements through plans for budget execution and the TA
approves their ’quota’, that is, ceiling, by the 15th of the preceding month. The Program
implementing entities submit such quarterly plans for budget execution each month on a rolling
basis.

23.    The funds will be disbursed based on achieved disbursement-linked indicators
(DLIs). There will be advances of the loan funds up to 25 percent of the loan amount. The
government will evidence and document achievement of DLIs at the end of each year (2016–
2018), and based on the verification of the achieved DLIs by the Bank according to details
described in the verification protocol, the advances will be converted to disbursements freeing up
space for the next advance up to 25 percent of the loan amount. The DLIs achievement and
disbursement will be scalable according to the level of achievement assessed by the task team
based on the verification protocol. The level of disbursed funds will be monitored based on the
achieved DLIs does so that it does not exceed the level of total Program expenditures incurred
over the implementation period. In case the disbursed funds exceed the level of incurred Program
expenditures, the excess amount will need to be reimbursed to the Bank. Loan funds will be
disbursed to a government account held at the National Bank of Serbia/CTA and will be
accounted for in the budget management information system as income.

E.     Internal Controls and Internal Audit
24.   Although there is still a long reform path in implementation of Public Internal
Financial Control (PIFC), existing systems for internal controls are sufficiently strong to


                                                 7
provide a satisfactory control framework for the Program. Implementation of FMC as
defined by PIFC is still in the early stages; however, there is a longstanding traditional system of
written internal controls and procedures within all implementing entities, which are properly
applied in practice. This system provides a sound framework and covers key controls such as
authorized signatories for transactions and approvals, segregation of duties, accounting checks
and controls, all operations cycles covered by appropriate internal acts, and so on. There are
written internal acts and rulebooks which describe procedures and controls applied for all
relevant cycles of transactions. The formulated system is assessed to be adequate and complied
with in practice. There is a Legal Framework for a functional PIFC system including FMC and
internal audit, but implementation requires improvement. Recent assessments of public
administration point to the conclusion that, despite extensive training on FMC concepts, the
objectives and benefits of a fully operational FMC system are still poorly understood across the
public sector. Operational guidance from the MoF on implementation of managerial
accountability in practice is still lacking. This will be necessary in the ongoing transition from
input- to result-based management of resources.

25.     The system of internal controls provides adequate safeguard of funds although it
often lacks the linkages with major requirements for a modernized sound system of public
internal controls. Features that need to be developed would include setting of objectives,
formalized risk assessment procedures, establishment of relevant and cost-effective internal
controls to provide reasonable assurance, delegation of responsibilities and authority,
documentation and audit trails, and so on. However, this centralized control over inputs still
provides a substantially sound control environment and safeguards the use of public funds.

26.   The assessment showed that key internal controls are instituted and applied within
Program implementing entities. Those include

           appropriate authorizations and approvals of all purchases, relevant documentation,
            transactions of payments, and so on;
           segregation of duties as different persons are responsible for different phases of a
            transaction;
           reconciliations between accounting records and the TML; and
           original documentation to support all project transactions.

27.   In addition to the above, the TA exercises the following controls for execution of the
budget:

           No payments are processed if they exceed annual budget appropriations (hard
            control in the FMIS).
           No payments are processed if they exceed monthly payment quotas (hard control in
            the FMIS).
           Only authorized personnel of users of public funds can access the FMIS.
           Only authorized signatories approve requests for payment.
           Appropriate supporting documentation for payments is needed.




                                                 8
28.    Some controls over nonsalary expenditure are exercised both by the TA and the
implementing entities. On the level of the BES managed by the TA, there is a robust framework
of automated controls over transactions in both the registration of the expenditure commitment
and payment stages. Segregation of duties for the transactions carried out through the BES is
adequate. Coverage of the controls integrated into the BES application includes
revenues/expenditures, own-source revenues/expenditures, and received grants/expenditures of
DBBs as well as transfers from the Republican budget. Transfers from local government budgets
and own-source revenues/expenditures of IBBs or project loans are not executed through the
BES.

29.     The internal controls in entities included in the scope of the Program provide a
framework for appropriate segregation of duties, authorized signatories and lines of
approval, accounting controls including reconciliations, and procurement controls—and
will be relied upon for Program implementation. According to the SAI reports, application of
the controls in practice is subject to certain deviations in some cases but, in general, are complied
with. Other identified weaknesses include lack of follow-up in the results of conducted annual
FMC self-assessments and low level of interest on behalf of the government for implementation
of recommendations intended to address systemwide issues in FMC. Selection of Programs to be
financed and monitoring of implementation will aim to mitigate this risk through financing
implementable Programs which allow for adequate monitoring. On the level of the budget final
account, the SAI gave a qualified opinion for compliance for FY2013. For the same year, the
SAI’s Sector for Audit of the Budget and Budget Funds reported 2 positive opinions and 17
qualified opinions for the audit of compliance for individual DBBs.

30.      Implementing entities make part of the centralized payroll system in the Treasury,
which is assessed to include adequate payroll controls. The TA is required to manage a
registry of employed, elected, appointed, and engaged Persons in the public sector. Recent
assessments contain reservations with respect to quality (that is, comprehensiveness and
credibility) of this registry due to delays in data gathering and issues with accuracy of the
submissions from individual public funds beneficiaries. This is mainly due to the fact that this
registry is designed as a self-reporting tool where the TA has no control over the quality or
reliability of the data provided. Until the comprehensive registry is fully implemented, the TA
relies on its own database of personnel records (established in 2006) to underpin the centralized
payroll system for civil servants and employees in the bodies of the Republican administration,
which covers about 120,000 civil servants and employees (a fraction of the total number of
general government personnel) and undisclosed number of staff in the military, police, and
intelligence structures. All the entities involved in the Program are covered with the current
centralized payroll system operated by the TA. Recent assessments indicate that the degree of
integration between personnel records and payroll, timeliness of changes, and internal controls
over changes to personnel records and payroll are satisfactory so the risk to the Program for the
participating entities is low.

31.     An internal audit unit has been established and made functional in the Program
implementing entities, but similar to the whole public sector it needs substantial
institutional, methodological, and capacity developments. The MPALSG and the TA have
one employee each in the internal audit department. Internal audit prepares annual plans based
on assessed risks, which are duly implemented. Implementation and follow-up of

                                                 9
recommendations of internal audit is limited and needs improvements. The Program will not rely
on the findings of internal audit as an instituted and agreed measure of confirming appropriate
fiduciary arrangements for the Program during implementation, but it will consult reports of
internal audits for entities involved in the Program as an additional source of information.
Internal audit reports are considered as an internal enactment of the respective institution and are
not normally distributed outside of the institution, except to the SAI, upon request. In recent
years, issues have been reported with respect to independence of internal auditors. It has likewise
been noted that quality assurance of their work needs further attention. On a positive note, a
substantial number of internal audit departments follow strategic/annual risk-based audit plan. A
high percentage of practicing public sector internal auditors are trained and certified under a
Program designed and implemented by the Central Harmonization Unit of the MoF, involving
in-class and practical on-the-job training. The same applies to the implementing entities.
Assessed entities have an established internal audit function, which is operational but—as with
most of the public sector entities—is in need of further capacity strengthening. Internal audit
units consist typically of several people and conduct audits in line with annual audit plans that
they prepare. Public sector internal auditors are required to follow internationally recognized
International Professional Practices Framework issued by the Institute of Internal Auditors.

32.     The MoF Budget Inspection Unit carries out additional control of compliance with
laws and regulations. Findings of the budget inspection, as they pertain to the Program
expenditures, will be consulted in the process of monitoring the expenditures. The mandate of
the Budget Inspection Unit is very broad and includes DBBs and IBBs, extra-budgetary funds,
state-owned enterprises, regional and local governments and their state-owned enterprises, and
any other legal entities who have received budgetary funds (for example, lending, subsidies,
donations, and so on). In case of noncompliance with the application of laws in terms of material
and financial operations and with the intended and legal use of funds by the budget beneficiaries,
the inspection may issue administrative acts and decisions, which impose orders to remove
irregularities, recover funds during the budget year, and file misdemeanor charges against the
inspected entities or responsible persons. At 11 systematized posts, the Budget Inspection Unit
remains largely understaffed for discharge of such a broad mandate. For the time being, the work
program of the Budget Inspection Unit is determined by the minister of Finance. It is likely that
planning of the Budget Inspection Unit’s work will have to be aligned more closely with
European Union (EU) PIFC requirements. Under the PIFC concept, inspection should act upon
petitions and complaints (in reaction to the problems that have arisen) and upon request of the
minister of Finance (in case of suspicion that particular areas may be prone to problems), making
it a more effective and flexible instrument for management of irregularities.

F.     Program Audit
33.     The SAI audit of the government’s annual financial statements (the final account)
will be considered as the audit of the Program. The implementing entities prepare the annual
financial statements using their accounting records and auxiliary ledgers after reconciling such
information with the TML. The Treasury consolidates based on such inputs and the TML, the
government’s annual financial statements (final account) which are subject to financial and
compliance audit by the SAI. The audit of the final account for the previous year is delivered by
the SAI by the end of the year following the audited period. The SAI issued modified qualified
opinion on the final account for 2013. The main reason for such opinion was information on

                                                10
fixed assets completeness and valuation of which could not be verified. The SAI audit of the
final account will be considered as the audit of the Program. The Bank has agreed with the SAI
that the audit report will include an explanatory note which will detail Program expenditures
specifically. The SAI is assessed to have sufficient capacity to produce a reliable audit providing
sufficient assurance about the use of Program funds. Program expenditures are an integral part of
the final account and are audited annually within the audit of the final account.

34.     The SAI’s capacity is assessed to be adequate as a result of significant development
over the past years in terms of the number of staff, organizational structure, and audit
methodology. The mandate of the SAI is exhaustive, and its remit includes financial, compliance
(regularity), and performance audits of all public entities, in accordance with national and
international auditing standards. The SAI performs its audits based on a risk-based Annual Audit
Plan which has to be adopted by the end on the current year for the subsequent calendar year.
The SAI subscribes to the International Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions’
International Standards of Supreme Audit Institutions. The institution conducted its first
performance audit in 2013 and the most recent development relates to establishing quality
control department within the institution. Manuals for financial and compliance audits,
performance audits, and quality control have been formally approved by the management in
April 2015. As a part of financial and compliance audits, apart from accuracy of financial
statements and compliance with laws and regulations, the SAI also examines the FMC systems
(including internal control systems) and internal audit.

35.     The SAI independence, mandate, and organization are established and protected by
the Constitutional and Legal Framework, which is respected in practice. The SAI is
accountable to the NA. The parliamentary Committee on Finance, State Budget, and Control of
Public Spending established a subcommittee to consider the SAI reports in 2015, thereby
increasing the capacity for the legislative scrutiny of audit reports. Management and supporting
structures to allow the SAI to discharge its mandate are in place. There was significant
strengthening of capacity of the SAI over the past years in terms of the number of staff,
organizational structure, and development of an audit methodology. Significantly higher
resources in the SAI and extensive technical support provided by the twinning project have
helped increase the audit coverage and quality. The institution conducted its first performance
audit in 2013 and the most recent development relates to establishing a quality control
department within the institution.

36.     All the entities participating in the Program are under the scope of the external
audit (financial, compliance, performance) carried out by the SAI. Apart from being part of
the final account, separate financial statements for entities involved in the Program have not been
included in the SAI risk-based Annual Audit Program in 2014 and audits of 2013 financial
statements. However, information available from the SAI reports in earlier years for the
participating institutions leaves a general perception that they have a substantial capacity in
internal controls and public procurement. The Program will have impact by promoting sound
management and control practices.

37.     The SAI system for follow-up on implementation of audit recommendations is
effective. For audit follow-up, the Law on SAI requires the auditee to report to the SAI on how it
has addressed the detected irregularities or deficiencies that had not been addressed during the

                                                11
course of the audit. The SAI is managing a database of all issued recommendations, including
their status, and reports to the NA on the status through its annual aeport on activities. The SAI
Annual Activity Report for 2014 identifies no outstanding recommendations issued in FY2013
by the Sector for Audit of Budget and Budget Funds, with a total of 142 of 229 recommendations
fully implemented and the implementation of the balance underway.

                         Table 1. Summary of Key FM Risks and Mitigation Measures

      Primary Risks            Potential Impact on Program                  Key Mitigation Measures
Planning and Budgeting
Unreliable medium-term       Programs included in the             Focus on key Programs/Program
expenditure ceilings         Expenditure Framework not            activities/projects as indicated in the
                             executed; risk to achievement of     Expenditure Framework with relatively high
                             DLIs                                 certainty of being included in the budget over
                                                                  the implementation period and with realistic
                                                                  cost estimates.
Inadequate budgetary         Programs included in the             Funds safeguarded as the Program design
allocation for Program       Expenditure Framework not            ensures achievement of DLIs is a prerequisite
activities by the            executed; risk to achievement of     for funding
government                   DLIs
                                                                  Risk to implementation mitigated by focus on
                                                                  including vital Programs and activities in the
                                                                  Expenditure Framework
Accounting and Financial Reporting
In-year reports with       May restrict monitoring and            Specify the frequency, scope, and level of
varying scope and level of determining amount of Program          detail for reporting for the participating
aggregation                related expenditures and affect        institutions
                           disbursement and decision making
                           for sound Program implementation
Poor quality annual        Poor quality Program annual            Specify the frequency, scope, and level of
financial statements       financial statements could affect      detail for reporting for the participating
                           Program monitoring and decision        institutions
                           making
                                                                  Reporting system entails reconciliation of
                                                                  implementing entities’ accounting records and
                                                                  the TML, constituting a double layer reporting
                                                                  mechanism and system of controls

                                                                  Annual financial statements audited by the SAI
Treasury Management and Funds Flow
Delays in releasing and  Insufficient funds available for         Commitment by the government to ensure
insufficient government  Program implementation                   adequate funding and improvements of
funds                                                             commitment control and cash management
                                                                  through technical part of the Program
Internal Controls and Internal Audit
 Weaknesses in internal     Risk of Program funds not being       Annual risk-based fiduciary
 control systems and cases  used for the intended purposes        reviews/supervision to be conducted on the
 of accountability of funds                                       Program to verify the use of funds for intended
                                                                  purposes

                                                                  External audit conducted by the SAI
Weak capacity of internal    Inadequate internal audit coverage   Annual risk-based fiduciary
audit function for staff                                          reviews/supervision to be conducted on the
numbers and skills and                                            Program to verify the use of funds for intended


                                                      12
      Primary Risks              Potential Impact on Program                Key Mitigation Measures
lack of functional                                               purposes
independence
                                                                 External audit conducted by the SAI
Insufficient capacity of the   Risk of Program funds not being   Annual risk-based fiduciary
Budget Inspection Unit to      used for the intended purposes    reviews/supervision to be conducted on the
cover all Program                                                Program to verify the use of funds for intended
expenditures                                                     purposes

                                                                 External audit conducted by the SAI
External Audit and Oversight
The SAI coverage of        Affects timeliness and quality of     Official letter to the SAI to agree on audit,
Program expenditures       Program audits                        including additional explanatory note in the
during audit of the                                              audit of the final account, which would detail
government’s annual                                              Program expenditures
financial statements
High incidence of audit    Indication of noncompliance with      Preparing action plans to address the identified
report qualifications      FM procedures and possible            issues and the Bank’s follow-up and
                           misuse of funds                       monitoring of implementation of the actions


III.    PROCUREMENT ASSESSMENT
A.      Legislative and Regulatory Framework
38.     The Public Procurement Law (PPL), adopted in December 2012,2 replaces the PPL
of 20083 and marks a significant reform of the public procurement system in Serbia. It
represents a notable step toward conformity with the EU procurement directives. Effective since
April 1, 2013, and amended in August 2015, the Law regulates the procedures for the award of
public contracts and framework agreements, outlines legal protection in relation to public
procurement procedures, defines types of procurement procedures, and introduces several
improvements to the procurement system, such as increased transparency and a reduction of the
number of exceptions. The key provisions of the PPL are outlined in annex I. Amendments to the
criminal code passed in December 2012 by the parliament introduced ‘abuse of public
procurement’ as a new criminal offense.4

39.    Since the adoption of the PPL, the PPO has continuously adopted regulations and
model documents for its implementation (for example, adoption of public procurement
secondary legislation, model tender documents, and standard forms, ‘three decrees and one
decision concerning centralised procurement, procurement in the field of defence and security
and common procurement vocabulary’,5 adoption of measures aimed at preventing corruption
and conflicts of interest in public tenders, and so on).



2
  Official Gazette 124/2012.
3
  Official Gazette 116/2008. http://www.lexology.com/library/detail.aspx?g=f188efa0-0f2b-4324-b299-
9ce1e2b97369
4
  Bertelsmann Foundation. 2014. Serbia Country Report. Bertelsmann Transformation Index.
5
  European Commission. Serbia Progress Report, October 2014.



                                                       13
40.     The issue of public procurement is high on the current administration's agenda.
Improving the public procurement system is part of the third objective of Serbia’s Public
Administration Reform Strategy, ‘Improvement of public finances and procurement
management’. The government adopted a Public Procurement Strategy for 2014–2018 and a
corresponding Action Plan for 2014–2015 on October 30, 2014.6 The strategy foresees the
amendment of the PPL in 2017 to ensure full harmonization with the acquis communautaire
(indeed, a few discrepancies remain, including for example, the definition of a contracting
authority, a few exemptions from the Law, the retention of the qualification system in addition to
other procurement procedures and (...) national preferences").7

41.     These are positive developments and show improvements. In 2013, the European
Bank for Reconstruction and Development assessment recorded regulatory gaps in Serbia’s
Public Procurement Legal Framework of between 17 percent and 21 percent in key regulatory
areas, such as transparency safeguards, efficiency instruments, and institutional and enforcement
measures. The assessment pointed out the gap between Serbia's Legal and Institutional
Framework and international best practice.8 The 2013 Enterprise Survey revealed that 40 percent
of firms thought they were expected to give gifts to secure a government contract,9 highlighting
the considerable room for improvement regarding integrity standards in public procurement
procedures.

42.      The Legal Framework for procurement (PPL and attendant regulations) provides
the elements needed for a functional system. The organization of public procurement
processes and the hierarchy between the PPO, the Republic Commission for the Protection of
Rights in Public Procurement Procedures (RC), and contracting authorities are clearly defined.
The procurement system and procurement operations are mostly decentralized with
approximately 4,700 registered contracting authorities, of which about 160 are central
government bodies.10 The PPL applies to all procurement undertaken using government funds,
that is, procurement of goods, works, and services purchased by state and local government
authorities, state-owned enterprises, and legal persons who use funds provided by the
government of Serbia or local self-governments. Limited exceptions are defined in Article 7 of
the PPL. According to Articles 32–35 of the PPL, open competitive procurement is the default
method of procurement. Articles 36–39 define cases in which other methods can be used under
specific circumstances and with specific justifications.11

B.      Institutional Framework
43.    The key actor in Serbia’s public procurement system is the PPO, a stand-alone
organization, accountable directly to the government12 to which it reports on a yearly basis. The
PPO is responsible for drafting public procurement secondary legislation and for coordinating
6
  Available at www.ujn.gov.rs.
7
  OECD-EU SIGMA. Public Administration Reform Assessment of Serbia, April 2014.
8
  For more information on the legal reform in Serbia, see http://www.ebrd.com/legal-reform-in-serbia.html.
9
  World Bank Group and IFC. 2013. Serbia Country Profile. Enterprise Surveys.
10
   World Bank. Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) Performance Report Serbia , March 2015.
11
   Ibid.
12
   OECD-EU SIGMA. Public Administration Reform Assessment of Serbia, April 2014 .



                                                     14
and monitoring the public procurement system in general. It also leads the negotiations with the
EU on Chapter 5 (Public Procurement) of the accession process and coordinates the activities of
all other involved institutions. However, public-private partnerships and concessions and defence
procurement are not in the remit of the PPO. (Following governmental reorganization,
responsibility for policymaking in these areas is not clearly defined.)

44.     The RC deals with complaints and appeals against decisions of contracting
authorities. It is an autonomous and independent entity established in 2010 and activated in
April 2013. It reports to the NA, which appoints and removes from office its president and
members. Until recently, the RC had a total of 54 staff (including the six members and the
president of the RC), a 38 percent increase compared to 2013. However, the new Amendment to
the PPL foresees an increase in the number of members from six to eight. The RC powers, under
the 2012 PPL, include the institution of minor offence procedures against both contracting
authority officers and bidders and the imposition of a range of fixed fines for those offences as
well as the cancellation of concluded contracts.

45.     The SAI is responsible for the audit of all public funds and reports systematically on
public procurement. In 2011, it reported that illegal acts in public procurement worth almost
€415 million had been discovered in 122 departments.13 Annex 2 presents in greater detail the
roles and responsibilities of additional relevant actors in the field of public procurement (for
example, the MoF, Anticorruption Agency, Administrative Court) as laid out in the Public
Procurement Strategy 2014–2018.

C.         Procurement Processes and Procedures
46.     The PPL applies to procurement of goods, works, and services purchased by the
state and local government authorities. It also covers state-owned enterprises and legal
persons that use funds provided by the government of Serbia or local self-governments.
Typically, procurement operations are decentralized; there are about 4,900 registered contracting
authorities, of which about 166 are central government bodies. The shopping method for
contracting may be used for ‘low-value’ contracts (annual estimated value below RSD
5,000,000, approximately €40,000). The PPL obliges contracting authorities to publish notices
and bidding documents for shopping on the public procurement portal.

47.     The various public procurement procedures established by the PPL are the
following: open, restricted, qualification, negotiated with invitation to bid, negotiated without
invitation to bid, competitive dialogue, design contest, and low-value public procurement
procedure. Contracts are awarded through an open or restrictive procedure and for them to be
awarded otherwise, specific requirements need to be met. In an open procedure, the contracting
authority may award the contract with a bid price higher than the cost estimate only if all bids
contain a price higher than the cost estimate and if it is not higher than the comparable market
price. Potentially, this provision leads to termination of numerous procedures. Other procedures
are restrictive (includes prequalification), qualification, negotiated with invitation to bid,
negotiated without invitation to bid, competitive dialogue, design contest, shopping, and

13
     Bertelsmann Foundation. 2014. Serbia Country Report. Bertelsmann Transformation Index.



                                                        15
framework agreement. To use less competitive public procurement procedures such as negotiated
procedure without invitation to bid and competitive dialogue, contracting authorities must obtain
prior approval from the PPO. This rule was introduced by the current PPL and use of open
procedure increased from 66 percent in 2013 to 85 percent in 2014, while use of negotiated
procedure without invitation to bid decreased from 17 percent in 2013 to 5 percent in 2014.

48.     Procurement rules and procedures are clearly established and easily accessible to
the public. Bidding procedures are advertised through the public procurement portal. Publication
of bidding documents on the public procurement portal is mandatory. The model of bidding
documents are provided by the PPO. The content of the bidding documents is prescribed by the
law—it must contain instruction to bidders, bid submission form, qualification requirements,
instructions to prove fullfilment of the requirements, a model of contract, technical
specifications/bill of quantity/terms of references, and declaration of an independent bid. The
contracting authorities are not obliged to follow the standard PPO tender documentation although
the template is often used. The relatively high share of procedures that do not use the lowest
price criterion exclusively (according to the data of the PPO) indicates that public procurement
officers are interested in achieving the objectives of procurement rather than the lowest possible
expenditure. A more detailed analysis reveals the most used award criteria: time of delivery of
service performance, guarantee period, and method of payment still focus on strictly economic
aspects of procurement. The introduction of PPL of 2013 did not increase the level of
competition. In 2014, the average number of bids submitted per tender was 2.6.14 The
competitiveness in the procedures with prior publication is at a medium level compared with the
EU average15 and even decreased in the past 2013 The register of bidders was introduced in
September 2013; it is maintained by the Serbian Business Registers Agency and is available
online at www.apr.gov.rs.

                     Table 2. Average Number of Bids Submitted Per Tender

                                       2012                         2013                        2014
 All contracts                          2.7                          2.7                         2.6
 Services                               2.3                          2.4                         2.3
 Supplies                               2.7                          2.7                         2.7
 Goods                                  3.2                          3.6                         2.7
Source: PPO.
49.     If the annual estimated value of the purchase is less than RSD 500,000
(approximately €4,200), contracting authorities are not obliged to apply the PPL for
procurement of goods, services, and works. However, they are obliged by Law to prevent any
conflict of interest, ensure competition, and ensure that the contracting price does not exceed the
comparable market price. For low-value contracts (annual estimated value below RSD 5,000,000
(€40,000), contracting authorities may use the ‘shopping method’ but need to publish notice and
bidding documents on the public procurement portal. Above these thresholds, contracting
14
  PPO data.
15
  Most EU advertised tenders receive between 4 and 6 bids, with an average of 5.4 bids: EU Public Procurement
Legislation: Delivering Results - Summary of Evaluation Report, European Commission, Internal Market and
Services, p. 13. http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/publicprocurement/docs/modernising_rules/executive-
summary_en.pdf.



                                                       16
authorities who wish to use less competitive methods of contracting (for example, negotiated
procedure without invitation to bid, Article 36 of the PPL, or competitive dialogue, Article 37 of
the PPL) must obtain prior PPO approval.16 This provision has reduced the incidence of the
negotiated procedure without invitation, from 24 percent of the total value of public procurement
in the first half of 2013 to 11 percent in the second half of 2013 and to 4 percent of the total
value of public tenders in the first half of 2014.17 Correspondingly, the use of open competitive
procedures increased from 54 percent of the total value of public procurement in the first half of
2013 to 79 percent in the second half of 201318 and 86 percent in 2014, according to the Annual
Report 2014 of the PPO.19 The average number of bids per tender remained stable, at 2.7 in 2013
and in the first half of 2014 against 2.6 in 2012.20

                 Figure 1. Structure of Concluded Contracts by Type of Procedure in Q3 2012



                                                                           Other
                                             18%

                                                                           Negotiated procedure
                                        62% 20%                            without invitation
                                                                           Open procedure



        Source: PPO, Support for Improvement in Governance and Management (SIGMA) Assessment 2014.

        Figure 2. Structure of Concluded Contracts by Type of Procedure in Q3 2013



                                             11%                                Other
                                                   10%
                                                                                Negotiated procedure
                                                                                without invitation
                                       79%
                                                                                Open procedure




        Source: PPO, SIGMA Assessment 2014.


16
   The PPO must decide whether to permit the requested procedure and respond to this effect within 10 days in cases
of negotiated procedure without invitation to bid and within 15 days in cases of competitive dialogue.
17
   European Commission. Serbia Progress Report, October 2014.
18
   PPO 2013 Annual Report, p. 9.
19
   UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). Draft country programme document for Serbia (2016 –2020).
June 2015. DP/DCP/SRB2.
20
   European Commission. Serbia Progress Report, October 2014.



                                                         17
50.     The contracting authorities are responsible for the implementation of contracts that
originate from public procurement procedures. As part of their bidding document,
contracting authorities need to include a model of the contract to be signed. In addition to the
contract notice award, they are also obliged to publish a notice on concluded public procurement
contracts. In case of contractual changes, they must make a decision on contract modification,
publish it on the public procurement portal, and notify the PPO and the SAI. While contracts are
currently not publicly available, it is foreseen that a register of public contracts shall be created
and made available through the public procurement portal in the last quarter of 2015.

51.     The Public Procurement Strategy 2014–2018 foresees the promotion of framework
agreements over the coming years. These reduce the administrative burden for contracting
authorities and allow them to save time on procurements that are likely to be repeated on a
multiyear basis. The strategy also notes that, “in the first year of implementation of the PPL,
there were 142 public procurement contracts signed under framework agreements and 204
contracts for centralised public procurement.?

D.       Procurement Planning and Overall Value
52.     Procurement planning is incorporated into legislation. Procurement planning is linked
to the available budget and procurement procedures cannot be launched if the budget is not
available. All ministries and contracting authorities prepare annual procurement plans by January
31 of the planned year and submit them to the PPO and the SAI within 10 days from the day of
adoption. “Contracting authorities may change their procurement plan in the case of a revised
budget or amended financial plans, but the PPL encourages them to do so in a transparent
manner that highlights the specific changes relative to the original plan and that provides
accompanying justifications. Changes in the procurement plans are submitted to the PPO and the
SAI, prominently including changes to contract elements such as price and contract duration.
Contracting authorities must also report quarterly to the PPO on conducted public procurement
procedures and contracts awarded. Exemptions from the PPL are clearly defined by Article 7.?21
With the implementation of the recent PPL Amendment, procurement plans will be published on
the public procurement portal as of January 2016 (for now, procurement plans were not
published on the public procurement portal; instead, each contracting authority was encouraged
to publish it on its own website). According to the statistics provided by the PPO, the total
number of purchasing entities in 2012 was 3,529.22 In 2013, approximately 83,000 public
contracts were awarded, with an approximate total value of RSD 262,938,735,000
(approximately €2,390,352,000.00).23

E.      E-procurement
53.     The PPL envisages the possibility of submitting bids electronically and provides for
the introduction of special e-procurement techniques, such as electronic auctions and a
dynamic procurement system. The Public Procurement Strategy 2014–2018 specifies that, “as
21
   World Bank. Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) Performance Report Serbia, March 2015 .
22
   OECD-EU SIGMA. Public Administration Reform Assessment of Serbia , April 2014.
23
   PPO 2013 Annual Report, table 3, p. 7.



                                                     18
regards the use of e-procurement, the PPL stipulates that the Administration for Joint Services
Office of Republic Bodies, as the body in charge of centralised public procurements for the
purposes of public authorities and organisations, must establish the information system and use
the dynamic procurement system and electronic auctions whenever feasible.? However, the PPL
does not set a specific time frame for the implementation of these systems to which the
contracting authorities would have to adhere.

54.    In practice there has been no experience to date with the use of e-bidding, e-
auctions, and the dynamic procurement system in Serbia. The potential of online tools is still
underused and the objective of establishing and operating a unified, comprehensive e-
procurement platform that would incorporate functionalities such as e-announcement, e-
communication and bidding, e-catalogue, e-auction, and e-dynamic procurement system, is still
far away.24

IV.     INTEGRITY AND TRANSPARENCY OF THE PUBLIC PROCUREMENT SYSTEM
A.      Public Access to Procurement Information
55.     Procurement laws and regulations are freely and easily accessible to the public. The
procurement law and bylaws are published in the Official Gazette and can be downloaded on the
website of the PPO (www.unj.gov.rs). According to the PPL, all public procurements
announcements and contract awards must be published by contracting authorities on the public
procurement portal for all types of procedures, including small-value public procurement
procedures. Furthermore, the PPL has also introduced the mandatory publication of information
on contract amendments and execution; the PPO opinions on the justifiability of negotiated
procedures, negative references, filed requests for the protection of bidders’ rights, RC decisions;
quarterly reports by contracting authorities on contracts signed and procedures conducted; and so
on. Access to the content posted on the portal and downloads by bidders and other interested
parties is free of charge. In practice, government bidding opportunities and contract awards are
promptly posted on the public procurement portal (www.portal.ujn.gov.rs); while data on
procurement complaints and their resolution is posted on the portal of the RC
(www.kjn.gov.rs/sr/odluke) and on the public procurement portal.

56.     Significant progress has been achieved in the use of the public procurement portal,
which became operational on April 1, 2013. In the first year of its implementation, daily visits
soared to 5,000—more than 600 percent of the number of visits to the previous version of the
portal. “New software for the electronic collection of procurement records and plans has been
made available to contracting authorities.?25 In addition, the average number of public
procurement procedures announced daily has been about 130, about 200 percent higher than
under the previous PPL.26 In the last quarter of 2014, the portal had 500,000 visits.27


24
   Republic of Serbia. 2014. Action Plan for Implementation of OGP Initiative in the Republic of Serbia for 2014
and 2015. htp://www.opengovpartnership.org/country/serbia.
25
   OECD-EU SIGMA. Public Administration Reform Assessment of Serbia, April 2014.
26
   Public Procurement Development Strategy of the Republic of Serbia for the period 2014 –2018.
27
   UNDP Article 2015, “Strengthening the Serbian public procurement system.? (June).



                                                        19
                   Table 3. Usage of the Public Procurement Portal, 2013–2014

   6,456 registered users—more than twice as much as on the old portal
   27,358 posted public procurement procedures
   161 published decisions by the RC
   2,150 opinions on negotiated procedure
   An average of 137 posted tenders per day—an increase of more than 60% when compared with the old portal
   An average of 6,170 daily visits—when compared with the old portal, this number reflects an increase of more
    than 700%.
Source: OECD-EU SIGMA. Public Administration Reform Assessment of Serbia, April 2014. p. 26.

57.     Further improvements of the portal are planned in the 2014–2015 Open
Government Partnership (OGP) Action Plan for Serbia. The OGP Action Plan foresees the
introduction of new features such as the ability to publish purchasers’ procurement plans, an
English version of the e-portal, better tools for searching the decisions of the RC, a registry of
public contracts, and a reporting system to the PPO. Trainings and technical assistance for users
are also envisaged in the OGP Action Plan. A Central Registry of Bidders has been established
and is operational since September 1, 2013, with more than 2,000 economic operators already
registered (SIGMA 2014).

B.       Complaints Receiving and Handling Mechanisms
58.     The RC is responsible for the administrative procurement complaints system. A
complaint may be lodged against any phase of public procurement procedure as well as against
decisions on contract awards. Among other responsibilities, the RC “(a) requests for protection
of rights and appeals filed against the conclusion of the contracting authority, (b) monitors and
controls implementation of its decisions, (c) annuls public procurement contracts, and (d)
imposes fines on contracting authorities and conducts minor offense proceedings in the first
instance.?28 The Commission issues decisions that are binding for all parties, without precluding
subsequent access to an external higher authority. Further appeals can be made to the
Administrative Court. The process for submission and resolution of complaints is clearly set out
in the PPL by Articles 148–155 and 157 and is publicly available on the website of the RC
(http://www.kjn.gov.rs/sr/zastita_prava/zahtev-za-zastitu-prava.html). Fees charged in the
procedures of complaints, as detailed in Article 156 of the PPL, are believed to be reasonable and
do not prohibit access by concerned parties.29

59.     The number of appeals submitted to the RC increased significantly over time (2,067
cases received in 2013 compared to 1,622 in 2012).30 From the entry into force of the new Legal
Framework in April 2013 until December 2013, the RC entirely annulled public procurement
procedures in 296 cases.31 In the same period, it did not annul any public procurement



28
   World Bank. Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) Performance Report Serbia , March 2015.
29
   Ibid.
30
   OECD-EU SIGMA. Public Administration Reform Assessment of Serbia , April 2014.
31
   Reports by the Republic Commission for the periods April 1, 2013 –June 30, 2013, p. 5 and July 1, 2013 –
December 31, 2013, p. 7.



                                                       20
contracts.32 It received 1,696 cases and reached a decision on 1,609 of these cases.33 Compared
to the same period in 2012, the number of requests for protection of rights increased by 39
percent.34 Over the whole year of 2013, the RC reached a total of 1,966 decisions, as compared
to 1,700 in 2012. During the first half of 2014, the RC entirely annulled the public procurement
procedure in 244 cases related to the protection of rights.35 In the same period, it did not annul
any public procurement contracts.36 It received 1,442 cases and made 1,282 decisions (958 for
protection of rights and 80 upon appeals to conclusions of the contracting authorities).37
Comparing the January 1–June 30 periods for 2013 and 2014, there were 37.66 percent more
cases received in the latter and 41.58 percent more cases resolved.38

60.     Due to a very high number of appeals, there are certain delays in the RC’s work.
Article 158 of the PPL states that the RC shall decide upon request for protection of rights whose
content is in accordance with Article 151 of the PPL within 20 days from receipt of the request
and not later than 30 days. The maximum number of days for decision on a complaint was
reduced by 2015 amendment to 20 days. The RC shall decide upon appeal to conclusions of the
contracting authorities within eight days from the day of receiving the appeal. In the second half
of 2013, the average period deciding upon a request for protection of rights was 23.61 days and
the average period for deciding an appeal to conclusions of the contracting authorities was 14
days.39 In the first half of 2014, the respective averages were 19.84 days and 13.19 days.40
Between April and December 2013, out of the 1,609 decisions, 341 were not made within the
deadline specified by the PPL.41 During the first half of 2014, out of the 1,282 decisions, 177
decisions were not made within the deadline specified by the PPL.42

C.      Control Mechanisms
61.    An important role in the process of control is carried out by the SAI. There are well-
defined policies and procedures within the SAI for audit of public procurement procedures. In
accordance with the PPL, contracting authorities are obliged to submit their procurement plans to
the SAI. This rule applies to any contractual changes that appear during implementation. This
submission must be done promptly and it is an important tool for prevention of irregularities. In
the process of an audit, the SAI audits the type of the procedure and all related decisions, bids,
evaluation report, decision of contract award, and the contract itself. The physical inspection of
contract outcomes is the subject of an audit. The audit report contains all findings with

32
   Reports by the Republic Commission for the periods April 1, 2013 –June 30, 2013, p. 93 and July 1, 2013 –
December 31, 2013, p. 238.
33
   Reports by the Republic Commission for the periods April 1, 2013 –June 30, 2013, p. 108 and July 1, 2013–
December 31, 2013, p. 261.
34
   European Commission. Serbia Progress Report, October 2014.
35
   Report by the Republic Commission for the period January 1, 2014 –June 30, 2014, p. 7.
36
   Report by the Republic Commission for the period January 1, 2014 –June 30, 2014, 252–255.
37
   Report by the Republic Commission for the period January 1, 2014 –June 30, 2014, p. 291.
38
   Ibid.
39
   Report by the Republic Commission for the period July 1, 2013–December 31, 2013, p. 265.
40
   Report by the Republic Commission for the period January 1, 2014 –June 30, 2013, p. 293.
41
   Reports by the Republic Commission for the periods April 1, 2013 –June 30, 2013, p. 107 and July 1, 2013–
December 31, 2013, p. 261.
42
   Report by the Republic Commission for the period January 1, 2014 –June 30, 2014, p. 288.



                                                       21
recommendations to the subject of audit and it is published. The most common findings are due
to poorly prepared procurement plans, lack of experience in public procurement, and particularly
unrealistic needs assessments. The SAI monitors implementation of its recommendations and can
impose implementation of its recommendations by undertaking further legal steps.

62.     The PPO and the SAI can initiate misdemeanor proceedings when they learn, in any
way, of a violation of the PPL. Since the entry into force of the new Law on Misdemeanours in
March 2014, the PPO initiated 26 misdemeanour procedures against contracting authorities.43
The RC is responsible for conducting first-instance proceedings. The PPL extends the deadline
for misdemeanour cases in public procurement to three years of the date of commission of the
infringement. The PPO and the RC can also initiate proceedings to annul public procurement
contracts and pronounce fines.

63.    The PPL includes a separate chapter dedicated to prevention of corruption and
conflict of interest in public procurement including

         the duty of every contracting authority to pass an internal act, which regulates in detail
          the manner of planning of public procurement, conduct of the procedures,
          implementation of contract, and oversight of public procurement;
         protection of integrity of the procedure by excluding all persons who were involved in the
          preparation of a public procurement from eligibility as bidders and the duty of
          contracting authorities to reject bids in such cases;
         the duty to report corruption to the PPO, the Anticorruption Agency, and the public
          prosecution office as well as to provide protection to persons who reported corruption;
         the duty of bidders to submit a Bidder’s Statement on independent bid and the duty to
          report violation of competition to the Competition Commission and provide protection to
          persons who report it; and
         the duty to appoint a civil supervisor for all procurements for which the estimated value
          exceeds RSD 1 billion.
D.         Civil Supervision of Procurement Processes
64.     The PPL mandates monitoring by a civil supervisor whenever the estimated cost of
the public procurement procedure exceeds RSD 1 billion (approximately €8.5 million).
Civil supervisors are appointed by the PPO on a case-by-case basis and receive no remuneration
for their work, which brings into question the sustainability of this mechanism of control.
Persons eligible to be appointed as civil supervisors are prominent experts in the field of public
procurement or organizations dealing with public procurement, anticorruption, or prevention of
conflicts of interest. Neither a person employed with or otherwise engaged by the contracting
authority and/or person(s) related with the contracting authority nor members of a political
organization qualify as potential civil supervisors.


43
     European Commission. Serbia Progress Report, October 2014.



                                                       22
65.     Civil supervisors perform their supervision by (a) following and analyzing
information posted on the public procurement portal and/or contracting authorities’ websites,
contracting authority’s legal acts issued before initiating, during the course, and upon conclusion
of public procurement procedure, up to the moment of the submission of report; (b) direct insight
into actions taken by the contracting authority in public procurement procedure; (c) direct insight
into contracting authority’s communication with stakeholders/bidders, contracting authority’s
internal communication, and contracting authority’s communication with other bodies in relation
to the given public procurement; and (d) obtaining additional requested information from
contracting authority.

66.     Civil supervisors are entitled to act upon reports on suspected corruption in the
public procurement procedure under their supervision, to take measures in cases of
reasonable doubt in terms of legality of public procurement procedure, notifying the relevant
state bodies and the public; to alert the contracting authority to deficiencies and failures in
conducting the procedure; and to issue orders, guidelines, and instructions for remedying such
deficiencies and failures as well as to file requests for the protection of rights. Upon the
completion of the public procurement procedure, the civil supervisor submits a report on the
conducted public procurement procedure to the NA within 20 days from the conclusion of
contract or from the decision to cancel the procedure. In 2015, there were 48 appointed civil
supervisors (the number grew from eight in 2013, to 30 in 2014, and 48 in 2015). To date, seven
civil society organizations were appointed as civil supervisors.44

V.         INSTITUTIONAL CAPACITY
A.         Public Procurement Professionals
67.     Serbia has made progress in public procurement training and certification. By the
end of August 2015, 881 public procurement officers45 had passed the exam. The SAI has 60
certified auditors and all municipalities are trained in implementing audit findings. There is a
growing need for training public procurement officials. Although training and certification is
required by the Law, the PPO is not obliged to organize and deliver training in preparation for
the exams. The target value expressed in Serbia's 2015–2017 Public Administration Reform
Action Plan is 2,300 certified public procurement officials by 2017.

68.     A contracting authority whose total value of planned public procurement per year
exceeds RSD 25,000,000 (approximately €210,000) has to employ (at least one) public
procurement officer. According to the PPL, to get certified, the public procurement officer
needs to pass a written exam, which involves theoretical and practical knowledge in public
procurement and related areas. At least 75 percent of the questions need to be answered correctly
for the candidate to pass the exam. The PPO issued a manual for the preparation of the exam and
made it available on its website free of charge. Exam sessions are held 4–6 times per month, for




44
     http://www.worldbank.org/content/dam/Worldbank/document/eca/georgia/11-procurement/Serbia_ENG.pdf.
45
     Data obtained from the PPO.



                                                      23
200–250 candidates. Between October 2014 and March 2015, 21 examinations were held, testing
751 candidates, of which 420 passed the exam (success rate of 56 percent).46

69.     While progress has been made, public procurement training needs to be further
developed. Indeed, from the perspective of contracting authorities and bidders, lack of
professional skills can become an issue, in particular with regard to the proposed introduction of
new working methods such as greater centralized procurement, framework agreements, dynamic
purchasing systems, and e-auctions. The level of understanding of common public procurement
procedure among end users and their ability to contribute to the process of defining technical
specifications can also be strengthened and will improve the overall efficiency of the
procurement process.

B.      Public Procurement Office
70.     The PPO lacks both adequate human and financial resources to satisfactorily
discharge its duties. Eight new posts were created in the PPO, but further reinforcement of its
administrative capacity is needed in view of its new responsibilities.47 In June 2015, there were
23 staff working for the PPO. According to its director, the number of employees should be
raised to 36.48 The PPO has set itself the goal “to assist cities and regional centers to upgrade
their expertise in public procurement which would enable them to assist other municipalities.?49

71.     Insufficient staffing has led to delays in the issuance of PPO opinions and low
response rates for certain requests addressed to the institution. “The large number of
requests for various approvals has caused serious problems in practice, and the PPO has been
unable to meet all of its obligations in a proper and timely fashion.?50 In the case of issuing
opinions on the use of negotiated procedures for instance, the PPL stipulates a time limit of 10
days. In 2013, the PPO received 2,411 requests related to this but could only issue 2,150
opinions, of which, the opinions were within the imparted time limit only in a few cases. A
positive trend was noticed in the last months of 2013, starting in November, when the delays
started to be consistently reduced: according to data provided by the PPO, the average number of
days for producing an opinion was reduced from 13 days in November 2013 to 10 days in
December, 9 days in January 2014, and 4 days in February.51 The limited time to analyze
applications raises questions both on the feasibility and the quality of examination. The PPO’s
report ‘Activities on the Law applications from April 1, 2013, until January 31, 2014’ states that
“940 written requests for opinions on interpretation and application of provisions of the Law
were received during the reported period. Of those, 358 requests were answered in writing, while
the rest remained unanswered due to lack of capacity within the PPO.?




46
   http://www.worldbank.org/content/dam/Worldbank/document/eca/georgia/11-procurement/Serbia_ENG.pdf.
47
   European Commission. Serbia Progress Report, October 2014.
48
   UNDP Article 2015, "Strengthening the Serbian Public Procurement System." (June).
49
   Ibid.
50
   OECD-EU SIGMA. Public Administration Reform Assessment of Serbia , April 2014.
51
   Ibid.



                                                   24
C.      Republic Commission for the Protection of Rights
72.     The RC comprises experienced professionals, familiar with the Legal Framework
for procurement and establishes a list of experts (who need to be on the list of the standing
court experts and have passed the exam for public procurement officer, in line with Article 143
of the PPL), who participate in the work of the RC, depending on current needs.52 The RC
exercises its authority to suspend procurement processes in practice, in line with Article 163 of
the PPL.

73.      The RC faces significant challenges to cope with the growing number of appeals
promptly. The number of appeals submitted to the RC has increased significantly (2,067 cases
were received in 2013 as compared to 1,622 in 2012). In 2013, the RC held a total of 422
sessions and made 1,879 decisions. The same year, the RC built up its enforcement record by
reviewing the implementation of 635 of its decisions and concluded that, in 24 cases, they had
not been properly enforced by the contracting authorities.53 Although in 2013, the RC’s average
time to resolve a request for protection of rights was within the time limit imparted (an average
of 19.26 days; thus within the 20 days time limit) and the PEFA assessment notes that the RC
mainly makes and delivers decisions within the time frame specified in Article 158 of the PPL,
several contracting authorities have reported delays, sometimes even in noncomplex cases. All
three requests for the cancellation of procurement contracts submitted to the RC in 2013 were
considered unfounded but the justification for these decisions was considered insufficient. Some
inconsistencies between the current Misdemeanour Law and the PPL blocked the possibility of
initiating misdemeanour procedures.54 Although the RC’s staff recently increased to a total of 54
employees, further strengthening of the institutional capacity, through the provision of adequate
financial and human resources as well as technical capabilities will be essential to ensure the
sustainability of the RC’s work.

VI.     CONCLUSIONS ON PROGRAM-FOR-RESULTS-SPECIFIC PROCUREMENT ARRANGEMENTS
A.      Overall Risk Assessment
74.     The assessment concludes that there is reasonable assurance that Serbia's procurement
systems for the Program (planning, bidding, evaluation, contract award, and contract
administration arrangements and practices as well as complaint mechanims and management and
mitigation of fraud and corruption [F&C] risk) will achieve the intended results through its
procurement processes and procedures.

B.      Procurement Profile of the Program
75.     Procurement under the Program will follow the government procedures. The procurement
procedures to be conducted under the Program are relatively modest and consist of IT
equipment, consultancy, and training services. None of the planned procurement activities, based
on their estimated values at the time, will require review and approval of the Operational
Procurement Review.

52
   World Bank. Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) Performance Report Serbia , March 2015.
53
   European Commission. Serbia Progress Report, October 2014.
54
   OECD-EU SIGMA. Public Administration Reform Assessment of Serbia, April 2014 .



                                                     25
C.       Procurement Capacity
76.    The implementing agencies will be the MPALSG, the MoF (Treasury), the PPO, the
National Employment Service (NES), the government Human Resource Management
Services, and the SAI. The procurement capacity of these insitutions is reviewed below:

        The MPALSG was established last year and has a Secretariat which has the responsibility
         of procurement. Within the Secretariat, there is a Division for Administrative Matters,
         Human Resources, and Public Procurement staffed with three professionals, out of which
         one is a certified procurement officer who has acceptable level of experience in public
         procurement. The ministry conducts procurement procedures for services (total value for
         2015 is approximately RSD 50 million, around US$450,000) and some minor
         procurement for goods (total value for 2015 is approximately RSD 4,000,000, around
         US$36,000). Works and goods are procured on behalf of the ministry by the centralized
         government procurement body—the Administration for Joint Services of Republic Bodies.

        The PPO’s Department for Financial Affairs has one certified procurement officer who
         has acceptable capacity and conducts minor procurement procedures such as services for
         maintenance of the public procurement portal. This procurement is conducted through
         negotiated procedure without invitation to bid because the vendor has ownership of the
         source code in line with the Copyright Law. The approximate value of this procurement is
         RSD 2,000,000 (approximately US$18,000).

        Within the Treasury, the Department for Legal and Administrative Affairs is responsible
         for procurement. There are five permanent professionals and additional staff to assist the
         Treasury on a temporary basis who are responsible for procurement. They have acceptable
         level of experience in public procurement. Procurement is mostly focused on IT services
         and equipment, software maintanance, licensing, and so on. Procurement includes some
         goods, minor works, and a modest range of services.

        The Public Procurement Department within the NES has a total of six staff sufficiently
         experienced in public procurement. Procurement operations consist of standard goods,
         minor works, and consluting services.The government Human Resource Services has a
         Department for Legal, Financial, and General Affairs, which is responsible for
         procurement. Procurement operations mainly consist of selection of consulting services
         for training.

        Within the SAI there is a Department for Legal and General Affairs that is responsible for
         procurement. Two professionals are certified public procurement officers with a sound
         level of experience in public procurement. The most used types of procedures are open
         and low cost, while negotiated procedures without invitation are rarely used. The total
         estimated value of public procurement for 2015 is approximately RSD 33,000,000
         (approximately US$300,000). Procurement undertaken consists of standard goods, some
         IT equipment, and software.

77.   Framework agreements, signed by the Administration for Joint Services of the
Republic Bodies are also used for procurement of common goods. The Department for Legal


                                                 26
and General Affairs, the Department for Financial Affairs and Accounting, and the IT Department
are responsible for contract management. Modification of contracts is not common and
termination of any contract has not occurred so far. Advance Payment Guarantees and
Performance Guarantees are mandatory.

78.     Contracting authorities are responsible for contract management. In accordance with
the PPL, the contracting authority shall post a decision of contract award on the public
procurement portal within three days of making the decision. The contracting authority shall
send a public procurement contract to the bidder to whom it was awarded within eight days from
the day of expiration of deadline for filing requests for the protection of rights. If the awarded
bidder refuses to sign the contract, the contracting authority may award the bid to the second
most advantageous bidder. Withing five days of concluding a contract, the contracting authority
shall publish a notice on the concluded public procurement contract.

79.     After conclusion of a public procurement contract, the contracting authority may allow
changes in price and other essential contractual elements due to objective reasons, which must be
clearly and precisely defined in the tender documents and in public procurement contracts or set
forth by special regulations. In case of contract modification, the contracting authority has to
make a decision on modifying the contract. The decision has to contain information on the initial
contract value, modified contract value (if changed), and objective reasons for contract
modification, with an excerpt from the tender documentation or from relevant legislation, which
contains the grounds for modification. This decision has to be published on the public
procurement portal within three days from the day of making the decision. Contracting
authorities have to submit a report on contractual modifications to the PPO and to the SAI.
Mandatory quarterly reports prepared by contract authorities delivered to the PPO, among others,
have to contain information on awarded public procurement contracts, amended public
procurement contracts, and execution of public procurement contracts.



VII.   GOVERNANCE AND ANTICORRUPTION ARRANGEMENTS
A.     Overview of the Fraud and Corruption Legal and Institutional Framework
80.     An overarching Anticorruption Strategy for the period 2013–2018 is in place and its
implementation is under way. Progress on the implementation of the respective Action Plan is
reported by the public entities and holders of the public authorities charged with its
implementation through six-monthly and annual reports. Overall monitoring of the
implementation of the strategy is carried out by the Anticorruption Agency (ACA) and reported
annually to the NA. The EU Screening Report for Chapter 23: Judiciary and Fundamental Rights
from 2013 states that the “Anticorruption Strategy and Action Plan provide an adequate
framework? for addressing the impediments to better transparency and accountability in public
service. The strategy, dealing with the issues of prevention, institution building and training,
contains a section dedicated to public finance. Specific fields covered in the section on public
finance include (a) public revenues; (b) public expenditure; and (c) PIFC, external audit, and
safeguarding of the EU’s financial interests. All the entities involved in the Program have
adopted Integrity Plans.


                                               27
81.     A Legal Framework for anticorruption activities is largely in place. Serbia has signed
and ratified all major international instruments against corruption, but recent assessments
indicate that more needs to be done on aligning the national legislation to consistently apply
them. Fraud- and corruption-related offences are sanctionable under the Criminal Code and
include, among other things, passive bribery and active bribery, embezzlement, fraud, obtaining
and using credit and other benefits under false pretenses, abuse of trust, money laundering, abuse
of position by a responsible person, malfeasance in public procurement, abuse of authority in
economy, forging of documents, forging of an official document, and abuse of office and trading
in influence. The Law on Protection of Whistle-Blowers has entered into force in June 2015 and
some rules on whistle-blowers’ protection are included in the Law on Free Access to Information
of Public Importance and the Law on Civil Servants. The Law on Civil Servants and the Code of
Conduct for Civil Servants also contain measures to increase integrity in the public sector. The
Law on Public Procurement contains a dedicated chapter on the prevention of corruption,
requiring the purchasing authority to take corruption prevention measures at all stages of the
procurement process and the duty to report corruption. Likewise, the law addresses potential
conflicts of interest in the procurement procedure.

82.    Specific institutions in the Anticorruption Framework are established and
functioning. The Anticorruption Institutional Framework includes the following:

   (a) Anticorruption Agency. This is an independent and autonomous state authority, founded
       by the virtue of the Law on the ACA, for which implementation started on January 1,
       2010. The ACA is accountable for its work to the NA. The ACA has numerous
       preventive, oversight, and supervisory authorities for prevention and suppression of
       corruption. Acting in accordance with its legal mandate, key responsbilities of the ACA
       are the following:
          Oversees implementation of the National Anticorruption Strategy and associated
           action plans

          Imposes measure due to the violation of the ACA Law

          Resolves conflict-of-interest situations

          Initiates changes in the Anticorruption Legal Framework

          Issues its opinion and instructions for the implementation of the ACA Law and
           National Anticorruption Strategy and associated Action Plans

   (b) Anticorruption Council. The council is an expert advisory body of the government,
       founded with a mission to oversee all the aspects of anticorruption activities; propose
       measures to be taken to fight corruption effectively; monitor their implementation; and
       make proposals for the adoption of regulations, Programs, and other acts and measures in
       this area. The council was established under provisions of the Law on Government
       (Article 26) in 2001. The council consists of the president, vice president, and five
       members.



                                                28
(c) The PPO. In line with the stated anticorruption aims, the PPO is proactively discharging
    its obligations from the Anticorruption Strategy. The PPO has prepared a Model
    (template) Internal Plan for Anticorruption in Public Procurement for the purchasing
    authorities, whose total annual value of procurement is estimated at over RSD 1 billion.
    Similar model internal enactment that regulates in more detail the internal public
    procurement procedure within the purchasing authority has been developed and made
    available. The PPO’s Rulebook on Contents of the Public Procurement Report and
    Manner of Maintaining Records on Public Procurement is in force.

(d) The SAI. The SAI is required by the law to submit to the competent authority, without
    delay, any evidence relating to misdemeanors or criminal offences, and that body is
    required to inform the SAI of its decision. It has been noted that this additional duty
    potentially takes away resources from the audit work. From the Program perspective, this
    segment of the SAI mandate could be the critical resource in addressing possible
    instances of F&C involving Program funding.

(e) Republic Commission for Protection of Rights in Public Procurement Procedures. The
    RC has the status of legal entity and is responsible to the NA of Serbia. The NA elects
    and relieves of duty the president and members of RC, upon the proposal of the
    Committee for Finance of the NA and after the open application procedure has been
    conducted. The RC has the following key competences:

            Decides on request for protection of rights

            Decides on appeal on procuring entity's conclusion

            Decides on appeal on conclusion made by the PPO

            Imposes fines on contracting authorities and accountable persons of the
             contracting authority and proposes compulsory retirement of managers or
             accountable persons of the contracting authority

            Imposes fines on claimants in case of misuse of request for protection of rights

            Annuls public procurement contracts

            Initiates minor offence proceedings in the first instance for the offences
             prescribed by PPL

(f) Administration for the Prevention of Money Laundering (APML). The APML is the
    financial-intelligence unit of the Republic of Serbia, which is the central anti-money
    laundering and counter-terrorist financing body in the system. The APML’s powers and
    responsibilities are provided for in the Law on the Prevention of Money Laundering and
    Terrorist Financing. The obliged entities under the AML/CFT Law send reports on
    suspicious transactions and persons to the APML, which then analyzes these reports and
    collects any additional data about them. Also, the APML can start collecting and
    analyzing data upon the initiative of another state authority such as the Court,


                                            29
        Prosecutors’ Office, Security Information Agency, Privatization Agency, Securities
        Commission, police, and so on.

83.     In the context of EU integration, the MoF has established an Anti-Fraud
Coordination Service (AFCOS). This is an independent national authority responsible for
protecting the EU's financial interests from fraud. It coordinates the sharing of information
between the national fraud prevention authorities and the European Commission Anti-Fraud
Office. AFCOS is still not fully operational and is missing a comprehensive legal basis to
determine its duties, competences, and arrangements for cooperation with the European
Commission. A full AFCOS network, including all other relevant national authorities in the area
of prevention, detection, investigation and prosecution, is yet to be established.

84.      Institutional responsibilities for investigating and prosecuting corruption are clear,
but their capacities remain inadequate. The specialized prosecution office for organized
crimes also has jurisdiction over high-level corruption cases. Throughout Serbia, around 40
prosecutors work on corruption cases. There is no similar degree of specialization at the level of
the police or the courts. Inter-institutional cooperation is formalized in the memoranda on
cooperation between the competent institutions. In March 2014, a memorandum on cooperation
has been concluded between the SAI, PPO, RC, MoF, Ministry of Economy, ACA,
Anticorruption Council, and Commission for Protection of Competition, which regulates the
manner of cooperation, coordination, and data exchange in the field of anticorruption. It is too
early to assess the results of the memorandum and how it addresses the remark from the EU
Screening Report on judiciary which states that “inter-agency cooperation has improved to a
certain extent, but needs to be further developed. In particular, databases should be better
interconnected and a safe platform to exchange intelligence should be established.?

B.      Alignment with Anticorruption Guidelines
85.     Program implementation will be aligned with the ACG applicable to Program for
Results operations. The Government of Serbia has agreed to implement the Program in
accordance with the ACG applicable to PforR operations dated February 1, 2012, and revised on
July 10, 2015. These guidelines will be operationalized in the following ways under the Program:

     (a) Sharing of information on fraud and corruption allegations: Through the official
         exchange of letters, the SAI will confirm agreement to share with the World Bank any
         indications or allegations of Fraud and Corruption (as defined by the ACG) in connection
         with the Program from the public, Government representatives, its own investigation, or
         otherwise, together with the investigative and other actions that it proposes to take with
         respect thereto, every six months.

     (b) Application of World Bank debarment and suspension lists of firms and individuals
         under the Program: The Ministry of Finance will share with the procuring entities the
         names of firms and individuals on the World Bank Group’s debarment and suspension
         lists and will ensure that these firms and individuals are not allowed to bid for contracts
         or benefit from a contract under operation during the period of debarment or suspension.
         The Ministry of Finance and Public Procurement Office will check compliance and report
         to the World Bank every six months as part of the reporting requirement of the operation.


                                                 30
     (c) Investigation of Fraud and Corruption Allegations: All allegations of fraud and
         corruption will be investigated by the SAI and the prosecutor’s office and those found to
         be credible will be prosecuted. The SAI will report to the World Bank every six months
         on the actions taken in any such investigations; and promptly, upon the completion of any
         such investigation, report to the Bank the findings thereof. The World Bank’s
         Institutional Integrity Vice-Presidency (INT) may also jointly with the SAI, or on its own
         initiative, investigate any allegations or other indications of Fraud and Corruption (as
         defined in the ACG) in connection with the Program or any part of the Program. In all
         such cases the Program managers and SAI will collaborate with INT to acquire all
         records and documentation that INT may reasonably request from the operation regarding
         the use of the Program financing. If the borrower or the Bank determined that any person
         or entity has engaged in Fraud and Corruption (as defined in the ACG) in connection
         with the Program, the Borrow will take timely and appropriate actions , satisfactory to the
         World Bank, to remedy or otherwise address the situation to prevent its recurrence.

     (d) Cooperation with representatives of the Bank: the Borrow shall fully cooperate with
         representatives of the Bank in any inquiry conducted by the Bank into allegations or other
         indicators of Fraud and Corruption (as defined in the ACG) in connection with the
         Program, and shall take all appropriate measures to ensure the full cooperation of relevant
         persons and entities subject to the Borrower’s jurisdiction in such inquiry.

86.     The Assessment concludes that the Fraud and Corruption risk will remain high.
Several fraud and corruption related cases have been filed by SAI in the recent past. In the course
of 2014, on the basis of the audit of financial statements from 2013 for all sectors (i.e. central
and local Government, public enterprises, extra-budgetary funds), SAI has filed 139 reports (111
for misdemeanor charges, 13 for economic crimes and 15 for criminal charges). Until March
2015 (latest available data), further 103 reports were filed (95 for misdemeanor charges, 6 for
economic crimes and 2 for criminal charges). Additionally, starting from March 2014, when the
new Law on Misdemeanor Offences entered into force, Public Procurement Office has filed 26
requests for initiation of misdemeanor proceedings to the Republic Commission for Protection of
Rights in Public Procurement Procedures. The Program Action Plan details important actions
that would have to be undertaken by the implementing agencies to ensure that Program activities
are not affected by Fraud and Corruption.

C.      Conclusion
87.     The country’s Institutional and Legislative Framework in mitigation of F&C risks
continues to gradually strengthen. An assessment of the Legal and Institutional Framework for
Anticorruption together with the effectiveness of country systems for tackling F&C was
undertaken as part of the Program’s Technical Assessment. The assessment concluded that while
the level of corruption remains high, the Institutional and Legal Framework for tackling
corruption is progressively improving and existing government commitment to addressing
corruption is high.

88.    The World Bank’s Guidelines on Preventing and Combating Fraud and Corruption
in Program for Results Financing would apply to the whole Program. If requested, the Bank
should be provided access to any information related to contracts under said Program (even if
held by third parties/contractors) and the Bank should have the right to investigate any

                                                 31
allegations of fraud and corruption within the Program. As part of its statutory mandate to audit
Government finances, irrespective of source, the Serbia Audit Institution will share, with the
World Bank, information on allegations of fraud and corruption. The Borrower’s commitment to
follow the Guidelines is confirmed in the Minutes of Negotiations.

89.     It has been agreed that the SAI will share with the Bank any indications or
allegations relating to F&C identified during the SAI’s work. The SAI has a statutory
mandate to audit all government finances irrespective of their source. Thus, financing from
grants and loan are equally covered with the SAI Law. The SAI’s mandate covers tackling F&C,
and given the nature of the lending, an official exchange of letters will set out a mechanism to
allow for exchange of information on the integrity of spending related to the activities covered
by the Program.




                                               32
                    Annex 1: Key Provisions of the 2012 Public Procurement Law

Key provisions include the following:

1.      Adoption of procurement plans. The 2012 PPL requires that contracting authorities
adopt an annual procurement plan and submit it electronically to both the PPO and the SAI
within ten days of its adoption. Contracting authorities may only initiate procurement procedures
that were envisaged in the plan and for which funds have been allocated (the procurement plans
have a tight margin of flexibility for the modification of items and fund allocations—only in
limited circumstances can a subsequent variation be permitted.)

2.       Publication of all procurement notices on the procurement portal. This targets in
particular low-value contracts, which represent a substantial part of purchasing activities. Low-
value contracts are defined as contracts valued under RSD 5 million (approximately €40,000).
Below RSD 500,000 (€4,200) the provisions of the PPL do not apply. The contracting authorities
have to publish their notices and bidding documents on the procurement portal (free of charge).
Moreover, whenever a contracting authority wants to initiate a negotiated procedure without a
call for competition, it is obliged to publish a notice accordingly. The new portal became
operational on April 1, 2013, and its number of registered users has more than doubled compared
to the old portal. The average number of posted tenders per day also increased by more than 60
percent.55

3.      De-bureaucratization, notably through the establishment of a Central Registry of
Bidders and a simplified bidding process. The Central Registry of Bidders became operational
on September 1, 2013, and features more than 2,000 registered bidders. It facilitates the
verification of mandatory eligibility requirements for participation in public procurement
procedures. In addition, the 2012 PPL allows bidders to prove their eligibility by submitting
copies rather than original documents and to avoid supplying evidence that is publicly available
on the websites of competent bodies. Only the (potential) winner of the procedure will have to
supply original documents, if requested by the contracting authority.

4.     Expanded control functions for the PPO. The PPO is now required to give its prior
approval for noncompetitive procedures (negotiated procedure without invitation, competitive
dialogue) and certain decisions of contracting authorities.

5.      Monitoring of public procurement for larger contracts (over RSD 1 billion, that is,
approximately €8,950,000) by civil supervisors. These supervisors are either experts in the
domain of public procurement or in associations dealing with the prevention of corruption or
conflicts of interests.

6.     Sanctions for noncompliance of contracting authorities, procurement officers, and
bidders. “Contracting authorities may be fined up to RSD 1,000,000 (approximately €8,950) for
breaching procedural or technical obligations. For more serious violations, such as failure to
follow public procurement procedures when no exemption exists or accepting bids of interested
55
     OECD-EU SIGMA. Public Administration Reform Assessment of Serbia , April 2014, 26–27.



                                                      33
persons, fines may go up to RSD 1,500,000 (approximately €13,400). Bidders who provide
inaccurate or false information, hire undisclosed subcontractors, or act as an interested person
can be fined up to RSD 1,000,000 (approximately €8,950). Individuals (physical persons) acting
for a contracting authority or bidder may also be fined a more modest sum.?56

The 2012 PPL also comprises a few specific anticorruption provisions:

1.     Mandatory corruption prevention plans. Both the PPO (in cooperation with the ACA)
and contracting authorities with an estimated annual value of public procurement in excess of
RSD 1 billion dinars (ca. €8,950,000) have to adopt internal action plans for combating
corruption in public procurement procedures.

2.      Post-employment restrictions for procurement staff, provisions to prevent conflicts
of interest, and a duty to report corruption.

3.     Whistle-blower protection. This measure introduces a right to indemnification for
individuals who are sanctioned (for example, dismissed) as a result of reporting a violation.

4.     Specific eligibility requirements. The PPL provides, as a mandatory eligibility
requirement, that the bidder or its legal representative must not have been convicted for any
criminal act. Amendments to the Criminal Code of December 2012 introduced criminal
responsibility for aggravated cases of abuse in the domain of public procurement.




56
     http://www.lexology.com/library/detail.aspx?g=f188efa0-0f2b-4324-b299-9ce1e2b97369.



                                                       34
          Annex 2: Responsibilities of Key Actors in Public Procurement in Serbia

The 2014–2018 Public Procurement Development Strategy lays out the following:

1.      The Public Procurement Office is a special organization which oversees the
implementation of the PPL; participates in the drafting of regulations in the field of public
procurement; passes secondary legislation and provides technical services in the field of public
procurement; oversees the conduct of public procurement procedures; controls the application of
specific procedures; manages the public procurement portal; prepares reports on public
procurements; proposes measures to improve the public procurement system; provides technical
assistance to contracting authorities and bidders; and facilitates cost-effective, efficient, and
transparent use of public funds in public procurement procedures. It is also authorized to file
requests for launching misdemeanour procedures and procedures for annulment of public
procurement contracts. The PPO is an institution which, in accordance with PPL and subject to
the government’s approval, conducts Serbia’s EU accession negotiations in the field of public
procurements and prepares plans and regulatory instruments in connection with public
procurement.

2.      The Republic Commission for the Protection of Rights in Public Procurement
Procedures is an autonomous and independent body of the Republic of Serbia that ensures the
protection of rights in public procurement procedures and is responsible to the parliament. As
part of its statutory powers, it decides on requests for the protection of rights in all public
procurement procedures; oversees compliance with its decisions; annuls public procurement
contracts; imposes fines on contracting authorities and responsible persons of contracting
authorities and submits proposals for dismissal of managers or responsible persons of contracting
authorities; fines applicants in case of abuse of requests for the protection of rights; conducts
infringement proceedings in the first instance for infringements specified in PPL; initiates
procedures for annulment of public procurement contracts; and performs other duties provided
by the law.

3.       The State Audit Institution is the supreme body in charge of auditing public funds in
the Republic of Serbia. It reports to the NA of the Republic of Serbia about its activities. As part
of its statutory powers, the SAI audits financial statements, audits the lawfulness of operations
which includes reviews of financial transactions and decisions in the field of public procurement,
and audits the purposefulness of operations, which includes inspection of spending of budget
funds and other public funds to report whether they have been used in accordance with the
principles of cost-effectiveness, efficiency, and effectiveness and in accordance with the planned
objectives.

4.      The Ministry of Finance is, under the Law on Ministries (Official Gazette of RS No.
44/14), vested with public administration duties which, among other things, includes public
procurements. Under the PPL, the MoF is responsible for adopting certain implementing
regulations. The Budget Inspection Unit within the MoF has responsibility related to the control
of implementation of the laws and secondary legislation in the field of financial and material
operations and appropriate and lawful use of funds by all spending units listed in the BSL.



                                                35
5.     The Ministry of Trade, Tourism, and Telecommunications is, under the Law on
Ministries, vested with public administration duties relating to concessions and public-private
partnerships. It is also in charge of regulations pertaining to e-procurement.

6.      The Commission for Public-Private Partnership (CPPP), in accordance with the law,
the CPPP, provides technical assistance in the implementation of public-private partnership
projects and concessions, as an independent interdepartmental public body.

7.      The Anticorruption Agency is an autonomous and independent public authority. It
reports to the NA. The agency’s statutory powers include overseeing the implementation of the
National Anticorruption Strategy and the Action Plan on implementation of the National
Strategy, which includes a chapter dealing with public procurement.

8.     The Commission for the Protection of Competition is an autonomous and independent
organization formed under the Law on Protection of Competition. It reports to the NA. The
commission is responsible for deciding on the rights and responsibilities of market participants.
As part of this responsibility, the commission is in charge of identifying any breaches of
competition, punishing them, and eliminating any consequences of such breaches of competition.

9.     The Administrative Court is a court with special jurisdiction which adjudicates
administrative disputes and rules on the lawfulness of final administrative enactments in
administrative disputes. Under the PPL, decisions of the RC are not subject to appeal but may be
challenged in an administrative dispute within 30 days after the decision was received or in cases
where the RC has not adopted and delivered and a decision within the time limits set out in the
PPL.

10.     The Administration for Joint Services of Republic Bodies is the body in charge of
centralized public procurement for national authorities and organizations including judicial
authorities. The conditions for and manner of conducting public procurement by the
Administration for Joint Services, the list of contracting authorities for which centralized
procurement is conducted, and the list of procurement items subject to centralization shall be
defined in detail by the government.




                                                36
Annex 3: Program Action Plan

Action Description                                DLI Covenant Due Date        Responsible Party      Completion Measurement
Fiduciary Assessment
Increased involvement of the budget                            December 31, MoF                       Adherence to budget calendar and evidence of
beneficiaries establishing the budgetary                       2017                                   effective two-way process in budget preparation
allocations and multiyear budget requirements
Regular periodic reporting on comprehensive                    December 31, Beneficiaries of public   Evidence of regular reports on arrears
data on arrears                                                2016         funds

Improved medium-term planning and                              December 31, Beneficiaries of public   Assessment of annual budgets and medium-term
consideration of medium-term targets in                        2016         funds; MoF                plans
preparation of respective annual budgets
Instituting ex ante controls for contractual                   December 31, MoF; Beneficiaries of     Instituted mechanism of controls over contractual
commitments                                                    2016         Public Funds;             commitments before assuming them

Improved control over multiannual contractual                  December 31, MoF;                      Implementing a systematic approach to approve,
commitments                                                    2016                                   record, and monitor multiannual contractual
                                                                            Beneficiaries of Public   commitments
                                                                            Funds;


The Government to strengthen the complaint                     December 31, PPO/RC                    Reports of activities in the first six months of
handling mechanism to improve its                              2016                                   Program effectiveness
effectiveness efficiency in handling complaints




                                                                          37
