BULGARIA




Piloting Statistical Models for Estimation of Schools’
Value-Added Using the Results from the National
Assessments

Key results and findings




March 2015




WORLD BANK
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA REGION
EDUCATION
Acknowledgements


This report was prepared under the Programmatic Education Sector Technical Assistance Program of the
World Bank (WB) in response to the request of the Bulgarian Ministry of Education and Science (MES) to
pilot and document the implementation of a set of statistical models for estimation of the value-added of
Bulgarian schools using data from the national census-based student assessments. The pilot and the report were
prepared by a team led by Plamen Danchev (Education Specialist, World Bank) and comprising of the
following researchers from the Bulgarian Association for Educational Measurement and Evaluation (BAEME):
prof. Kiril Bankov (Lead Consultant, BAEME), Vessela Stoimenova (Consultant, statistical analyses,
BAEME), Dimitar Atanasov (Consultant, statistical analyses, BAEME).
The scope of the pilot implementation, the key parameters for the activity and the required data for the analysis
were jointly defined by the WB and a working group of MES experts led by Mr. Krassimir Valchev, Secretary
General of the MES and comprising Evgenia Kostadinova (Director for Curriculum and School Programs,
MES), Orlin Kouzov (Director for IT in Education, MES), Neda Kristanova (Director, CKOKUO – National
Testing Agency), Penka Ivanova (Director of Policy Directorate, MES), Sashko Arabadjiev (Expert,
CKOKUO), Rumiana Tomova (Expert, MES), Stela Mitsova (Expert, MES) and Radosveta Drakeva
(Adminsoft, developer of the Education Management Information System of the MES).
Summary


At the request of the Ministry of Education and Science (MES), the World Bank (WB) has
expanded the scope of the schools value added measurement pilot using test results from the
national census based student assessments. The first pilot was implemented in 2013. The
present report summarizes the results of the second phase of the pilot.

The value added measures (VAM) of school performance try to isolate the contribution of
the schools to the academic growth of the students from the factors that are beyond the
control of schools teachers and management. As such, the VAMs are arguably among the
most precise and equitable test-based measures of school performance, as long as their
estimation is based on valid and reliable student assessments and appropriate statistical
models.

The results from the present pilot show that the three tested models (a fixed effect linear
regression model, a random effects model and a random effects model benefitting from the
inclusion of the language spoken at home by the observed students) could be used for the
purposes of estimating the value added of Bulgarian schools, but the model with the most
advantages is the random effect model using the “language spoken at home? variable. It
produces statistically more precise composite VAMs based on the two subjects (Math and
Bulgarian language and literature) and allows a problem-free adjustment of small schools
VAMs.

To counteract the negative impact of the small number of tested students in small Bulgarian
schools on the estimation of their value added, a statistical shrinkage of the VAMs is
recommended for all schools with less than 20 tested students per cohort. The two random
effect models allow a precise way of implementing such shrinkage.

The successful introduction of VAMs in Bulgaria would benefit from the following changes
to the existing national assessment framework:
       Enforce the recently announced video surveillance not only for the Matura exams,
           but for all national assessment tests;
         Increase the number of items to achieve better reliability of the assessment tests.
          This is especially important for the subjects that are used for the VAM analysis,
          namely Bulgarian language and literature and Mathematics.
         Include items measuring both lower- and higher-order competencies embedded in
          the national curriculum, not just the presently tested achievement of the minimum
          standards. The “minimum standards? approach creates a “ceiling? effect for the
          students with better performance due to the low discriminating power of the tests
          and affects negatively the estimation of the value added.

         Related, the scales of the tests should be revisited to ensure there is a sufficient
          stretch to measure the progress of both very low and very high achieving students;

         Consider making the Matura exam in Math compulsory so that high schools are
          also included in the VAM framework and a composite VAM could be produced
          by using the Matura results from both Math and Bulgarian Language and
          literature.



                                             2
      Introduction

1) The objective of this report is to document the process and summarize the results from the second phase of
   the pilot implementation of statistical models for measuring the value-added of Bulgarian schools through
   analysis of the national student’ assessments results. The first effort to conduct such analysis was made
   in 2013 as part of the World Bank’s technical assistance program for the education sector in Bulgaria. The
   first phase of the pilot suffered from a number of significant constraints, such as the large share of missing
   data for the test results of the students, the failure to collect contextual data for the entire analyzed cohort
   of students, and the resulting limitations for quality value added analysis. At the request of the Ministry of
   Education and Science (MES), the work has been expanded in 2014 and 2015 to pilot new statistical
   models with a full set of data for two consecutive student cohorts. This report presents the technical
   aspects of the pilot and the key outcomes in terms of value-added measure for each of the schools included
   in the analysis. It is intended to ensure the institutional memory for the pilots and to stimulate the
   discussions at technical level among experts and decision makers at the MES, focusing on the relevance
   and applicability of the piloted statistical models, in the context of Bulgaria student assessment framework,
   and given the available data. The report documents as well all the data processing, adjustments and
   procedures run as part of the school value added modeling. In this respect, it is also intended for expert
   statisticians and researchers.
2) Test based measures of school performance have been used for long time in many education systems,
   mainly in the form of average scores on standardized tests. There has been growing recognition of the
   limitations of this approach and the unintended consequences it could bring about if raw unadjusted
   absolute scores are used for accountability or are attached to “sticks and carrots? type of incentives for
   school performance. These measures often do not take into account other factors that influence educational
   achievement, such as: the starting point and native abilities of students; their socio-economic background;
   the influence of peers and individuals in and outside school; various events and situations that occur
   outside the school that might affect student learning; etc. One option is to use a simple student growth
   percentile model for assessing the contribution of the schools to students’ outcomes. This approach,
   however, has significant limitations compared to the VAMs1.
3) International experience suggests that the VAMs based on a valid and reliable student assessment system
   are the most equitable and precise test-based indicators for school performance developed to date. The
   school’s value added represents a measure of school performance derived from statistical analysis of the
   raw test scores of one and the same cohort of students in at least two points in time, further adjusted to
   control for the socio-economic characteristics of the students. Through such analyses the stu dents’
   achievement could be decomposed into components attributable to schools and components attributable to
   the students’ background characteristics. The discrete or more direct use VAMs for accountability or
   school improvement purposes is gaining popularity and policymakers increasingly accept them as a
   measure of school performance (MILO, 2008). Among the EU member states, well-established VAMs
   exist in England (Ray, 2006) and Poland (Jakubovski, 2008). In both countries VAMs are used for school
   improvement, as well as for accountability purposes.
4) The goal of the MES to develop fair and objective measures for school performance that could be publicly
   disclosed has stimulated discussions among stakeholders on the possibility to develop value-added
   assessment models based on analysis of student assessment data as part of a broader set of indicators
   measuring the quality of schools.


      Key prerequisites for the introduction of the school value-added measures in Bulgaria


5) External standardized national assessment tests were first introduced in Bulgaria in 2007. Presently
   national assessments are census based (covering all students in the tested cohorts), administered annually
   at the end of elementary (Grade 4), primary (Grade 7) and upper secondary (Grade 12, Matura) levels. The
   new draft law on Preschool and School Education envisions a new lower secondary education stage
   covering Grades 7-10, and a national, census-based, annual assessment at the end of Grade 10. Presently,
   the national student assessment results in Bulgaria are reported on a non-transformed raw point scale
   accompanied by a table that allows a transformation of the raw points to the six-grade rating scale, adopted

1
    OECD, Measuring Improvement of Learning Outcomes
                                                        3
    for measuring students’ performance. Based on this, each school receives an average score and some
    means of comparison with other schools in the country. However, datasets with the results of all schools in
    Bulgaria are not publicly available to avoid improper comparisons. The assessment results have not yet
    been put to a use that can significantly improve decision-making, policy development and incentivizing
    school performance gains. The census-based assessment in Bulgaria needs to provide education
    stakeholders with information about the performance progress of individual schools and to facilitate the
    implementation of national policies for improving the quality of education. VAMs could serve well the
    above objectives.
6) Lingering concerns remain, however, about the supervision of the test taking process and the arrangements
   to counteract gaming in test taking. The Government has recently announced measures to improve the
   integrity of the Matura tests by using video surveillance during test taking and taping the process for
   subsequent scrutiny. This measure need to be enforced and implementation should cover all national
   assessment tests beyond the Matura. Until then, the returns to Government investment in the assessment
   system would be lower than its potential. Any attempt to use the assessment results and the related VAMs
   for accountability or school improvement purposes will be inappropriate, given the integrity concerns.
   While analyzing the gaming in tests is beyond the scope of the present report, it should be stressed that
   rolling out the VAMs in Bulgaria without resolving these issues will results in unfair distribution of
   recognition and resources across the system. The Bulgarian Government needs to first address the above
   mentioned shortcomings, ensuring that test results do reflect in objective manner the knowledge of tested
   students and that the test instruments are sufficiently improved to fully respond to the requirements of
   VAMs.
7) Further, the design of the test instruments, need to be revisited to include items capturing both lower- and
   higher-order competencies of the national curriculum, not just the minimum standards, which presently
   form the ceiling of competencies measured by the 4 grade tests. Related, the scales of the tests should be
   developed according to the commonly accepted rules and should have sufficient stretch to measure the
   progress of both very low and very high achieving students in order to produce good value added analysis
   (Sanders 2003). Otherwise, “floor? or “ceiling? effects may lead to underestimating the value -added of
   high performing schools or not adequately measuring developments in low-performing schools (Ray
   2006). As shown in the graphs and histograms in the next chapter, the test results after grade 4 are far from
   the normal Gaussian distribution. This is a clear sign that the tests do not have sufficient discriminating
   power for the high achieving students. The reliability of the assessment tests can be improved by including
   more items. This is especially important for the subjects that are used for the VAM analysis, namely
   Bulgarian language and literature and Mathematics. However, including more items may have budgetary
   implications. If changes to the national assessment instruments are considered and more items are added,
   the testing time will increase accordingly. Further, the production of more items in a bid to avoid the so
   called “floor? and “ceiling? effects will also increase the budget of the national assessments.


8) As part of the dialog with the MES on the present VAM pilot, a number of features and parameters were
   discussed and agreed upon, including the following:
    a) Producing separate VAMs for the different educational stages. Value-added estimates are produced
       for the schooling confined between the grade of the prior attainment measure and the grade of the
       outcome measure in a particular subject or group of subjects. As such, the value-added modeling used
       in Bulgaria will produce value added measures in Bulgarian language for each education stage – in
       grade 7, marking the end of primary education (based on prior attainment in grade 4), in grade 10,
       marking the end of lower-secondary education (based on prior attainments in grades 4 and 7, or grade
       7 only) and grade 12 (based on prior attainments in grade 4, 7 and 10, or just grade 10). Similar value-
       added measures could be produced for cognitive attainment in mathematics. Further, to arrive at
       school value-added estimates rather than subject value-added estimates, results for the two tested
       subjects will be aggregated and could therefore be presented as a composite value of the school value
       added for each educational level. It should be noted that for this purpose test results in both subject –
       Bulgarian language and literature and Mathematics – are needed at the end of Grade 12 in addition to
       the test results after Grade 7. At present, these are available only for Bulgarian language and literature,
       since the Matura is not compulsory for Mathematics. Should VAM be expanded to include upper
       secondary educational level, MES should consider the introduction of compulsory Matura in
       Mathematics. For the purposes of the present VAM pilot, value added is produced only for primary
       education (comparing assessment results from grade 4 and grade 7). This means that basic schools
                                                        4
    (grades 1 to 7) may be included in a value added calculation once, for their value added estimated for
    the 4-7 grade span; the general comprehensive schools may have 3 value added measures (first, for the
    4-7 grade span; second, for the 7-10 grade span, and third, for the 10-12 grade span) allowing them to
    participate in value added school rankings for the three key stages of education. In order not exclude
    schools offering 1-4 grades from the overall accountability system, results from the tests in grade 4
    may be used in a status contextualized attainment model (provided adequate contextual student data is
    available) and adjusted results used according to the policy objectives set for elementary education.

b) Vertical and horizontal linkage of testing instruments. There is considerable debate about the
   comparability of test scores and the conversion of scores into meaningful and comparable scales
   (Braun 2000; Dorans et al. 2007; Patz 2007; Kolen and Brennan 2004). Longitudinal value-added
   analyses typically employ test score scales that have been vertically linked across grades (Harris et al.
   2004). Different strategies to carry out vertical linking yield score scales with different properties that,
   in turn, can have a substantial impact on value-added estimates (Patz 2007). The construction of tests
   that allow for vertical calibration and establishment of clear relationships between what is tested in the
   different grades and its expression on common scales suggests that the ideal setting for value-added
   modeling would be assessments tests based on the Item Response Theory. The latter is best poised for
   vertical linking and generally produces tests of higher reliability.

    In practice, however, many value-added models (such as the ones implemented in England and
    Poland) do not require that the test scores be vertically scaled. They simply require that scores in
    successive grades or educational stages tested be approximately linearly related and, in most cases,
    that is a reasonable measure (Doran and Cohen 2005). In England (Ray 2006; Evans 2008) and Poland
    (Jakubowski 2008) the tests are based on the classical test theory and are aligned with curricular
    objectives and their scoring with the prescribed levels of proficiency, which allows for optimal
    implementation of VAM. Placing the national assessment tests in Bulgaria on the same scale and
    achievement continuum, and the extent to which the Matura exams are, or can be, placed on the same
    scale and continuum, are important issues that need to be resolved in a manner that allows quality
    implementation of value added analyses.

c) Value-added of small schools. The accuracy of VAMs may suffer if estimates are based on a limited
   number of student assessment data. While this may not be an issue for most schools, small primary or
   basic schools’ VAMs may vary significantly from year to year because of the small number of
   students enrolled due to the substantial sensitivity of the measure to changes in cohorts’ composition.
   This issue is examined at length in Ray (2006) using data for small schools in England. One solution
   that was discussed and agreed with the MES is to perform shrinkage of test results (as part of the
   specifications of the value-added statistical model), thus adjusting small schools’ value added
   estimates towards the mean. The models presented in this report have analyzed VAM based on two
   definitions for small schools – one, a school is considered small when there are less than 30 students
   per a tested cohort, and two, less than 20 students per a tested cohort. Shrinkage was performed for all
   these schools.

d) Technical complexity of value-added modeling. Value-added models range from rather simple
   regression models to extremely sophisticated models that require rich data sets and state-of-the-art
   computational procedures. In general, it could be argued that more complex models do a better job of
   yielding estimates of school performance that are free of the influence of confounding factors,
   although there is still some argument on this point. The disadvantage is that, typically, the greater the
   level of complexity, the greater are the staffing requirements and the longer is the time required to set
   up and validate the system. More complex models usually require more comprehensive data (years and
   subjects), so that data availability limits the complexity of the models that can be considered. In
   addition, the greater difficulties of communicating the workings and use of more complex models
   might reduce the transparency of the system and increase the problems of gaining the support of
   stakeholders. As such, it was agreed with the MES to use simpler statistical models, namely a linear
   regression model and a random effect model.

e) Low impact on parental choices. Even though VAM’s are equitable measures and describe better the
   effort of teachers to improve students’ performance, international research shows that parents are far
   more interested in the absolute achievement levels for a given school, rather than its value-added. As

                                                    5
        such, the impact of VAMs on parents’ choice is likely to be low. The experience in Chile, analyzed
        with several specifications by Mizala and Urquiola (2013), concludes that parents react to rankings for
        school choice rather than measurements of value-added in schools.

    f) Unintended consequences that could be triggered by the use of VAM. As discussed earlier, attempts
       to cheat during test taking in a bid to improve students’ scores has been the most common form of
       manipulation of tests results in Bulgaria even without attaching particular incentives to the test results.
       Such manipulation is also the easiest one to counteract through strong test taking arrangements and
       careful selection of test supervisors. However, there are a number of documented international
       instances where various school indicators and high-stakes tests can and have been manipulated in a
       more sophisticated manner that creates sub-optimal outcomes, including when value-added measures
       are used to trigger various forms of performance rewards (Nichols & Berliner 2005). When two
       assessments are employed to estimate schools’ value-added, e.g., grade 4 and grade 7, a school’s
       value-added increases if there is a larger positive difference between the two assessments; hence there
       is an incentive both to lift students’ scores in grade 7 and to lower the scores (of those same students)
       in grade 4. This could be achieved by advising students not to take the grade 4 assessment as seriously
       as might otherwise be the case or even by encouraging them to deliberately under-perform. More
       radical actions could include structuring the curriculum so students are not properly prepared for the
       grade 4 assessments. Yet, strategies can be developed to reduce the likelihood of such sub-optimal
       activities. For example, the perverse incentive effect could be countered by imposing performance
       targets for the grade 4 assessment. More generally, schools should have an incentive to lift the
       performance of students in all assessments, thereby aligning their interests with those of the students.
       This can be achieved most simply when each assessment is both a prior and final assessment (e.g.,
       grade 7 assessment is an outcome assessment for value added measure for grades 4-7 schooling and a
       prior attainment for the value added measure for grades 7-10 schooling).


    Results from the pilot

    Data used for the pilot implementation of the school value-added models

9) Conducting a value-added assessment requires test scores from at least two separate points in time. As
   described above, in Bulgaria there are three census-based national assessments. For this analysis tests
   scores and student level data are used for the cohort of students that took both the national assessment test
   in Grade 4 (back in 2010 and 2011) and the national assessment tests in Grade 7 (respectively in 2013 and
   2014). This makes it possible to use the results of one and the same students of two consecutive cohorts at
   these two points in time in order to pilot value-added measure of the schools between grades 4 and 7. The
   national assessments in Grades 4 and 7 cover a number of subjects. The stable and common subject base,
   however, is observed in Bulgarian language and literature and Mathematics, therefore only the test scores
   from these two subjects are included in the value-added analysis.
10) The students in the merged dataset are linked by their national ID number (called EGN). This number
    contains the information about the date of birth. In addition to the test scores of the 4 graders of the 2010
    cohort, the Grade 4 national assessment data also contains information about the language spoken at home.
    The models are piloted using the available data for each of the two cohorts: tests scores from the national
    assessments of one and the same cohort of students and a limited set of student and school level
    characteristics (age, gender, type of school, language spoken at home).
11) The data provided by MES are structured in three files. The ?rst ?le contains information about the results
    from exams and additional information about student’s language spoken at home . The data are presented
    in table structured in the following way:
           exam_year – the year of the exam,
           exam_class – grade of the exam,
           school – school where the exam is given,
           student_id – code of the student,
           examcode – code of the exam,
           totaly1 – result_1 of the exam,
           totaly2 – result_2 of the exam,

                                                        6
            totalpoints – result_3 of the exam,
            languageid – code of the language spoken at home.
    Thus for each student in the survey there are 4 rows in the data ?le.
12) The second ?le contains information about the student’s characteristics as gender, birth year, etc. and
    additional information about the mobility of the student from one school to another.
            exam_year – the year of the exam,
            exam_class – grade of the exam,
            school – school where the exam is given,
            student_id – code of the student,
            gender – student’s gender,
            birth year – student’s year of birth,
            interim_school – school where the student was enrolled in grades 5/6,
            interim_year – year when the students was in grade 5/6,
            interim_class – grade of the student, 5 or 6,
            EdForm – form of the education of the student in grade 5/6,

13) The third file contains information about the schools.
        School_ID – coded of the school,
        School_Name – name of the school,
        Obl_ID – region where the school is situated,
        Municipality_ID – municipality where the school is situated,
        EKATTE – code of the village where the school is situated,
        cat – category of the village where the school is situated,
        School_Type_1 – type of the school (education),
        School_Type_2 – type of the school (ownership),
        BudgetFrom – type of funding of the school,
        IsProtected – indication for protected school,
        Shifts – number of shifts of instruction,
        NumOfPedag – number of the teachers in the school.


    Data processing

14) As a ?rst step the information from the diﬀerent sources needs to be transferred in one data set. This is
    done by a program on Perl 5 programming language developed by the authors for the purpose of the study.
    The data is imported in two hash tables, one for the students, with key student ID, and another for the
    schools, with key school ID. The language spoken at home has been numerically coded as follows:
    Bulgarian (Code 1), Roma (Code 2), Turkish (Code 3), and other (Code 4).

15) The obtained data structures are saved as a text file with “comma separated value? format with the
    following structure:
        1.       7-th class score,
        2.       4-th class score,
        3.       Gender of the student,
        4.       School ID,
        5.       Language spoken at home,
Descriptive statistics

Student Level Characteristics

16) The important characteristics at student level are: language, spoken at home; gender; mathematics and
    Bulgarian language score from the national assessment at the end of Grade 4; mathematics and Bulgarian
    language score from the national assessment at the end of Grade 7.

                                                        7
17) The proportions of the students for diﬀerent values of the language (language code 1, 2, 3, 4) are
    presented on Figure 1. For nearly 80% of the population the language spoken at home is Bulgarian.




                               Figure 1. Distribution of the language spoken at home


18) The distribution of the percentages of the students’ gender (0-girl; 1-boy) is presented on Figure 2.




                                        Figure 2. Distribution of the gender


The 4-th grade level

19) At the 4-th grade level there is information available about the scores for the mathematics (MATH) and
    Bulgarian language and literature (BEL) exams. The histograms of these scores are presented on Figure 3
    and Figure 4 respectively for the exam held for grade 4 in 2010; and on Figure 5 and Figure 6 respectively
    for the exam in 2011. Obviously the distribution of these parameters does not follow the normal
    distribution curve. The mean and the variance of the parameters are presented in Table 1. Since these two
    parameters are used as predictors in the regression models, the form of their distribution is not important
    for the quality of the model.

                                                      mean       variance
                                     MAT    2010     15.9657       3.7116
                                     BEL    2010     12.0603       2.6596
                                     MAT    2011     15.2885       3.7432
                                     BEL    2011     12.1160       2.7018
                                 Table 1. The mean and the variance, grade 4
                                                       8
    Figure 3. Math score, grade 4, 2010                          Figure 4. BEL score, grade 4, 2010




    Figure 5. Math score, grade 4, 2011                          Figure 6. BEL score, grade 4, 2011

The 7-th grade level

20) Similarly, the distributions of the parameters, for the 7-th grade are presented on the histograms on Figure
    7 and Figure 8 respectively for the exams held in 2013 and on Figure 9 and Figure 10 respectively for the
    exam in 2014. The mean values and the variances are presented on Table 2.


                                                      mean variance
                                       MAT   2013    34.1255 16.9015
                                       BEL   2013    37.1727 15.0254
                                       MAT   2014    22.5720 9.4153
                                       BEL   2014    18.2325 5.9984

                                 Table 2. The mean and the variance, grade 7




    Figure 7. Math score, grade 7, 2013                      Figure 8. BEL score, grade 7, 2013


                                                       9
    Figure 9. Math score, grade 7, 2014                       Figure 10. BEL score, grade 7, 2014


21) The distribution of these two parameters has much larger variance than expected (this is the variance if the
    distribution follows the normal law of data with this spread). These two parameters are considered as
    response variables in the regression models in the main part of the study. The large variance contributes to
    the small value of the determination coefficient R 2 (the proportion of the data explained by the model) as
    there is a large unexplained variance in the outcome.


The software used

22) The data, which should be studied in this project, are available in ?les with ?xed width text format. This
    requires a preliminary processing of the data in order to combine the information from diﬀerent data
    sources and to rearrange it in a useful dataset. Therefore the analyses of the data can be considered in two
    main stages.
         Preliminary processing of the data and arranging the data set;
         Statistical data analyses and model con?rmation.

23) The ?rst stage is performed using Perl 5 programming language. The main advantage of this choice is that
    this is a very ﬂexible script type language, designed for manipulating large text ?les. It is an open source.
    The available data ?les are saved as text ?les with “comma separated value? structure. After that the
    information from these ?les is processed and combined using a custom developed Perl program. During
    this process the data were checked for any type of inconsistency, which can aﬀect the quality of the ?nal
    study. As a result a well-structured dataset is produced.

24) The second stage consists of actual data analyses and model ?tting. This stage can be separated in three
    diﬀerent steps.
         Descriptive data statistics.
         Regression analyses for discovering the main relationships in the dataset, according to the ?rst of
            the proposed models.
         Fitting a Multilevel model to apply the second of the proposed models.

25) Taking into account the complexity of the tasks, the MATLAB system for scienti?c calculation was
    chosen. This commercial software, produced by MathWorks, is well known with its capabilities and
    accuracy in computation of large, multidimensional objects. Even more, MATLAB can be considered as a
    powerful and ﬂexible programming language, which is important in this study, as it gives the possibility
    for additional data manipulations if needed. The MATLAB framework provides a very powerful
    “Statistical toolbox? which incorporates a large number of statistical tools and models. Using this toolbox,
    in order to apply the proposed theoretical models to the available data set, a custom designed program will
    be developed.




                                                       10
Description of the models

Linear Regression Model

26) The method below is based on the linear regression model, where the individual student test scores after
    grade 7 are regressed on the scores after grade 4, on the contextual characteristics and on the school level
    characteristics:

                      7
                    Gij  ?  ? Gij
                                  4
                                     ? X ij  ? ij ,                                                (1)

               7
    where Gij stands for the grade 7 results in Bulgarian language and literature, or for mathematics or total
                                     4
    (and correspondingly Gij stands for the same subject grade 4 results) of the student i from school j, X ij
    is the student characteristic, included in the model (gender). Here ? , ? , and ? and the parameter to be
    estimated, ? ij are the random errors of the model, which have zero mean, are uncorrelated and normally
     N  0, ? ?2  distributed with variance Var ? ij  ? ?2 .
27) The residuals ? ij (the estimates of the error terms ? ij ) from the estimated regression are used for the
    calculation of the value-added of the schools. More precisely, the value-added measure of the j-th school
    of a given subject (BEL or MATH) is the mean residual of students from this school:
                         Sj 
                                1
                                nj
                                         ?
                                     iSc j
                                              ij   
                                                       1
                                                       nj
                                                             G
                                                            iSc j
                                                                      7
                                                                     ij    Gij
                                                                              7
                                                                                .             (2)

    Here Sc j is the set containing all students of the j-th school, n j is the number of the students in this
                 7
    school and Gij is the estimated predictor of the grade 7 exam scores of the i-th student from the estimated
    school.


School value-added as a random effect
28) A more general approach to the inﬂuence of the school on the students’ results is to consider the school
    value-added S j as a random eﬀect. Such models are knows as mixed eﬀect model or multilevel models.
    This model diﬀers from the model in (1) by introducing an additional term – random eﬀect S j .

                7
              Gij  ?  ? Gij
                            4
                               ?k  ? l  X ij  ? ij ,                                               (3)

    In equation (3) the terms ? k , k  1, 2 and ? l , l  1, 2,3, 4 represent the random eﬀect of the student’s
    gender and the random eﬀect of the language spoken at home, correspondingly.

29) In fact these models represent a multilevel regression model with a random intercept. In this case an
    important role play the variances of the random terms – the school eﬀect ? s , the eﬀect of the school
                                                                               2


    ??
     2
       , the language eﬀect ? ? and the error term ? ? . In Section 3.1 two diﬀerent implementations of the
                                2                     2


    model in 3 are presented: one without the language term ? l and one with this term included.

30) Although the multilevel modeling has a number of disadvantages related to the complexity of the
    stochastic form and the computationally intensive procedures for its statistical estimation, it has many
    desirable features. One of the most important is the fact that its value added estimates “incorporate? the so
    called “shrinkage?. Goldstein (2011) showed that the estimated school level residuals S j equal the raw
    residuals obtained from the model’s estimated ?xed eﬀects, adjusted by a shrinkage factor c j . The


                                                                            11
    constant c j is bounded by the interval [0,1]. Hence the residuals S j are smaller than the raw residuals.
    As the size of school (number of the students participating in the exam) increases, the shrinkage factor
    gets closer to 1. This means that for large schools the value-added residuals obtained on the basis of the
    OLS method and of the multilevel modelling will be similar, while for small schools the shrinkage factor
                                                          n j? s2
    has an important impact. More precisely, S j                      ? j . In this formulae n j is the number of the
                                                      n j? s2  ? ?2
                                                                                               ?
                                                                                              iSc j
                                                                                                       ij

    students in school j and ? j is the mean of the raw residuals for this school: ? j                     , where Sc j is
                                                                                                   n
    the set of all students of the school j.

31) The factor multiplying the mean ? j of the raw residuals for the j-th school is called “shrinkage factor?:
                                  n j? s2
                        cj                                                                  (4)
                               n j? s2  ? ?2

32) The degree of shrinkage depends on the size of the school, the increased shrinkage for a small school can
    be regarded as an expression of the relative lack of information in the school, so the “best? estimate sets
    the predicted residual closer to the overall population value, i.e. smaller schools are “shrunk? towards the
    national mean. In the study the shrinkage factors of schools below a certain level are calculated.

Description of the results

Estimation of the school value-added using Linear Regression Model
33) Here we consider the results, obtained using the model (1). The estimated, according to (2), school value-
    added for all schools in the study is reported in ?le result lr.xls. The model is applied for both language
    and math exams separately. As an estimation of the overall school value-added the average of the two
    speci?c values is used. The procedure is applied for data from 2013 and 2014 separately and together and
    three estimates of the added school value are obtained.

34) Let us look at the results for the combined data from years 2013 and 2014. (If we consider years 2013 and
    2014 separately, similar results are obtained). The value of the estimated parameters for the models are
    presented in Table 3.
                                       Parameter Value       SE       p-value
                                         BEL μ     0.534 0.1887 0.0046
                                        BEL α 2.1442 0.0152 0.0000
                                         BEL β     2.557 0.0817 0.0000
                                        MAT μ -3.688 0.1668 0.0000
                                        MAT α      2.017 0.0102 0.0000
                                        MAT β 1.0868 0.0766 0.0000
                                 Table 3. Parameter estimates for the regression model
                    2
    The reported R is as low as 0.1644 (for Bulgarian language and literature) and 0.2613 (for mathematics).
    Histogram of the estimated residuals ? ij for the Bulgarian language and literature and for mathematics are
    presented in Figure 11 and Figure 12, respectively.




                                                        12
   Figure 11. Histogram of the residuals, BEL                Figure 12. Histogram of the residuals, MATH


35) The distribution of the schools according to the estimated school value-added in both Bulgarian language
    and literature and Mathematics is presented on Figure 13. The ID of the schools near the boundary of the
    set are labelled. Table 4 presents the estimates of the parameters by years separately and combined.




                        Figure 13. Distribution of the schools, according to the LR model



                 year                    BEL                          MAT
                    parameter value StdErr p-value           value StdErr p-value
               2013     μ     0.9965 1.4722 0.49848 -2.5569 0.66134 0.0001
               2013     α     2.8414 0.0188 0.0000 2.1786 0.0157 0.0000
               2014     μ     7.0766 0.41978 0.0000 5.9179 0.2354 0.0001
               2014     α     0.8717 0.0083 0.0000 1.0453 0.0092 0.0000
              XXXX*     μ     5.6156 0.9603 0.0000 0.0069 0.4204 0.9868
              XXXX*     α     1.7223 0.0165 0.0000 1.7377 0.01074 0.0000
                          Table 4. Estimates of the ?xed eﬀect parameters
   * XXXX means combined data from years 2013 and 2014.


Estimation of the school value-added as a random effect
36) We will now apply the model (3) without the language term. It is reduced to
                                             7
                                           Gij  ?  ? Gij
                                                         4
                                                            ?k  S j  ? ij ,

                                                        13
     where only the gender of the student and the school eﬀect are treated as random eﬀects without their
     interaction term. The parameter ? represents the ?xed eﬀect of the student’s 4-grade score Gij . The
                                                                                                  4


     estimated variances of the random eﬀect parameters and the error terms are presented in Table 5.

                                Year Exam         ??
                                                   2
                                                              ? ?2
                                2013 BEL         6.8180     9.9046
                                2013 MAT         7.8192     11.641
                                2014 BEL         2.8493     4.4907
                                2014 MAT         5.2257     6.8165
                               XXXX* BEL         4.4983     12.879
                               XXXX* MAT         5.7376     11.543

                        Table 5. Estimates of the variance of the random effect and the error
    * XXXX means combined data from years 2013 and 2014.


37) Histogram of the estimated residuals for Bulgarian language and literature and mathematics exams are
    presented in Figure 14 and Figure 15, respectively.




    Figure 14. Histogram of the residuals, BEL              Figure 15. Histogram of the residuals, MATH


38) These models allow a “shrinkage? procedure, de?ned by equation (4), to be applied to the estimated
    random eﬀect of the school. As a result the inﬂuence of the size of the school is reduced. The shrinkage
    factor was applied separately for two school size: 20 students and 30 students per year. The result shows
    that there is no meaningful diﬀerence between the results for the two values. The value 20 seems to be
    more appropriate, as it limits the number of classes in the school to one.

39) The distribution of the schools, according the estimated school added values (shrunken) in both Bulgarian
    language and literature and mathematics is presented on Figure 16. The ID of the schools near the
    boundary of the set is labelled. The detailed score of the school value-added for this model is presented in
    ?le result.xls.




                                                       14
             Figure 16. Distribution of the schools, according to the random effect model, 2013, 2014


Differences of the value-added of the schools according to the different school characteristics
40) Here we consider how the diﬀerent school characteristics aﬀect the value-added of the school. We will
    consider one characteristic as a particular example, which is the region in Bulgaria (de?ned as Region) at
    which the school is located. All other characteristics can be considered in the same way. Their results are
    presented in sections 1 to 144 in the Appendix.

41) As a measure of school value added both Normed and Scaled values are used. These two estimates of a
    school value-added are based on the estimation of the inﬂuence Si of the school i on the students
    achievements, treated as a random eﬀect in a regression model. They are computed the following way
                                                                                      
             SCALED   Si                        100  max S j                        ,
                               100                                         100
                                                                                                   (5)
                        max S j  min S j                j       max S j  min S j    
                        j
                                    j                             j          j           
                                                                                           

                      30            
            NORMED     2
                           S i  100 .                                                             (6)
                      ?
                                    
                                     
                                                       2
    Here [.] means the nearest integer number and ? is the estimated value of the random eﬀect variance.
    The values S j , j  1, 2,..., n comes as a result of a “shrinkage? procedure, reducing the inﬂuence of the
    school size on the estimated random eﬀect.

42) The SCALED school value-added represents the position of the school in the range between 0 and 100.
    The value 0 means that a school has the lowest (compared to the other schools) eﬀect of the students’
    achievements and the value 100 represents the highest eﬀect. The average SCALED eﬀect is near 50
    (approximately). The NORMED school value-added has a mean value of 100 and variance 30. The
    schools with higher value have a greater eﬀect.

43) The comparison of school value-added for diﬀerent school characteristics is performed for both Bulgarian
    language and literature (bel) and mathematics (mat) as well as for their combination, noted as XXX.
    Additionally a separated study is performed for diﬀerent years of the exams: 2013 (X13) and 2014 (X14),
    as well as taking both years together (XXX). Thus for example the parameters, noted as XXX.bel.Scaled
    represents the school value-added, calculated using (5), based on the results of Bulgarian language and
    literature exam in both years together.

44) As an example, we will study the dependence of the NORMED school value-added and the region
    (Region) parameter, calculated for the years 2013 and 2014, and based on both mathematics and language

                                                      15
    exams (XXX.xxx.Normed). In Table 1 of the Appendix the means of the XXX.xxx.Normed for the
    diﬀerent values of the Region are presented.

45) In order to check the statistical signi?cance of the observed di ﬀerences in the mean values for diﬀerent
    regions we perform one-way ANOVA with the null hypothesis stating that “There is no diﬀerence
    between the mean values?. Obtaining the p-value p  0.05 one can reject the null hypothesis and
    conclude that the observed diﬀerences in the mean value of the XXX.xxx.Normed parameter are
    statistically signi?cant and the region aﬀects the school value-added.

46) Nevertheless Region is important for the mean value of the observed school value-added score, it is
    possible that there is no diﬀerence between two (or more) particular groups (regions). This study is
    presented in Table 2 of the Appendix, where the ?rst and the second columns present the compared
    groups, the forth column presents the estimated diﬀerence and it is 95% con?dence intervals (third and
    ?fth columns) and the p-value for the hypothesis “There is no diﬀerence between the groups?. According
    to the data in this Table there is not diﬀerence between group 1 and group 5 (for example) as the p-value
     p  0.862 is greater than the signi?cance level 0.05. Looking at the row comparing groups 2 and 25, a
    p-value p  0.006 can be found. This means that the observed diﬀerence -8.819 is statistically
    signi?cant and schools in region 25 have a higher school value-added than the schools in region 2. This
    diﬀerence is between -15.534 and -1.104 with probability of 95%. This conclusion is con?rmed by the
    ?gure in Section 1 in the Appendix (on page 11) where the diﬀerent regions are presented as lines. The
    length of the line represents the variance of the score for the group. The dot represents the mean value.
    Two group means are signi?cantly diﬀerent if their intervals are disjoint; they are not signi?cantly
    diﬀerent if their intervals overlap. The same concept of study can be applied for the comparisons,
    presented in Section 4 of the Appendix.

Effect of the number of teachers on the value-added of the schools
47) This paragraph considers the eﬀect of the number of teachers in the school to the estimated the value-
    added. In Section 145 of the Appendix, the results of a linear regression model with predictor Number of
    teachers and response the corresponding school value-added are presented. The results are presented for
    both SCALED and NORMED scales for diﬀerent year of the exams 2013 (X13) and 2014 (X14) as well
    as taking both years together (XXX ).

48) The conclusion is that the school value-added does not depend on the number of teachers, as the
    dispersion of the observations, presented in the scatter-plot is away from the con?dence interval of the
    regression line and the distribution of the residuals is far from the Normal distribution as it can be seen on
                                                      2
    the normal probability plot. Even more the R statistics is too low, despite that the estimation of the
    regression coeﬃcients in some cases are statistically signi?cant.

Effect of the language spoken at home
49) Now we will study the effect of the home language of the students. The model to be applied is (3), with
    the language term. The model was performed for diﬀerent types of exams (Bulgarian language and
    literature and Mathematics) for the year 2013, as the data about the language spoken by students at home
    is available only for this year. The estimated values of the parameters, in this case are presented in Table
    6. The estimated variances of the random eﬀect parameters and the error terms are presented in Table 7.
                                       BEL                              MAT
          parameter       value        StdErr    p-value       value   StdErr p-value
             μ          -0.38387      2.3326     0.86929 -3.7001 1.2570 0.0032
             α           2.7086      0.018901 0.0000          2.1217 0.0159 0.0000
                                   Table 6. Estimates of the ?xed eﬀect parameters


                                    Year     Exam ? ?   2
                                                                ? ?2     ??2


                                    2013     BEL 6.2882 3.1828 9.7986
                                    2013     MAT 7.6256 1.9418 11.610
                       Table 7. Estimates   of the variances o f the random eﬀect and error

                                                       16
    The values of the estimated terms for the diﬀerent languages are presented in Table 8.

                                                    BEL           MAT
                                       Language ID   ?k            ?k
                                      1. Bulgarian  4.5739        3.0105
                                      2. Roma      -0.7146       -0.3495
                                      3. Turkish   -3.6203       -1.6827
                                      4. Other     -0.2389       -0.9783
                       Table 8. Values of the estimated terms for the diﬀerent language
     The information provided in Table 8 shows that including the language term will most likely lead to
increasing the value added measures for the schools with larger number of students speaking non-Bulgarian
language at home.


50) Histograms of the estimated residuals ? ij for the Bulgarian language and literature and mathematics
    exams are presented in Figure 17 and Figure 18, respectively.




   Figure 17. Histogram of the residuals, BEL               Figure 18. Histogram of the residuals, MATH


51) This models allow a “shrinkage? procedure, de?ned by equation (4), to be applied to the estimated
    random eﬀect of the school. As a result the inﬂuence of the size of the school is reduced. Again the
    shrinkage factor can be applied on the schools with less than 20 students. The distribution of the schools,
    according to the estimated school value-added (shrunken) in both Bulgarian language and literature and
    Mathematics, is presented on Figure 19. The IDs of the schools near the boundary of the set are labeled.




       Figure 19. Distribution of the schools, according random eﬀect model including language, 2013
                                                      17
    Key Findings and Recommendations

52) This study considers how diﬀerent statistical models can be applied for the estimation of school value
    added in Bulgarian schools using the data available at the moment. Three diﬀerent approaches are
    performed and the results shows that all of them can be applied for estimation the school value-added. The
    available data consists of exams for 2013 and 2014, with diﬀerent numbers of meaningful indicators.
    School value-added was estimated using two parallel models, one for Bulgarian language and literature
    and one for Mathematics, and the compound estimation of the school value-added was calculated as an
    average of these two measures. For the purpose of the study the two measures of school value-added are
    treated separately when the characteristics of the models and the relationships are considered.

53) First a model, based on the linear regression, was considered. The main disadvantage of this model is the
    problem how a schools with small number of students should be treated. Other problem that arises from
    this model is the assumption that the school aﬀects all the students in one and the same way. This model
                                               2
    results in a relatively small value of R statistics and a distribution of residuals which diﬀers from
    Normal. The plots show a relatively high proportion of observations with a relatively high value of the
    residuals. This leads to the conclusion that there exists a sub-population with a relatively low performance
    on the exams.

54) The second model treats the school value-added as a random eﬀect. The positives of this approach are the
    assumption that the school aﬀects the students in a diﬀerent way and that on the school level the average
    eﬀect is observed. In addition this approach gives the opportunity to treat the small size schools with the
    so called shrinkage factor, reducing the eﬀect of the small sample sizes. This model also shows a bi-modal
    distribution of the residuals in the case of Bulgarian language and literature exam, but in the case of
    mathematics exam the residuals follow the normal distribution.

55) In the third model, an additional random eﬀect term is introduced. This term represents the student’s
    language spoken at home. This data are available only for exams held in 2013, so the model is applied
    only for this year. The results shows an approximately normal distribution of the residuals for both exams
    and a positive correlation between the school value-added for BEL and MAT.

56) The results from the analysis allow the following conclusions:

57) The linear regression model assumes that every school has equal and fixed effect on the students who
    learn in it. The value-added of the school is the value of this effect. The value-added of the schools with
    small number of students in the population is strongly influenced by the results of individual students who
    have relatively high (or low) results, i.e. one can expect a relatively high error in the estimation of the
    value-added of the small schools. In this model, there is not a methodologically correct approach to this
    problem. Another disadvantage of the model is the impossibility to handle the non-negligible number of
    unexplained data with huge variation, as well as the set of observations with relatively low scores (a
    relatively large proportion of observations with high positive error).

58) Some of the above mentioned disadvantages could be solved using the multilevel regression model with
    random effects. This model assumes that the school has different effect on different students. The value-
    added of the school is the mean of these effects. Although this model applied to the available data
    demonstrates the same problem with the existence of subpopulations with relatively low scores, it allows
    a methodologically proper treatment of the schools with a small number of students, which makes this
    method more appropriate.

59) The random effect model can be elaborated by including the effect of the language spoken at home. Even
    though the language data are available only for the cohort that took exams after grade 7 in 2013, the
    model shows a good fit, because it appropriately models the subpopulation with relatively low scores. As
    a result, the above-mentioned relatively high error for the students with low scores. This model allows a
    shrinkage treatment of the small schools and has an additional advantage, described below.



                                                      18
60) The two random effect models described above are applied using the results of the exams of two subjects:
    Bulgarian language and literature (BEL) and mathematics (MAT). This way two separate value-added
    estimates (one for BEL and one for MAT) for each school are obtained. According to the results, the
    random effect model without the language term does not allow a sensible interpretation of a unique
    combined value-added (i.e. the mean of BEL and MAT value-added). This is because there are many
    schools with relatively high BEL value-added and relatively low MAT value-added and vice versa. In this
    case a two-dimensional representation as Figures 16 and 19 seem to be more appropriate.

61) The random effect model with language term, however, shows a positive correlation between the BEL and
    MAT value added. This is why in this case a combined value-added (i.e. the mean of BEL and MAT
    value-added) might be considered as a composite indicator or the value-added of the school.

62) Based on the above discussions of the characteristics and the properties of the piloted modes on the
    available data the following recommendation can be made: the random effect model with language term is
    the most appropriate for the estimation of the school value-added, even though this model is applied only
    to the population that took grade 7 exam in 2013. Given the imprecision of the estimations produced by
    the statistical models, a viable option is to introduce “confidence? intervals or broader quality bands for
    presentation of the value added results, similar to the approach that has been adopted in Poland.




                                                      19
    References

Goldstein, Harvey (2011). Multilevel Statistical Models, 4th edition, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. ISBN: 978-0-
      470-74865-7

Jakubovski, M. (2008). Implementing Value-Added Models of School Assessment. European University
     Institute, Florence (http://cadmus.eui.eu/bitstream/handle/1814/8103/RSCAS_2008_06.pdf?sequence=1)

MILO (2008). Measuring Improvements in Learning Outcomes, OECD
    (http://www.oecd.org/education/school/measuringimprovementsinlearningoutcomesbestpracticestoasses
    sthevalue-addedofschools.htm).

Nichols & Berliner (2005). The Inevitable Corruption of Indicators and Educators through High-Stakes
     Testing. EPSL, Arizona State University (http://nepc.colorado.edu/files/EPSL-0503-101-EPRU.pdf).

Ray, A. (2006). School Value Added Measures in England. Department for Education and Skills
      (http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20130401151715/http://www.education.gov.uk/publications/
      eOrderingDownload/RW85.pdf).

Sanders, W. (2003). Beyond No Child Left Behind. Presented at the 2013 Annual Meeting of AERA.

Luke, Douglas A. (2004). Multilevel Modeling, Series: Quantitative Applications in the Social Sciences, Sage
      Publications.

Jan de Leeuw, Erik Meijer (Eds) (2008). Handbook of Multilevel Analysis, Springer.

Skrondal, Anders, Rabe-Hesketh, Sophia (2004). Generalized latent variable modeling: multilevel,
     longitudinal, and structural equation models, Chapman&Hall.

Smith, Robert B. (2011). Multilevel Modeling of Social Problems. A Causal Perspective, Springer.




                                                     20
