EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT AND
  SKILLS ACROSS THE LIFE-COURSE
    THROUGH THE LENS OF THE
        DEVELOPING BRAIN

 DISCUSSION PAPER    DECEMBER 2015




 Dorota Chapko
            THE WORLD BANK




        APPROVED CONCEPT NOTE*




EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT AND SKILLS
  ACROSS THE LIFE-COURSE THROUGH THE
      LENS OF THE DEVELOPING BRAIN




             Dorota Chapko




              December 2015



                    i
        Health, Nutrition and Population (HNP) Discussion Paper
This series is produced by the Health, Nutrition, and Population Global Practice. The papers in
this series aim to provide a vehicle for publishing preliminary results on HNP topics to encourage
discussion and debate. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are
entirely those of the author(s) and should not be attributed in any manner to the World Bank, to its
affiliated organizations or to members of its Board of Executive Directors or the countries they
represent. Citation and the use of material presented in this series should take into account this
provisional character.

The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The
boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not
imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or
the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

For information regarding the HNP Discussion Paper Series, please contact the Editor, Martin
Lutalo at mlutalo@worldbank.org or Erika Yanick at eyanick@worldbank.org.

                                  RIGHTS AND PERMISSIONS

The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages
dissemination of its knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for
noncommercial purposes as long as full attribution to this work is given.


Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office
of the Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-
522-2422; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.




© 2015 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW Washington, DC 20433
All rights reserved




                                               1
 Early Childhood Development and Skills across the Life-course
            through the Lens of the Developing Brain
                                           Dorota Chapkoa

a Aberdeen   Biomedical Imaging Centre, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, UK

 This paper was prepared and funded under the World Bank’s Strategic Impact Evaluation Fund
      (SIEF). SIEF is a multi-donor trust fund created in 2012 with the support of the British
  government’s Department for International Development (DFID) and currently also receives
         support from the London-based Children’s Investment Fund Foundation (CIFF).

Abstract: “Human development” and “development” are inseparable, and now new evidence
emerges that “brain development” is the key driving mechanism behind this association. The
foundations of brain architecture are established early in life. Critical aspects of its structure begin
to be shaped by experience before and soon after birth. The current report discusses brain
development from a life-course perspective with a particular emphasis on early childhood
development (ECD), skills formation, resilience and aging. There is mounting evidence that early
and sustained investments in brain development have economic and social returns that can benefit
current and future generations. This paper synthesizes knowledge across multiple disciplines and
is weighted towards findings from brain sciences to encourage a new perspective on “human
development” initiatives among policy makers and international development practitioners. The
report discusses the role of social policies in shaping brain function and structure. The policy-
relevant findings from brain sciences research can greatly enhance the ability to carry out cost-
effective policies that foster human development over the life-course, eliminate extreme poverty
and improve shared prosperity.


Keywords: early childhood development, aging, life-course, brain, skills

Disclaimer: The findings, interpretations and conclusions expressed in the paper are entirely those
of the authors, and do not represent the views of the World Bank, its Executive Directors, or the
countries they represent.

Correspondence Details: Dorota Chapko, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen Biomedical Imaging
Centre, Lilian Sutton Building, Foresterhill, AB25 2ZD, Aberdeen, UK; tel: +44 (0)1224 438350;
email: dorota@abdn.ac.uk or dora12@alum.mit.edu




                                                   ii
                                                  Table of Contents

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS ............................................................................................... V
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ............................................................................................ VI
INTRODUCTION: LIFE-COURSE SKILLS DEVELOPMENT WITH THE
BRAIN IN MIND ......................................................................................................... VIII
PART I – BRAIN DEVELOPMENT ............................................................................ 10
   INTRODUCTION TO BRAIN DEVELOPMENT ....................................................................... 10
     Brain Structure......................................................................................................... 10
     Genetic and Environmental Influences on the Developing Brain .................... 12
   BRAIN DEVELOPMENT FROM A LIFE-COURSE PERSPECTIVE ............................................. 13
     Prenatal Stage and First Three Years of Life ..................................................... 13
     From Age Three to Adolescence.......................................................................... 14
     Adulthood and the Aging Brain ............................................................................. 15
   BRAIN DEVELOPMENT WITHIN THE CONTEXT OF EXPERIENCE ......................................... 16
     Early Plasticity and the Window of Opportunity ................................................. 16
     Socio-economic and Psychological Influences on the Developing Brain ...... 17
PART II – SKILLS AND THE BRAIN ........................................................................ 19
   NEURAL CONNECTIONS AS THE FOUNDATION FOR SKILLS FORMATION ........................... 19
   COGNITIVE AND SOCIO-EMOTIONAL FUNCTIONS AND SKILLS .......................................... 19
   COMPLEMENTARITIES BETWEEN BRAIN FUNCTIONS IN SKILLS FORMATION .................... 20
   BRAIN’S FUNCTIONAL DEVELOPMENT ............................................................................. 21
   BRAIN FUNCTIONS AND THE AGING BRAIN ...................................................................... 22
   EARLY-LIFE SOCIO-ECONOMIC DISPARITIES IN BRAIN FUNCTIONS ................................... 23

PART III – POLICY LEVERS AND BRAIN DEVELOPMENT: ............................ 24
   THE ROLE OF SOCIAL POLICIES IN SHAPING BRAIN FUNCTIONS AND STRUCTURE ............. 24
     How do Socioeconomic and Psychosocial Influences “get under the Skull”?
     ................................................................................................................................... 24
     WHICH Brain Systems are Important during Development ............................. 24
     WHEN are Disparities in Neural and Cognitive Development first Detected 25
     ................................................................................................................................... 25
     WHO Should Constitute the Priority Target Group............................................ 26
   BRAINS RESILIENCE AT THE CORE OF SOCIAL POLICIES ................................................... 29
     Recovery in Brain Structure and Function .......................................................... 29
     Harnessing the Power of the Human Brain ........................................................ 30
   POLICY INSTRUMENTS FROM A BRAIN DEVELOPMENT PERSPECTIVE ............................... 32
     Stress ........................................................................................................................ 32
     Nutrition .................................................................................................................... 34
     Early-life Stimulation ............................................................................................... 38
   POLICY INSTRUMENTS FROM A LIFE-COURSE PERSPECTIVE ............................................. 39
     Education ................................................................................................................. 39
     Job-relevant Skills ................................................................................................... 40


                                                                   iii
CONCLUSIONS AND POLICY IMPLICATIONS .................................................... 42
REFERENCES ................................................................................................................ 46




                                                             iv
                                ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was prepared and funded under the World Bank’s Strategic Impact Evaluation Fund
(SIEF). The paper was authored by Dorota Chapko. Julieta Trias, Economist, (World Bank), was
the Task Team Lead for this project. We are grateful to our peer reviewers and colleagues for their
valuable comments and contributions. The peer reviewers included Emanuela Galasso, Senior
Economist, Sophie Naudeau, Senior Education Specialist, Omar Arias, Lead Economist, (World
Bank), and Professor Alison Murray, (University of Aberdeen, UK).

We are especially thankful for comments received from our SIEF colleagues including Joost de
Laat, a former Program Manager, and Aliza Marcus, Senior Communications Officer, and other
colleagues across the World Bank including Claudia Costin, Senior Director, Bénédicte Leroy de la
Brière, Lead Economist, and Lucy Bassett, Social Protection Specialist. In addition, we received
valuable insights through a workshop organized as a background input to this paper. We would
also like to thank Holly Blagrave, Consultant, and Rachel Rosenfeld, Consultant, (World Bank), for
administrative support of the project.




                                                v
                                  EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
It’s widely recognized that achieving the brain’s full developmental potential, starting from
early childhood, is crucial for socio-economic success. Brain complexity –i.e. the diversity and
complexity of neural pathways and networks— is moulded in a person’s early-life and has an impact
on the development of cognitive and socio-emotional human abilities. Early life experiences affect
childhood and later life-course development through changes in brain structure and function. The
first years of life starting in-utero is a window of opportunity for investments that will lead to a healthy
and productive life. Jim Heckman, Nobel Laureate in economics, and his collaborators have
compellingly shown that strong foundational skills built in early childhood lead to a “self-reinforcing
motivation to learn” so that “skills beget skills” (Heckman 2006). This ultimately leads to better-
paying jobs, healthier life-style choices, greater social participation, and more productive societies.

This work calls for an approach to human development policies that integrate the domains
of early childhood development (ECD), skills formation, aging, and resilience within a life-
course framework. First, “human development” and “development” are inseparable, and now new
evidence emerges that “brain development” is the key driving mechanism behind this association.
Second, development and aging are part of a continuum; the positive and negative early-life
experiences may have profound consequences in later-life due to their accumulating impact over
the life-course. This paper synthesizes knowledge across multiple disciplines and is weighted
towards evidence from brain sciences to encourage a new perspective on “human development”
among policy makers and international development practitioners.

Brain development across the life-course goes beyond the behavioral science toolkit and
calls for neuroscience-informed interventions that would complement behaviorally-
informed initiatives. This report encourages thinking about behavioral change from a
developmental and life-course perspective by recognizing that decision-making processes across
the life-course are rooted within the developing brain – therefore complements the discourse on
neuroeconomics and decision making processes (Camerer, Loewenstein & Prelec 2005).

Key messages:

•   Positive and negative experiences in early-life affect childhood development through
    changes in brain structure and function. A healthy and active brain, shaped by adequate
    nutrition and safe and enriching environments starting in utero, enables retention of brain
    functioning across the lifespan and healthy brain aging.

•   Both cognitive and socio-emotional abilities are vital to successful early childhood
    development. Evidence from brain sciences shows that “cognitive” and “non-cognitive” or
    rather “socio-emotional” functions are interdependent (Pessoa 2008). Both cognition and
    emotions are governed by a number of overlapping neural systems which complement each
    other. Together they give rise to higher order brain processes which underline complex skills;
    it is thus important to ensure that interventions targeting human development and skills
    acquisition are holistic and target both cognitive and socio-emotional domains.

•   Multiple studies from low-, middle- and high-income countries have shown that early
    childhood socio-economic circumstances are associated with brain functions across
    the life-span, staring in early childhood. To eliminate the socioeconomic disparities in brain
    function, we need to understand the neural pathways of how early life-conditions or its facets,
    that is, specific modifiable factors (for example, nutrition, early stimulation) “get under the skull”.
    With this knowledge, we will be better equipped to design and evaluate effective and scalable
    initiatives aimed at reducing life-course individual differences in brain functioning (Noble, Farah
    2013).




                                                    vi
•   WHICH brain systems are important during development? Recent studies have indicated
    that brain systems affected by early-life socioeconomic adversities play a critical role in
    functional domains essential for later school achievements (Brito, Noble 2014) such as
    language skills, working memory, cognitive control, mental flexibility, self-regulation skills and
    an overall ability to form meaningful relationships.

•   WHEN disparities in neural and cognitive development can be detected? The resulting
    socioeconomic differences in neural development and brain functioning begin to emerge
    already in infancy; if no intervention is provided at the right point in time, they persist and even
    widen with increasing age. Generally, because of the brain’s decreasing malleability across the
    life-course, the earlier sustained and high quality experiences impact the brain, the better for
    the brain.

•   WHO should constitute the priority target group? Everyone deserves a good head-start
    and the attainment of optimal brain development. Individuals from the most disadvantaged
    backgrounds, who will have greatest developmental delays and brain burden, need the early-
    life investment the most.

•   Brain complexity programmed in early life facilitates retention of brain functioning
    across the lifespan and healthy brain aging. Optimal brain development provides an
    individual with a greater number of neurons (the biological units of the brain), more synapses
    (connections between neurons), and thus multiple pathways to perform any given task. Such
    “neuronal redundancy” comes in handy when faced with deleterious brain aging. An increasing
    number of studies suggest that early childhood interventions targeting mental domains might
    increase maximum life-time cognition, potentially reduce the trajectory of cognitive decline in
    late-life, and even postpone the point at which cognitive deficits first appear.

•   The human development policies should be implemented within the life-course
    framework. Many of the qualities of brain resilience to biological and social factors are shaped
    in early life when the brain is most plastic. With the appropriate investments extending beyond
    early-life, for example, in quality education and jobs, resilience can be sustained across the
    life-course. Therefore maximum brain development should be sustained with life-course
    investments and equal opportunities for highest returns.

•   The associations between SES and brain function and structure could emerge from disparities
    in the prenatal environment as well as postnatal experience or exposures. Potentially
    modifiable and policy-relevant life-course factors include stress reduction, nutrition,
    early-life stimulation, education and job-relevant skills.

•   Multi-factor interventions are the key. Because children in developing countries are exposed
    to multiple risks to brain development at once, it is very unlikely that a single-factor intervention
    will solve the issue of suboptimal brain development with its life-course consequences; rather,
    multi-factor interventions incorporating the features of behavioral change might produce the
    expected results (Aboud, Yousafzai 2015).

In summary, mounting evidence from studies across several disciplines – neuroscience, health,
education, economics, and psychology - provide evidence that early and sustained investments in
human development are the key for our neurons, our brains, for us as individuals, and for our
societies. They lay the foundations for our capacity to achieve and to function well despite social
or even biological obstacles and adversities throughout the life course.




                                                  vii
  INTRODUCTION: LIFE-COURSE SKILLS DEVELOPMENT WITH
                   THE BRAIN IN MIND
It’s widely recognized that achieving the brain’s full developmental potential, starting from
early childhood, is crucial to socio-economic success and well-being. Brain complexity
programmed in a person’s early-life (that is, the diversity and complexity of neural pathways and
networks), gives rise to cognitive and socio-emotional functions which fuse together to form human
abilities acquired across the life-course (Richards, Hatch 2011). Advances in the brain sciences
show that, in addition, individuals with a good head-start in brain development are more resilient to
potential mid-life adversities and the aging process. This is important because globally by 2050
there will be 400 million people aged > 80 years. Societies around the world in both developed and
developing countries face extensive complex challenges when developing the needs of the
increasing number of elderly. These demographic changes call for changing focus of the
interventions from “survival” to “thriving” (World Bank 2015) and an approach to human
development policies that integrates the domains of early childhood development (ECD), skills
formation, aging, and resilience within a life-course framework (Richards, Hatch 2011). This paper
synthesizes knowledge across multiple disciplines and is weighted towards evidence from brain
sciences to encourage a new perspective on “human development” initiatives among policy makers
and international development practitioners.

Early brain development is like building a house – just like a house needs a strong foundation, early
stages of brain development provide a foundation for more complex brain architecture, behaviors,
and successful early childhood development (ECD) which covers the period from pregnancy until
a child transitions to primary school (and up to age 8). During early childhood, the brain undergoes
enormous growth and rapid development and is most malleable to experiences, especially in the
first 2-3 years of life. Thus the first years of life starting in-utero is a window of opportunity for
investments that will result into a healthy and productive life. A healthy and active brain, shaped by
adequate nutrition and safe and enriching environments in early-life (Walker et al. 2007), enables
retention of brain functioning across the lifespan and healthy brain aging. Jim Heckman, Nobel
Laureate for economics, has compellingly shown that strong foundational skills built in early
childhood lead to a “self-reinforcing motivation to learn” so that “skills beget skills” (Heckman 2006).
These can ultimately lead to better-paying jobs, healthier life-style choices, greater social
participation, and more productive societies. Therefore the achievement of an optimum
neurodevelopment and therefore maximum brain skills across the life-span should be a
priority policy area in all countries around the world.

Early childhood development is complex and relies on multiple systems and organs; however, it is
widely recognized that early-life experiences affect childhood development mainly through changes
in brain structure and function. The availability of positive experiences help the brain grow and
thrive across the life-course. The presence of negative experiences hurt brain development and
impede a child’s ability to flourish into a successful adult; “Poverty's most insidious damage is
to a child's brain” (Luby 2015). This is especially alarming today when poverty rates are highest
among children with some 400 million still living in extreme poverty (World Bank 2013).

Multiple studies from low-, middle- and high-income countries have shown that early childhood
conditions as estimated by socio-economic status (SES), poverty, or more specific elements of
SES are correlated with brain functions across the life-span, starting in early childhood. Few of
them are able to estimate the causal effect. To eliminate the socioeconomic disparities in brain
function, we need to understand the neural pathways of how early life-conditions (SES, poverty) or
its facets, that is, specific modifiable factors such as nutrition, stimulation, attachment “get under
the skull.” With this knowledge, we will be better equipped to design and evaluate effective and
scalable initiatives aimed at reducing life-course individual differences in brain functioning. Although
this field is still in its infancy, recent studies have indicated that brain systems affected by early-life
socioeconomic adversities play a critical role in functional domains essential for later school




                                                   viii
achievements. Unsurprisingly then, our main goal as global citizens should be to foster and
protect children’s developing brains (Luby 2015).

The current report presents the themes of early childhood development (ECD), skills formation,
aging and resilience within an integrated life-course framework through the lens of the developing
brain. By investing in early childhood neurodevelopment, “cognitive”, “socio-emotional” as well as
social and economic returns might be present immediately and decades later, this way contributing
to greater well-being of individuals in development, maturation and aging. The first part of the report
discusses how socio-economic success and healthy aging begin early in life with the developing
brain. Next, the concept of resilient brain aging in neuroscience is introduced and the catalytic role
of an adequate early-life environment and a brain developed to its full potential in building cognitive
and socio-emotional abilities and a more resilient brain. Finally, potential policy levers with their
implications on the brain across the life-course are described. While details of how to intervene are
beyond the scope of this report, some examples of already implemented interventions presented
from a life-course perspective are included. Overall, the policy-relevant findings from brain
sciences research can greatly enhance our ability to carry out cost-effective policies that
foster human development over the life-course, eliminate extreme poverty and improve
shared prosperity.




                                                  ix
                         PART I – BRAIN DEVELOPMENT


                        INTRODUCTION TO BRAIN DEVELOPMENT

Brain Structure

To understand how the developing brain influences brain structure and functions in later-life, we
have to understand how the brain’s morphology changes as well as how the output in the form of
cognitive and socio-emotional functions changes across the life-course. In order to understand the
links between skills development and the brain in greater detail, it is important to provide first a
short introduction to the brain itself (Gazzaniga, Ivry & Mangun 2009).

Neurons are at the center of learning, memory and communication. A neuron is a biological cell
which constitutes a basic signaling unit within the brain. It consists of structures called a cell body,
dendrites and an axon. Dendrites, which are treelike processes extending from the cell body of a
neuron, receive information from other neighboring neurons. Based on this information neurons
make a “decision” on what to do next and this communication results in a network of millions of
neurons. Specifically, neurons communicate by firing an electrical nerve impulse along the axon;
by changing their activity levels, neurons send a signal to their neighbors at locations called
synapses – a small gap between the axon terminal of the sending neuron and the dendrite of the
receiving neuron. When electrical signal arrives at a nerve terminal, chemicals called
neurotransmitters are released from the axon, then bind to the receiving molecules on the
dendrites of the receiving neuron, and transmit impulses from one neuron to the next. Myelin, a
fatty substance wrapped around the axons of many neurons, enhances the speed of the information
flow between neurons by helping to transmit electrical impulse along the axon. Myelination is the
process of wrapping the axons of neurons with myelin.

Neurons make functional connections with each other to establish neural networks which support
all brain processes, including cognitive and socio-emotional functions. The outer part of the brain
mainly consists of the neuronal cell bodies (grey matter) and the inner layer of the brain mainly
consists of nerve fibers connecting different brain areas (white matter). Glial cells are neurons’
supporting cells which facilitate the speed of information transfer and generally provide structural
support. In fact, glial cells greatly outnumber neurons by a factor of 10 and may constitute more
than a half brain volume.

The human cerebral cortex is at the center of cognitive processes and is viewed as “the biological
substrate of human cognitive abilities” (Rakic P, Arellano JI, Breunig JJ 2009). The human cerebral
cortex is the brain’s outer layer which mainly consists of the grey matter. It occupies two
symmetrical hemispheres and it is a highly organized layered structure. The cerebral cortex is ~ 2
– 4 millimeters thick and has a highly folded surface tissue: if you were to spread it you would create
the sheet of ~ 1m2. Cortical surface area and cortical thickness have distinct features and different
developmental trajectories. Interestingly, from an evolutionary perspective it seems like the addition
of new functions to the cortex requires significant expansion of cortical surface and relatively small
enlargement of cortical thickness; in fact, human’s cortical surface area is a thousand fold greater
than that of the mouse whereas cortical thickness is only 2-3 times larger (Rakic P, Arellano JI,
Breunig JJ 2009). The role of the cerebral cortex is to receive external information from the
“subcortical” structures located below the cortex, subsequently to integrate this information within
and across different cortical functional areas and finally send the processed information to other
brain regions to initiate the most appropriate behaviors. The cerebral cortex is organized as a map
and is divided into 4 lobes which reflect the anatomical organization of functional areas: the frontal,
parietal, temporal, occipital. Occasionally, researchers identify the 5th lobe – the limbic lobe. Apart




                                                                                                           10
from the cerebral cortex visible on the surface of the brain, other important subcortical structures
are involved in cognitive and socio-emotional processing. For details, see Box 1.



     Box 1: Brief Description of the 4 Basic Lobes (Gazzaniga, Ivry & Mangun 2009):

         •   The frontal lobe controls planning, executive functions (cognitive control), and
             execution of movements. It is further divided into the motor cortex and the
             prefrontal cortex (PFC). PFC is very essential for the more complex aspects of
             planning and executing behavior which require the integration of information
             over time. It is also central to emotional regulations.
         •   The parietal lobe receives sensory information about touch, pain, temperature,
             limb position and controls coding space and coordinating actions.
         •   The temporal lobe is engaged in auditory, visual, multimodal processing and
             language comprehension.
         •   The occipital lobe is involved in processing of visual information.

     Apart from the cerebral cortex visible on the surface of the brain, other important
     subcortical structures are involved in cognitive and socio-emotional processing. Below
     we highlight only those brain components which have been implicated and highlighted
     in the literature on early childhood development or brain maturation and aging. Keep in
     mind that the brain is far more complex than that and consists of many more
     subdomains!

         •   Hippocampus is located in the temporal lobe of the brain and its shape
             resembles a seahorse. Humans have two hippocampi. Hippocampus is central
             to learning and memory. As we learn, the hippocampi support the rapid
             consolidation and initial storage of information for some memory types. It is also
             important for the formation of new long-term memories. It is abundant with
             glucocorticoid receptors implicated in stress responses.
         •   Amygdala composes of groups of neurons composing an almond-shaped
             structure within the temporal lobe. It is an integral part of the “limbic system” and
             mainly implicated in emotional functioning and learning such as responses to
             negative social events or threatening emotional situations.
         •   Hypothalamus is a collection of nuclei important for the maintenance of
             homeostasis i.e. maintaining the stability of the body. The hormones produced
             by the hypothalamus control the endocrine system and the autonomic nervous
             system which initiates a “fight or flight” behavioral response. It receives inputs
             from the limbic cortex and is involved in emotional processing.

     Occasionally, researchers identify the 5th lobe – the limbic lobe. The limbic system is
     involved in emotional processing, learning, and memory. The main limbic brain areas
     including PFC, amygdala, and hippocampus regulate neuroendocrine, autonomic, and
     immune systems and therefore are central to stress responses (McEwen & Gianaros,
     2010). While PFC and hippocampus reduces stress responses, amygdala intensifies
     this process. Stress initiates the release of a hormone produced by the adrenal glands
     called “cortisol” which binds to the glucocorticoid receptors. Excess cortisol levels are
     toxic to neurons which are very sensitive to biological insults underpinning stress;
     especially to hippocampus which is abundant with glucocorticoid receptors. If the
     release of cortisol is prolonged and becomes chronic, then the brain’s regulatory
     responses to stress might be maladaptive.

     Corpus callosum is a neural fiber area which connects the left and right cerebral
     hemispheres facilitating communication between the two regions.




                                                                                                       11
Genetic and Environmental Influences on the Developing Brain

Achieving the brain’s full developmental potential is crucial for a lifetime of success. Early
life experiences impact childhood development through changes in brain structure and function
(Walker et al. 2007). Early brain development is like building a house – just like a house needs a
strong foundation, early stages of brain development provide a foundation for more complex brain
architecture, behaviors, and successful early childhood development. It is cumulative – even a
minor error will have an impact on the subsequent stages of development (Nelson et al. 2014)
including maturation and aging. During the first years of life brain undergoes enormous growth and
rapid development. The brain is most malleable in early childhood i.e. the brain’s ability to change
in response to experience is greatest. However, brains are built over time from few weeks after
conception through adolescence and early adulthood (Nelson et al. 2014). Therefore the brain
needs supporting and nurturing environments that give rise to positive experiences for optimal
development so that the child’s brain can reach its full potential for lifelong success.

What does it mean to reach the brain’s full developmental potential? All components of mental
health including morphology and function of the brain are in part genetically determined and
regulated by the unchangeable DNA sequence. For example, brain size is almost entirely
genetically determined (Bartley, Jones & Weinberger 1997). Therefore genes act as “the initial
blueprint” for the developing brain and “the template for brain architecture” (Nelson et al. 2014).
However, brain structure is predominately environmentally determined (Bartley, Jones &
Weinberger 1997). The environment and associated experiences are important for “fine-tuning” of
the brain and therefore play an important role in early childhood development (Nelson et al. 2014).
Because optimal brain development requires the presence of a high quality experience, regardless
of the genetic background, a child’s brain will not reach its full developmental potential if
deprived of high quality environmental inputs.

The brain needs experience for optimal development: “if starved of experience, then the journey
of development has little structure” (Nelson et al. 2014). Experience is defined as the interaction of
the brain with the environment. Although genetics play an essential part during development,
experience-driven modifications within the brain shape neural connections within constraints
imposed by genetic background (Nelson et al. 2014).The prolonged phase of development in
humans, in comparison to other mammals, and the brain’s extraordinary power of malleability
during development means that the human brain has a greater window of opportunity to adjust to
specific environments which are the source of specific experiences. Therefore the brain achieves
its full potential within constraints imposed by the genetic background and the availability of
experiences.

The environment and the associated experiences can influence how genes are expressed
via epigenetic alterations. For example, DNA methylation is a chemical change in DNA which
determines how genes are expressed by turning a gene on or off. Certain environmental conditions
can change methylation of specific genes, even in utero (i.e. in the womb), with effects present
across the life-course (Richards, Hatch 2011). DNA methylation is dependent on folate, vitamin
B12, and vitamin B6 therefore nutrition can cause epigenetic changes; in fully differentiated
neurons epigenetic modifications support neuronal functions and malleability. Insults such as
infections, maternal alcohol, nutrition restriction, and endocrine changes due to maternal stress
might result in dysregulation to fetal neurodevelopment and an atypical architecture of the brain
(Van den Bergh 2011).




                                                                                                         12
            BRAIN DEVELOPMENT FROM A LIFE-COURSE PERSPECTIVE

Prenatal Stage and First Three Years of Life

The prenatal stage, the most rapid phase of brain development, provides the structural
framework for subsequent development and modification of neural networks. The brain starts
developing soon after conception and the biological mechanisms governing these processes
frequently intersect in time and space. The core of brain architecture is formed between day 56
post-conception until about 24th week of gestation (Van den Bergh 2011). Neurons with their
supporting glial cells are generated in the first half of gestation (Rakic P, Arellano JI, Breunig JJ
2009). Classical studies established that almost all cortical neurons in human are generated in
utero. Interestingly, this suggests that the same neurons operate highest cognitive and socio-
emotional functions across the entire life-span highlighting the importance of optimal brain
development before birth (Rakic P, Arellano JI, Breunig JJ 2009). At the start, neurons and glial
cells massively migrate to their destined layers of the cerebral cortex starting with the deepest layer
first and moving on to the most outer ones. Then, from 8 to 16 weeks of gestation, accumulating
cells in the cerebral wall form “the primitive brain” (Nelson 1999) - a construct that will give rise to
the mature cerebral cortex; at first transient and then increasingly more permanent neuronal layers
and connections between subcortical structures and the cortex are made. Subsequently, between
24 and 28 weeks of gestation, all the neural connections are refined and this process continues
until perinatal period which extends beyond birth. The transiently overproduced neurons, axons
and synapses die while the remaining axons and dendrites grow to make new topographical
connections in the cortex what will serve as the base for functionally coordinated and complex
outputs in the years to come.

From about 34 weeks of gestation to about 2-3 years after birth, the brain undergoes
enormous growth and development. While it has been established that most cortical neurons in
human are generated in utero, the formation of new neurons continues well after birth in other brain
structures such as hippocampus and cerebellum (Rakic P, Arellano JI, Breunig JJ 2009). It is when
the brain is most plastic, that is, most able to make new connections between neurons (see Figure
2). During this period new neural connections are formed at a tremendous rate – in fact, synapse
addition approximates a logarithmic growth with 40,000 synapses being generated every single
second to reach the level of 1,000 trillion connections by age three! Overall, these processes reach
their peak by two years of age and play an important role particularly in speech and verbal
communication formation, highlighting the importance of the first 1,000 days of life (Levitt 2003);
(Rakic P, Arellano J.I, Breunig J.J 2009)). Because the brain’s malleability decreases exponentially
throughout the years, this period provides the opportunity to change the brain’s architecture with
minimal effort (see Figure 2). In practical terms, during early years the brain can easily “absorb”
positive experiences to develop properly or is especially vulnerable to environmental insults which
impinge on the developing brain – the developing brain needs to be simultaneously nurtured and
protected for optimal outcomes to occur.




                                                                                                           13
Figure 2: Malleability of the Brain Across the Life-course




Source: Pat Levitt (2009) in http://developingchild.harvard.edu/science/key-concepts/brain-architecture/



From Age Three to Adolescence

Brain development is cumulative and continues through childhood and adolescence. Even
though between ages 3-6 the new connections between neurons are formed at a slower rate than
in the first three years of life, it is in later childhood and adolescence when brain areas responsible
for most complex brain functions progressively increase their involvement in development. The loss
of unnecessary connections continues until adolescence. In fact, during puberty, it is estimated that
synapses in the human cerebral cortex are lost at the rate of 100,000 per second! (Nelson, 2010).
This ensures that the brain spends energy on the fine-tuning and the improvements of the
necessary pathways (Nelson, 2012 and Nelson, 2010).These changes are as remarkable and
important as the ones that occur before age 3 (Nelson et al. 2014) and allow for further maturation
and sophistication of neural processes (Rakic P, Arellano J.I, Breunig J.J 2009).

The developing cortex undergoes substantial changes through adolescence. The cortex
increases in size through adolescence mainly due to the net increase in number of synaptic
connections and due to glial development and myelination of nerve fibers which constitute the final
stages of brain development (Kolb, Gibb 2011). The process of myelination requires our particular
attention because normal adult brain functions are attained only after myelination is complete; in
essential brain regions, such as PFC, this is achieved only after 18 years of age (Kolb, Gibb 2011).
In contrast to white matter, gray matter increases from birth to age 4 to 5 years and then gradually
decreases in a non-uniform fashion across the cerebral hemisphere. The subdomains of grey
matter, cortical surface area and cortical thickness, have also distinct developmental trajectories in
normal development. On the one hand, the cortical surface expands until adolescence and then
decreases in adulthood. On the other hand, the cortical thickness declines rapidly in childhood and
undergoes the process of gradual thinning to reach its plateau in early adulthood (Noble et al.
2015).




                                                                                                           14
Adulthood and the Aging Brain

With age our brains accumulate pathologies (sub-clinical disease) which erode structural
and functional brain integrity. The deterioration of grey matter and white matter as well as
subcortical structures underpins aging processes and dementia (For details, see Box 2). Even
though there are conflicting results regarding the extent to which loss of neurons (atrophy) occurs
in old age (Whalley et al. 2004), reduction in brain size and the acceleration of brain atrophy,
especially in the prefrontal regions (Deary et al. 2009) and hippocampus (Murray et al. 2011), have
been generally established. Furthermore, the density of neural connections in the frontal cortex
drops and this decrease is greater in patients with Alzheimer's disease (Small, Mok & Bornstein
2001) (For details, see Box 2). In general, shrinkage of the cerebral cortex is less pronounced for
the nerve fibers connecting different brain areas (white matter) than for the neuronal cell bodies
(grey matter) and cortical thickness (Deary et al. 2009). Brain white matter volume tends to be
relatively preserved until about age 70 when it follows a steep trajectory of decline (Deary et al.
2009). This may result in worsening of connectivity between cerebral areas (Whalley et al. 2004).
Another important aspect of structural brain changes in aging is the presentation of white matter
hyperintensities (WMH); these “lesions” are depicted as areas of high signal intensity at magnetic
resonance (MR) imaging. WMH are vascular in nature brain abnormalities acquired across the life-
course and may reflect age-related disturbances in brain metabolism that contribute to the lifetime
burden of brain aging (Murray et al. 2005); it is the determinant of global functional decline in older
adults.



     Box 2: “The Aging Brain and Dementia”

     Cognitive abilities might decline to the point at which detectable deficits occur
     potentially leading to the diagnosis of cognitive disorders such as dementia.
     Dementia is a clinical syndrome that can be due to various pathologies that affect the
     brain. It is the leading cause of loss of independence and requirement for institutional
     care and dementia incidence increases exponentially with age. However, it is not an
     inevitable consequence of aging and is superimposed on normal age-related slowing of
     cognitive processing speed. Alzheimer’s Diseases (AD) is the most common cause of
     dementia. AD is characterized by the build-up of two damaging proteins in the brain
     called β amyloid (Aβ) and tau; while Aβ accumulates around neurons, tau collapses into
     neurofibrally tangles inside a dying cell. Cerebrovascular disease is another most
     common cause of age-associated structural changes and neuropathologies (Matthews
     et al. 2009). It includes a spectrum of conditions underlined by problems with the blood
     supply to the brain such as stroke or transient ischaemic attacks (TIAs). Both AD and
     cerebrovascular disease can cause cognitive impairment and dementia.

     With the increasing life expectancies around the globe, the aging processes are
     prolonged and there is more chance for individuals to cross the threshold for clinical
     expression of dementia. The number of people living with dementia worldwide is
     currently estimated at 47 million and this number is predicted to triple by 2050 (Prince,
     M, Wimo, A, Guerchet, M, Ali, G, Wu, YT, Prina, M, 2015). Dementia prevalence differs
     by socio-economic status and occurs more frequent in those from disadvantage
     backgrounds. Importantly, nearly 60 percent of dementia cases live in low- and
     middle-income countries. There is currently no treatment for dementia and dementia
     related care is costly and complex; some of the main challenges associated with
     dementia include the economic impact of dementia on families, caregivers and
     communities, and the associated stigma and social exclusion (World Health
     Organization, 2012). In March 2015 WHO hosted the first Ministerial Conference on
     Global Action Against Dementia to raise awareness of the global socio-economic burden
     created by dementia and to move the global dementia agenda forward.




                                                                                                          15
           BRAIN DEVELOPMENT WITHIN THE CONTEXT OF EXPERIENCE

Early Plasticity and the Window of Opportunity

Neuroplasticity is the mechanism by which positive and negative experiences change and
reorganize neural connections. The extended period of brain development involves neuronal and
synaptic overproduction and their subsequent elimination. This is because neurons and synapses
await confirmation from the environment in the form of an experience. In the cerebral cortex,
neurons and connections between them are overproduced during development in the processes
called “neurogenesis” and “synaptogenesis” respectively. The peak of maturation is marked by
cell death and a substantial reduction of synapses in the process called “neuronal apoptosis” and
“synaptic pruning” respectively. Just like in the process of creating a statue with a block of stone
the unwanted pieces are removed to achieve the desired function and shape, the brain has a
parallel system in which unneeded neurons and synapses are removed (Kolb, Gibb 2011). The
purpose of these mechanisms is to capture and incorporate experience into the developing
architecture of the brain.

Synapse formation and synaptic loss constitute the basis for neuroplasticity in development
and beyond (Rakic P, Arellano J.I, Breunig J.J 2009). Synaptogenesis and pruning are guided by
environmental cues and contribute to individual differences in neural circuits of the cerebral cortex
(Kolb, Gibb 2011). This synaptic change is the form of experience-induced neuroplasticity
underlying skills development. Most areas of cerebral cortex massively overproduce synapses in
the 1st year of life. Synapses which are overproduced during early development “expect” specific
experiences which in turn can prune them back to the optimal adult levels throughout the cerebral
cortex – therefore in early-life these synapses are “experience-expectant” (Kolb, Gibb 2011) (see
Box 3). Experience, positive or negative, activates certain neural pathways; with repeated
experience, the same neural pathways underlying certain skills are used multiple times (Noble
2014). In this process the neural connections along these activated pathways are confirmed – these
connections are strengthened and stabilized. Connections that are not involved under this
experience are not confirmed – these connections are eliminated. Synaptic plasticity in early
childhood requires high quality experiences which are repeated over time for an optimal outcome.

Early stages of development are characterized by “windows of opportunity” during which
different areas of the brain are sensitive to experience at different time points. First, in the
neurodevelopmental neurosciences, a “critical period” refers to a narrow time frame during which
a specific experience must take place for an expected developmental outcome to occur. Second,
a “sensitive period” encompasses a somewhat extended time period from the one imposed by
the “critical period” and therefore is more flexible in nature. In fact there are only few “critical
periods” in human development (Thompson, Nelson 2001). For example, an infant must be
exposed to linguistic input in the form of speech or sign language during the first year of life for
normal language acquisition (Petitto 2005) (Thompson, Nelson 2001). However, time intervals
within early childhood development are better represented as “sensitive periods” (Nelson 1999).
For example, the timeframe for forming meaningful attachments to caregivers is more open-ended;
even in case of a child experiencing profound neglect in early-life there is still high possibility that
he or she will develop an attachment relationship with a potential future caregiver (Nelson 1999).
The distinction between “sensitive” and “critical” periods is important because “sensitive periods”
imply some hope for “catch-up growth” in different developmental domains and the possibility for
effective early childhood development interventions.

The availability of a specific experience during a “sensitive period” which activates the
“experience-expectant” synapses is the key feature of early brain development. However,
the elements of the expectable environment must be present at the right time (Nelson et al. 2014).
If the right experience is not available at the right time, that might lead to over-pruning or no pruning
at all, which is equally damaging. As the result, the developing brain could end up with too few
neurons and synapses. It is not only the presence of an experience at the right time that is




                                                                                                            16
important. Only a high quality experience may lead to desirable developmental outcomes. A faulty
input may result in maladaptive brain development. For example, if a caregiver feeds a child (the
availability of experience) while both face away from each other (a faulty input), then a warm and
trusting relationship may not fully developed (maladaptive brain development) (Nelson et al. 2014).
Overall, the brain might not reach its full developmental potential from lack of experience or faulty,
low-quality input.




     Box 3: “experience expectant” vs “experience dependent” information storage
     during early childhood development and beyond (Greenough, Black & Wallace
     1987)

     In general, brain development is characterized by experience-expectant
     information storage and later brain development and adulthood relies on
     experience-dependent information storage. The “experience-expectant” storage of
     information is common across mammals. Throughout the evolutionary history, mammals
     relied on predictable experiences which they have expected during development – the
     expectation of these experiences has stayed with humans until today. Within the
     experience-expectant paradigm, the expected experiences prune synaptic connections
     back to the adult level – this way the performance of brain systems can be appropriately
     tuned to the given environment for an optimal performance. The loss of synaptic
     connections can actually make a less organized pattern into a highly organized one.
     This type of information storage is characterized by a restricted period and therefore
     constitutes the essence of the sensitive period. Due to individual differences (e.g.
     underlined by genetic predispositions), in the presence of an identical experience, brain
     structure can be altered differently. It is not only the quality of experience that determines
     the changes in brain structure and function, but also the intrinsic characteristics of an
     individual. In addition, an infant is not a passive recipient of the expected experience but
     also has a role to play in controlling the experiences produced by a caregiver. Later in
     life, the synaptic changes are induced to specific experiences and are more local –
     therefore those synapses are not “experience-expectant” but more “experience-
     dependent”. Even though synapses overproduction and pruning seem to dominate
     early years, experience-dependent synaptic growth accompanies this process to some
     extent as well.



Socio-economic and Psychological Influences on the Developing Brain

Early childhood development does not occur within a vacuum; this complex process is
influenced by the interplay between individual characteristics, biological forces, family and class
dynamics imbedded within broader historical, socio-cultural and economic circumstances and other
environmental factors (Boyden, Dercon & Singh 2014). These conditions in turn determine the
availability, quantity and quality of a wide range of positive and negative experiences which impact
early brain development, as broadly discussed in the previous section. The idea that not only
biological but also socio-cultural and economic experiences (determinants) influence health
outcomes has been a topic of extensive and passionate research across multiple disciplines,
including sociology, anthropology, psychology, epidemiology, animal behavior, genetics, and
economics. For example, social analysis offers a system level approach in explaining how social
disparities in health outcomes come into existence and how they are reinforced. Paul Farmer
suggests that even in the context of a health condition which is very well characterized on a
biological-level, its emergence, course and outcome is shaped by “social forces” such as racism,
pollution, poverty, infrastructure or policies; therefore health phenomena are “biosocial” and not
entirely biological in nature (Farmer et al. 2006). Social disparities in health are also “structural”




                                                                                                         17
because social forces influencing health emerge from the political and economic context and
decision-making processes. Therefore, we have to acknowledge that experiences affecting
function and structure of the brain across the life-course emerge from a social world.

According to the ecological systems theory, there are two major social structures which
influence a developing child (Bronfenbrenner in (Boyden, Dercon & Singh 2014)). On the one
hand, the family and/or peer group constitute a micro-system directly influencing child development
via frequent interactions and activities. The micro-system, apart from material conditions, provides
a developing child with specific values and meanings which shape the child’s perception of the
environment. This is important because the perceived, and not the actual objective environment,
might be the key in early childhood development. On the other hand, this micro-system is shaped
by the macro-system referring to broader political-economic and socio-cultural contexts. Therefore
the nature of early childhood development is determined partly by potentially modifiable
environmental factors on the micro-system level and the opportunities provided by the pervading
economic conditions and socio-cultural constraints on the macro-system level. However, the
scientific community across multiple fields has acknowledged that direct care-givers within a family
have the greatest influence on child cognitive and socio-emotional development (Heckman 2006).

The concepts of socio-economic status (SES) and socio-cultural capital are of special
relevance in the context of the micro- and macro- systems envisioned by Bronfenbrenner. On the
one hand, SES is defined on the level of an individual (“micro-system”) and has been associated
with multiple health outcomes via cognitive and behavioral pathways. The effects of SES might be
mediated via material resources or specific practices characteristic to a particular socio-economic
stratum. More directly, not being able to afford high quality food might result in child’s under-
nutrition/stunting leading to deficits in neurodevelopment. Indirectly, within low SES families, care-
takers might be pre-occupied with multiple responsibilities, therefore have less opportunities to
spend high quality time with a child and providing him or her with socio-cognitive stimulation. It is
worth noting that SES is dynamic across the life-span depending on the degree of social and
economic risks and opportunities. This is important because even a brief socio-economic shock
experienced by a household might have a profound impact on early childhood development (in
(Boyden, Dercon & Singh 2014)). On the other hand, social capital is usually characterized by the
nature of the availability of economic as well as human, cultural resources or social interactions
(Almedom & Glandon in Kawachi et al. (eds), 2008:191). It acknowledges the fact that as social
individuals we do not only live within a border of a household but are constantly influenced by a
greater community (“macro-system”) and socio-cultural context that varies in form and complexity
across developed and developing countries. In theory, higher levels of social capital can
compensate for lower SES and thus constitute another level for intervention strategies. Overall, the
complexity of the social and culturally complex world that give rise to the variety of experiences has
to be considered while thinking about possible interventions targeting disparities in brain outcomes.

Social determinants in brain outcomes are extremely complex. The concept of SES has been
extensively examined in the field of health sciences. However, the question of how SES impacts
specifically brain structure and function is a relatively new initiative within the field of brain sciences.
The idea behind this paradigm is that SES might act directly on brain structures and/or function or
it can be mediated by specific life experiences and behaviors associated with SES (Brito, Noble
2014). Studying separate measures of socioeconomic status might be difficult because of close
relationship (correlation) between such factors. In the field of cognitive neurosciences, SES has
been described and measured in multiple ways: household or family income, parental education or
educational attainment, parental occupation, neighborhood SES or SES composite measures.
Importantly, in all these cases, SES is just a proxy for the collection of positive and negative life
experiences impacting brain structure and function termed “experiential correlates of SES” (Brito,
Noble 2014).




                                                                                                               18
                        PART II – SKILLS AND THE BRAIN

     NEURAL CONNECTIONS AS THE FOUNDATION FOR SKILLS FORMATION

The brain, although to a lesser extent, remains malleable across the life-course. Although
details regarding adult plasticity extends beyond the scope of this paper, it is important to highlight
some of the most important forms of adult plasticity to understand that neuroplasticity might
“interfere” with brain structures and functions in the developing and aging brain.

Synaptic plasticity is one of the experience-induced changes underlying learning and
memory and thus skills formation. The acquisition of new knowledge, retention and storage of
new information rely on the weakening and strengthening of synaptic connections which are
essential for skills development. Although the brain continue to form synapses throughout the
lifetime, the processes governing changes in synaptic connections in adulthood differ from the ones
that occur during early brain development (Kolb, Gibb 2011). Later in life, the synaptic changes are
induced to specific experiences and are more local – therefore those synapses are not “experience-
expectant” but more “experience-dependent” (see Box 3). The common feature of synaptic
plasticity in early and later brain development is the requirement of high quality and repeated
experience for an optimal outcome. During an experiential learning activity, different neurons from
different parts of the brain talk to each other and fire signals at different time points. Once the
activity is repeated and neurons fire together in a synchronized fashion, according to the Hebb’s
Rule “neurons that fire together, wire together” - the molecular knowledge about the activity is
consolidated and easier to extract next time the same activity is performed.

Other forms of plasticity are at work in later-life. For example, glial cells are born just after most
neurogenesis is complete and continues throughout life (Kolb, Gibb 2011). Also, the process of
myelination continues through the 3rd decade of life. Multiple studies indicate that new neurons are
formed (neurogenesis) in certain areas of the brain even in adulthood, for example in the region of
hippocampus. One of the most influential studies in the field of adult brain plasticity (Maguire et al.
2000) indicated that experienced taxi drivers in London, a city that requires high levels of navigation
abilities, had regionally enlarged hippocampi in comparison to controls who did not drive taxis.
Furthermore, regional hippocampal volumes correlated with time spent as a taxi driver. Although
the results were prone to reverse causation bias, the study indicates the possibility of substantial
training-induced brain plasticity occurring in mid-life with positive consequences on brain structure
and function.

           COGNITIVE AND SOCIO-EMOTIONAL FUNCTIONS AND SKILLS

One of the ultimate goals for successful brain development is to ensure that a child develops high-
level cognitive processes to tackle novel problems and reason about the world. In addition to the
attainment of cognitive functioning, another ultimate goal is to ensure that a child acquires high-
level socio-emotional skills to function well in socially challenging environments. Brain complexity
programmed in early life directs the development of human abilities. The activity of neurons in the
brain gives rise to cognitive, socio-emotional and executive functions underlying skills
development. Cognitive events involve processes such as reasoning, processing speed, memory
and spatial ability (Deary, Penke & Johnson 2010) as well as language (Pessoa 2008). The more
nebulous concept of emotion refers to states such as anger, fear or happiness. Brain morphology
and cognitive as well as socio-emotional functioning change across the life-span.

There are two main aspects of cognitive ability: crystallized and fluid. Crystallized ability, or
knowledge-based ability, is defined as “the individual’s store of knowledge about the nature of the
world and learned operations such as arithmetical ones which can be drawn on in solving problems”
(Nisbett et al. 2012). Cognitive capacities such as logical thinking, speed of thought and problem
solving ability, aspects of memory and cognitive control are contained within the term of fluid




                                                                                                          19
abilities. They tend to correlate (individuals who perform well in one domain have a tendency to
perform well in the other domains) and are closely linked to general cognitive ability (Deary, Penke
& Johnson 2010) which depends on the integrity of the entire brain (Deary et al. 2009). Since fluid
and crystalized abilities have different trajectories across the life-span, it is believed that they are
underlined by distinct cognitive functions.

Cognitive and socio-emotional skills give rise to higher order brain processes which
underline complex skills important for future life success. A system called “Executive
Functions” (Cognitive Control) acts as the umbrella for both cognitive and socio-emotional
processing (Naudeau et al. 2011). It is the brain’s capacity to consciously control our thoughts and
actions to plan and execute goals. Due to improvements in mental processes controlled by
Executive Functions, a child becomes better at organizing thoughts, working towards long-term
goals, ignoring irrelevant information, and controlling impulses (Silvia A. Bunge, Allyson P. Mackey,
and Kirstie J. Whitaker 2009).

Both Executive Functions and fluid cognition rely on working memory – a central
component of human cognition. Working memory contains sensory or memory-like information
over a short period of time that we can act on and process. It is often represented as a “mental
blackboard” which keeps relevant information “online” in order to carry out an immediate goal (Silvia
A. Bunge, Allyson P. Mackey, and Kirstie J. Whitaker 2009). For example, when we are introduced
to a new colleague, our ability to recall the colleague’s name minutes later depend on bringing that
information back into working memory for further processing. The ability to retain and manipulate
information improves over childhood development and is an important feature of school readiness
and academic success.

  COMPLEMENTARITIES BETWEEN BRAIN FUNCTIONS IN SKILLS FORMATION

Multiple policy reports concerned with early childhood development present cognitive and
socio-emotional skills as a rather dichotomous construct in which one set of functions acts in
opposition to the other (thus the term “cognitive” versus “non-cognitive” skills). Some tend to divide
brain functions and regions into more ‘affective’ or ‘cognitive’ but increasing evidence from brain
sciences provides us with more clues into why “cognitive” and “non-cognitive” or rather “socio-
emotional” functions are interdependent. As Pessoa points out, “complex cognitive–emotional
behaviors have their basis in dynamic coalitions of networks of brain areas, none of which should
be conceptualized as specifically affective or cognitive” (Pessoa 2008).

The concept of the cognitive and emotional brain divide is not scientifically proven (Okon-
Singer et al. 2015). In fact, the more emotional brain regions are also involved in cognition; the
more cognitive brain regions are also involved in emotions; finally, cognitive and emotional
pathways in the brain are integrated and they jointly contribute to behaviors (Pessoa 2008).
Cognition and emotions are governed by a number of overlapping neural systems (Phelps,
Elizabeth A. and Delgado, Mauricio R. 2009); both cognitive and socio-emotional processes share
common antecedents and underlying physiology in development (Richards, Hatch 2011). On the
one hand, cognitive events engage cortical regions (Pessoa 2008), trigger behavior and are the
consequence of parallel processing whereby different modules of the brain influence activity in
other modules in countless ways (Gazzaniga, Doron & Funk 2009). On the other hand, emotions,
often represented as irrational and spontaneous processes governed by more “primitive” brain
structures (such as the amygdala and hypothalamus (Pessoa 2008)), play a crucial role in
emotional learning and memory as well as social interactions. Importantly, brain areas with a high
degree of connectivity, called hubs, regulate the flow and the integration of information between
the “emotional brain” and the “cognitive brain”; this highly dynamic and context-dependent process
is thought to reflect the cognitive–emotional interactions (Pessoa 2008). For example, amygdala,
a region of the brain that was thought to be purely associated with emotional functions, has been
recently identified as a cognitive–emotional connector hub (Young and colleagues in (Pessoa
2008)).




                                                                                                           20
Certain functions are not limited to a single brain area or structure but rather rely on both
cortical and subcortical components and complex neural networks between them. For example,
different regions of prefrontal cortex (PFC) control the more - “cognitive” and more- “socio-
emotional” neural processes. More specifically, cognitive and socio-emotional functions rely on the
maintenance of neural activity in PFC which coordinates the activity of billions of neurons extending
over much of the brain (Miller, Cohen 2001). This pattern of neural activity involving higher and
lower level processes represents the formulation and achievement of goals which gives rise to
purposeful and goal-oriented behaviors, the key feature of Executive Functions (Cognitive Control).
Finally, studies suggest that the fine-tuning of neural connections within prefrontal and parietal
areas of the cortex and increased neuronal connectivity within and between these and other more
“superficial” regions are likely to underlie improvements in working memory, Executive Functions
as well as fluid cognition during development (Silvia A. Bunge, Allyson P. Mackey, and Kirstie J.
Whitaker 2009). Therefore evidence based on structural and functional features of the developing
brain confirms the complexity and interrelationship of cognitive and socio-emotional processes.
The different regions and structures of the brain are involved in cognitive and socio-emotional
functions which give rise to cognitive and socio-emotional skills underlying complex behaviors.

                           BRAIN’S FUNCTIONAL DEVELOPMENT

Figure 3: Development of Neural Networks




Source: in http://ngm.nationalgeographic.com/2015/01/baby-brains/neural-network-graphic

Different areas of the brain mature at different rates (Figure 3). As already mentioned, the
overproduction of synapses for a particular faculty is achieved at different time points and is
followed by the loss of unnecessary connections. Areas controlling sensory processing mature first.
The lower adult levels of neural connections in the areas of the brain that control vision, audition
and language are achieved by age 5-6. In contrast, while child’s sensory cortex develops its full
functionality in the first few years of life (Mackey et al. 2012), the brain areas supporting complex
cognitive and socio-emotional functions mature last by ~ age 18 (Thompson, Nelson 2001). For




                                                                                                        21
example, PCA controlling important skills such as reasoning, problem solving, self-regulation,
personality, and social functioning achieves its full maturity beyond the 2nd decade of life (Mackey
et al. 2012). Since developmental period for PCA is substantially prolonged, this makes this brain
area especially vulnerable to environmental insults or, on the more positive side, malleable to
positive experiences for longer (Mackey et al. 2012).

                         BRAIN FUNCTIONS AND THE AGING BRAIN

It is challenging to distinguish between normal and abnormal cognitive aging and there are
substantial individual differences of cognition across the life-span (Deary et al. 2009).
However, on average knowledge-based abilities remain relatively stable into late-life and fluid
abilities decline with advancing age starting in mid-life contributing to age-associated cognitive
decline (Nisbett et al. 2012, Mustafa et al. 2012) due to age-associated brain pathology. The
prevention of decline in ‘fluid’ abilities is important for multiple reasons (Deary et al. 2009). First,
‘fluid’ domains are essential for every-day activities, living independently and general well-being.
Second, declines in speed of information processing drives the overall age-associated cognitive
decline. As pointed out previously, the density of neural connections in the frontal cortex drops
with increasing age (Small, Mok & Bornstein 2001). Unsurprisingly, since PFC underlines the
cognitive control system which supports goal-oriented behaviors, impaired executive functions (in
addition to mental speed) have been proposed as the mediator of the overall age-associated
cognitive decline - emphasizing the importance of healthy PFC and executive functions across the
lifespan (Whalley et al. 2004).




Box 4: “Early-life environment determines brain development and brain aging”

There is a growing body of evidence that brain complexity programmed in early life facilitates
cognitive and socio-emotional maturation, retention of brain functioning across the lifespan and
healthy brain aging. Optimal bran development will provide an individual with a greater number of
neurons, more synapses and multiple pathways for any given task. Such “neuronal redundancy”
comes in handy when faced with deleterious brain aging. Within the context of cognitive aging
there is suggestive evidence that the peak level of fluid cognitive abilities, shaped in part by (early)
childhood cognition – which itself has been affected by exposure to stimulation, nutrition, and
stress in early-life - is one of the major factors in determining cognitive aging trajectories.

Childhood cognitive functions provide a basis for adult cognitive functions which remains
fairly stable across the life-span (i.e. the rank is preserved) (Deary, Whiteman, Starr, Whalley, &
Fox, 2004). In fact, early childhood cognitive ability is a very powerful predictor of later-life cognitive
functions and the results are remarkable: it explains more than 50% of the variance in mid-life and
late-life fluid cognitive abilities (Deary, Whalley, Lemmon, Crawford, & Starr, 2000). The heritability
of general cognitive ability, closely associated with fluid abilities, is estimated at ~50% and because
the brain is the most sensitive to environmental influences in very young childhood, this proportion
increases over the life-course to even 80% in later-life (Deary in Richards, 2012).

An increasing number of studies have suggested that early childhood interventions targeting
mental domains might increase maximum life-time cognition, potentially reduce the trajectory of
cognitive decline in late-life, and postpone the point at which cognitive deficits appear. One of the
studies concluded that ‘ethnic and socioeconomic disparities in cognitive function in older
Americans arise primarily from differences in ‘peak cognitive performance’ achieved earlier in the
life course and less from declines in later life’ (Karlamangla et al., 2009). Although multiple complex
pathways have been proposed to explain this association (for example, childhood cognitive
abilities might provide, partly via education, entry to better jobs and healthier environments),
optimal early-life environment (Staff et al., 2012) and brain developed to its full potential (Richards
& Sacker, 2003) might play the key role.



                                                                                                              22
It should be clear by now that our ability to exercise certain skills depends importantly on our brains:
the building blocks as well as the underlying cognitive and socio-emotional processes within our
brains.

        EARLY-LIFE SOCIO-ECONOMIC DISPARITIES IN BRAIN FUNCTIONS

Education, sociology, public health and anthropology have already provided us with tremendous
knowledge on understanding the links between SES and childhood development in terms of
cognitive and educational achievements (Noble, Farah 2013) and an increasing number of studies
within brain science contribute to this knowledge. Multiple studies from low-, middle- and high-
income countries have shown that early childhood conditions as estimated by socio-economic
status (SES), facets of poverty, or more specific elements of SES are associated with cognitive
functions across the life-span, staring in early childhood. The impact of economic shocks on
cognitive functions is causal and well-established. It appears that children from more wealthy
families perform better on cognitive tests than children from poorer families creating what is called
socio-economic disparities of individual differences in brain functioning across the life-course.

Early-life socio-economic disparities affect multiple brain functions that are important for
school readiness skills. For example, Noble et al. has shown that these socioeconomic gradients
are present for specific brain functions including language, memory and executive functions with
language being affected the most (Noble, McCandliss & Farah 2007). Importantly, socioeconomic
disparities in developmental trajectories of language and memory are already detected before two
years of age (Noble et al. 2015); disparities in more specific aspects of language such as
vocabulary and language processing efficiency are already evident at 18 months (Fernald 2013)
(Fernald, Marchman & Weisleder 2013). In both studies home environment and the characteristics
of parenting practices played an important role in mediating the socio-economic disparities in brain
functions. In the former study, these were the home language/literacy environment and parental
warmth that in part explained these differences (Noble et al. 2015); in the latter one, it was richer
language experience (Fernald, Marchman & Weisleder 2013). This evidence is supported by quite
shocking results indicating that there is a 30 million word gap by age 3 in the USA between children
of well-educated families and children from the families on welfare (Hart 2003). Therefore these
results indicate that the socioeconomic disparities in brain functioning appear relatively early. Also,
they point out to the importance of supporting and nurturing environments provided by caregivers
on optimal brain development.

Similar early-life socioeconomic gradients in the same brain domains are present in low-
and middle- income countries. Fernald et al. found that in a large nationally representative
sample of children in Madagascar, children whose families were in the top wealth quintile or whose
mothers had secondary education performed better on almost all cognitive and language tests
compared with children whose mothers were in the lowest wealth quintile or with no education
(Fernald et al. 2011). The mean difference in scores doubled between ages 3 and 6 years; the
disparities were the greatest for language and executive functions components including working
memory and sustained attention. In addition, based on multiple longitudinal studies from Kenya,
Brazil, Guatemala, Philippines, South Africa and Indonesia, wealth at birth was consistently
associated with later cognitive or academic performance within the age range 12 months – 18 years
whereby poor children performed worse compared with children born into more affluent families
with the effect sizes ranging from 0.70 to 1.24 SD scores between the top and bottom quintiles
(Grantham-McGregor et al. 2007). Overall, these findings suggest that socioeconomic gradients in
brain functioning during childhood exist across the socio-economic spectrum and even in the
context of extreme poverty. The effects of poverty on the overall childhood development in middle
and low income countries have been already summarized (Walker et al. 2007).




                                                                                                           23
      PART III – POLICY LEVERS AND BRAIN DEVELOPMENT:

       THE ROLE OF SOCIAL POLICIES IN SHAPING BRAIN FUNCTIONS AND
                               STRUCTURE

How do Socioeconomic and Psychosocial Influences “get under the Skull”?

Understanding the mechanisms of early-life socio-economic disparities in brain function is
crucial for the design of effective and scalable early interventions. To eliminate the
socioeconomic disparities in brain function, we need to understand the neural pathways of how
early life-conditions (SES, poverty) or its facets i.e. specific modifiable factors such as nutrition or
stimulation “get under the skull”. With this knowledge, we will be better equipped to design and
evaluate appropriate initiatives aimed at reducing life-course individual differences in brain
functioning. Research on these questions is of high relevance to the global intervention community.
Multiple professionals from the variety of fields who design and implement early childhood
development interventions to improve brain outcomes have recognized the potential advantages
associated with the introduction of biomarkers to identify the best timing and effectiveness of an
intervention. This field is still in its infancy - only recently, with the advancement of neuroimaging
and electrophysiology modalities and techniques, we are just beginning to understand the
underlying neurobiological mechanisms and the potential neural pathways of these associations.

In order to come up with appropriate policies and interventions to eliminate the visible early-life
socioeconomic disparities in brain outcomes, we need to know the answer to the following three
questions: WHICH brain systems are important? WHEN are disparities in neural and cognitive
development first detected?; and HOW can different potentially modifiable factors explain these
differences? (Noble, Farah 2013). Another crucial question is: WHO should constitute the priority
target group?

WHICH Brain Systems are Important during Development

Brain systems affected by early-life socioeconomic adversities play a critical role in
cognitive domains important for children’s school readiness skills. In an invited review co-
authored by Brito and Noble (Brito, Noble 2014), the authors comprehensively summarized the
state of the field examining the relationship between early-life socio-economic status (SES) and
brain development with several key messages. First, different dimensions of early-life SES might
reflect various life experiences and therefore differentially impact brain structures. Multiple aspects
of SES in early-life have been shown to be associated with specific brain constructs in childhood
and later in life as opposed to global brain differences – therefore SES disparities in brain outcomes
are domain specific. These associations are in a negative direction such that “poorer” SES aspect
is associated with greater neural deficits in multiple brain areas at different time-points (Pavlakis et
al. 2015). These specific structure include PFC, the temporal lobe (memory and language
comprehension), and the limbic circuitry involving amygdala and hippocampus. These findings are
important because the identified structures are involved in relatively distinct brain circuits and
support skills essential for later school achievements (Brito, Noble 2014) such as language skills,
working memory, cognitive control, mental flexibility, self-regulation skills and an overall ability to
form meaningful relationships. This is important because these individual behaviors form the basis
for healthy and productive societies.

Overall, these comprehensive reviews and studies have indicated that early life adversities have
an effect on brain structure and function across the life-span: children from more affluent families
achieve greater structural and functional brain capacity and therefore better brain’s potential in
multiple domains. These circumstances put them at an advantage for the years to come: children
of higher pre-school cognitive and socio-emotional abilities are more likely to perform well at school
and therefore less likely to drop-out from school, gain a better and potentially more cognitively




                                                                                                           24
stimulating job, are better able to cope with stress, avoid a variety of risky behaviors, and select
healthier lifestyles.

WHEN are disparities in neural and cognitive development first detected

Socioeconomic differences in neural development begin to emerge in infancy. Tomalski et
al. have detected socioeconomic disparities in functional brain development driven by the frontal
brain areas implicated in language and attentional processes in infants as young as 6- to 9-month-
old! (Tomalski et al. 2013). In this study, with the use of electroencephalography (EEG) (see Box
5) the researchers recorded resting-state gamma-band activity in the infant participants who were
presented with video clips representing toys and interacting faces. These differences were related
to family income and maternal occupation but were not explained by the quality of infant sleep or
parental education although could be potentially associated with the quality of home environment
and early interactions with parents. These results support the studies indicating that language and
executive functions development (in addition to memory) are most vulnerable to early-life
suboptimal environments. Although there are only a few studies which investigated SES disparities
in brain structure and function during infancy, the study by Tomalski et al. suggests that these
differences might emerge and be detectable extremely early. Based on the studies reviewed in this
document, a general consensus is that the sooner an intervention is provided the better for both
functional and structural features of the brain (Nelson et al. 2007) (Bick, Nelson 2016). Similarly,
the earlier the adversity impacts the brain, the more profound the disruptions to the brain, and lower
the chances for recovery (Tomalski, Johnson 2010).

Because deficits in neural development may emerge early in infancy and early interventions can
have a remediating effects on brain structure (Bick, Nelson 2016), reliable assessment and the
early detection of brain developmental delays is crucial but challenging. Existing behavioral
paradigms and the well-established assessment tools designed to measure cognitive and socio-
emotional functioning can only detect the impact of environmental factors (such as facets of
poverty) once they reach the threshold for observable output (Lloyd-Fox et al. 2014). In addition,
electrophysiology (along with neuroimagining) is a more culturally-neutral marker for brain
outcomes and its adaptation as well as standardization is more straight-forward than for the more
conventional tools, therefore offer role in informing targeted early intervention strategies (Lloyd-
Fox et al. 2014).




     Box 5: Brain electrophysiology

     Electroencephalography (EEG) measures the electrical activity of the brain (Gazzaniga
     et al., 2009). Resting baseline EEG is commonly measured while infants are engaged
     in observation of general stimuli (Tomalski & Johnson, 2010). EEG captures oscillatory
     activity at low (theta, alpha) and high (beta, gamma) frequencies - these oscillations are
     thought to reflect attentional processes, perceptual binding and maintaining high-level
     neural representations of objects. EEG is useful for studying infant functional brain
     development and for identifying early risk factors (Tomalski & Johnson, 2010). In
     addition, resting EEG is cheap and relatively reproducible – therefore it could be utilized
     as a biomarker in assessment of various early interventions (Pavlakis et al., 2015).




                                                                                                         25
WHO Should Constitute the Priority Target Group

Noble et al. (2015) showed that family income is associated with total brain surface area
among children from the poorest families. While most studies investigating the associations
between SES and brain structure have measured cortical volumes (the product of cortical surface
area and cortical thickness thickens), the team looked at the relationship between SES and cortical
surface and cortical thickness separately, in addition to hippocampal and amygdala volumes, in a
cohort of 1,099 typically developing individuals between 3 and 20 years of age (Noble et al. 2015).
This novel approach recognizes that cortical surface area and cortical thickness have different
developmental trajectories. In this fascinating study, Noble et al. found that family income and
parental education are associated with brain structures in regions critical for the development of
language, executive functions and memory after controlling for genetic ancestry. Firstly, an
additional time of a parent spent in education was associated with an increase in child’s or an
adolescent total brain surface area. Secondly, family income was associated with total brain surface
area such that for every dollar increase in income, the increase in brain surface area was most
detectable among the poorest families. In addition, children’s whole brain surface area, but not
cortical thickness, indirectly mediated the links between family income and executive functions.
Possibly these associations have their origins in prenatal or postnatal environmental disparities;
however, the researchers were not able to test this hypothesis with the available data. The fact that
the total brain surface area, but not the thickness, mediates the link between SES and executive
functions is important; it is believed that cortical surface area is shaped by experience-related
synaptic pruning whereas cortical thickness reflects the more experience-expectant type of
synaptic pruning (Noble, Houston et al., 2015) – pointing to the possibility that the link between
income and the brain functions examined in the study are mediated by brain processes malleable
to experience and therefore can be potential targets for interventions. However, the authors of this
single study did not elaborate on this issue further emphasizing that these novel findings based on
a cross-sectional design require validation. Overall, these results imply that early childhood
interventions might have the greatest impact among the most disadvantaged families.

Hair et al. (2015) found that the influence of early-life low socioeconomic circumstances on
cognitive and academic performance across the life-course is mediated by structural brain
development. This very recent brain imaging study presented “even more powerful evidence”
(Luby 2015) confirming the relationship between low socioeconomic status and impaired brain
structure. Importantly, Hair et al. extended the idea further to determine whether the detected
changes in structural brain development mediate the relationship between household poverty and
poorer academic performance (Hair et al. 2015). In this study, 389 typically developing children and
adolescents aged 4 to 22 years underwent longitudinal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans
(see Box 6, (Murray 2012)) and detailed cognitive and academic achievements assessments.
Household poverty was measured by family income adjusted for family size as a percentage of the
federal poverty level. In this sample, children from poor households scored on average 4 – 7 points
lower on standardized academic tests. Importantly, regional gray matter volumes in the frontal lobe,
temporal lobe and hippocampus were significantly lower in low-income children relative to the
developmental norms; the largest gaps were detected in children below the federal poverty line. It
has been estimated that 20% of the deficits in test scores could be explained by structural
differences in the frontal and temporal lobes. The major strengths of the study were community-
based sampling strategy so that the children reflected regional and overall US demographics and
strict exclusion criteria to study typical brain development therefore the effects were likely
underestimated. Another advantage was the longitudinal design and statistical modelling which
accounted for multiple observations within a single participant. It is important to point out that
similarly to the study performed by Tomalski et al., in this sample poor families were highly educated
and the effects were not explained by differences in early health or parental education suggesting
that the accumulation of circumstances associated with poverty can have a profound and direct
impact on the developing brain. Taken together, these data are consistent with the notion that those
from the poorest households, who will have greatest brain maturational lags, need the early life
investment most.




                                                                                                         26
Recent work supports the idea that children from disadvantaged backgrounds, in addition
to having brain developmental delays, acquire more brain burden associated with aging.
Staff et al. examined the effects of childhood socioeconomic status on adult brain size and its
components among members of the 1936 Aberdeen Birth Cohort aged 68 years (Staff et al. 2012).
To investigate this association, Staff and colleagues used structural equation modeling and
volumetric magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) which quantifies volumes of brain structures (see
Box 6). They demonstrated a significant association between childhood SES as index by paternal
occupation at age 11 and hippocampal volumes in older adults without dementia - older adults with
low SES in childhood had smaller hippocampi. These effects were present after taking account for
life-course variables such as cognitive ability at age 11 years, adult socioeconomic status, gender,
and education. Thus, this study extends the current findings to the possibility that early-life
socioeconomic disadvantage impacting structural brain development might endure for more than
50 years. Simultaneously, Staff et al. did not find any association between childhood SES and
whole brain volume confirming earlier results that early-life environment affects specific brain
structures as opposed to the whole brain.




                                                                                                       27
A second study performed within the same cohort (Murray et al. 2014) indicated that early life
socioeconomic disadvantage is associated with increased brain imaging evidence of hyperintensity
burden (cerebrovascular disease) in late-life, with its established negative consequences for
cognition, stroke, dementia and survival (see Box 7). The team detected an obvious cut off between
“blue collar” and “white collar” paternal occupations in increased white matter hyperintensity
burden. The major strength of both studies lies in the availability of childhood intelligence rarely
available for aging cohorts. Together these results indicate that childhood disadvantage poses a
‘‘double whammy’’ of brain pathology and provide insights into the disparity in cognitive outcomes
across the life span as well as dementia prevalence in those from different socioeconomic
backgrounds. The mechanisms underlying these effects are unknown, but may act through fetal
and/or early life programming in line with the Barker’s hypothesis (for additional information, see
Box 11). In summary, those from the most disadvantaged backgrounds in childhood (Noble et al.
2015), who will have greatest disease burden in late-life (Murray et al. 2014), need the investment
most (Hair et al. 2015).




                                                                                                       28
               BRAINS RESILIENCE AT THE CORE OF SOCIAL POLICIES

Recovery in Brain Structure and Function

The brain’s recovery from early-life insults is possible even when children experience
severe deprivation during early development. In 2000 a new study, the Bucharest Early
Intervention Project, investigated the consequences of early-life institutionalization characterized
by limited access to language and cognitive stimulation, and inadequate caregiving (Bick et al.
2015) on brain development (Zeanah et al., 2003). It is the only existing randomized controlled trial
of foster care for institutionalized children in Romania. As part of this study, 136 infants aged around
2 years at recruitment were randomly assigned to remain in the institution or to move to foster care
- family homes which could be a beneficial alternative to the institutions due to better caregiving
environment. A community comparison group consisting of 72 children who were never
institutionalized was also recruited. A proportion of children (n=69) at 8 years of age underwent
structural (brain) imaging MRI scans which measures volumes of brain structures (see Box 6), here
gray and white matter.

In one of the very recent study projects, Sheridan et al. examined the potential for recovery in total
grey matter and white matter volumes among children who were initially institutionalized and then
randomly assigned to foster care (Sheridan et al. 2012). First, both institutionalized and foster care
children had significantly lower global gray matter volumes compared to the community control
group – children who were never institutionalized. Second, children who remained in the institution
had significantly lower total white matter content relative to the community comparison group.
However, there was no difference in white matter volumes between children who were randomized
to foster care homes and children who were never institutionalized. This increase in white matter
(essential for cognitive and emotional development) among the intervention group was interpreted
by the authors as the brain’s potential for recovery: “the potential for developmental ‘catch-up’ in
white matter growth, even following extreme deprivation” (Sheridan et al. 2012).

After this finding, the follow-up study examined the potential long term improvements in white
matter microstructural integrity – more specific feature of white matter pathways measured with
diffusion tensor imaging technique (DTI) (Bick et al. 2015) (see Box 8). Alternations in
microstructural integrity of white matter tracks involved in Executive Functions, emotional
functioning and learning as well as sensory processing were associated with early-life neglect.
Again, children who were randomized to foster care homes did not differ from children who were
never institutionalized with respect to the white matter microstructure while children who remained
institutionalized showed marked alternations in the integrity of the white matter circuits.




                                                                                                           29
Even though the results of both studies cannot be generalizable to a general children population,
they indicate that the brain is capable of developing resilience mechanisms to severe early-life
neglect if provided with the opportunity to continue development in caring and enriching
environments. In other words, the developing and highly malleable brains of children who initially
experienced extensive psycho-social deprivation and then were moved to more stimulating and
nurturing caregiving environments were able to ‘catch-up’. Even though large socioeconomic
gradients have been identified in language, memory and executive functions (Noble, McCandliss
& Farah 2007) further longitudinal studies need to determine which brain functions can be
recovered later in life and which are the ones that are permanently marked by severe deprivations
if the sensitive period is missed. Although mechanisms of brain recovery upon early interventions
are complex, there is “clear evidence” that protective early-life factors (or removal of risk factors)
can positively impact the brain and ameliorate adverse outcomes (Bick et al. 2015). Overall, the
above studies emphasize again the importance of the high-quality family and caregiving
environments during early childhood development. Also, as suggested by Noble et al. (2015), if this
evidence based on correlational results is in fact causal, those from the most disadvantaged
backgrounds (Noble et al. 2015), including children growing up in institutional settings, who will
have potentially greatest brain developmental delays (Murray et al. 2014), need the early-life
investment most (Hair et al. 2015).

Harnessing the Power of the Human Brain

Another unifying theme across early childhood development initiatives and brain aging is
the notion of resilience, defined as the ability to withstand socially or biologically
constructed adversity. In the field of cognitive neurosciences, the fascinating concept of cognitive
reserve (CR) (Stern 2012) which requires quantification of neuropathology (e.g. with the use of
imaging techniques (Murray et al. 2011)) implies that some individuals are able to remain
cognitively healthy despite the accumulation of age-associated or dementia-related
neuropathology. This is because structural or functional features of the brain allow individuals to
overcome brain pathology due to the protective action of life-course factors such as early-life
cognitive ability (which determines maximum life-time cognition, see Box 4 & Figure 4), greater
educational attainment, more complex occupations, and exposure to challenging mental
activities with the former being a strong predictor of the latter three (Deary et al. 2009). These




                                                                                                         30
factors increase or maintain reserve in part because brain remains plastic and is capable of learning
new things across the lifespan; and according to the “use it or lose it” principle, if you do not practice
a domain, you are likely to lose the skill. A childhood cognitive ability is a major influence on
educational achievements, work experience and opportunities to benefit from work-related training.
These factors are potentially modifiable in early-life and, due to their accumulating impact over the
life-course, may determine delayed onset of functional brain declines associated with aging.

Also, CR is in line with resilience to more socially grounded ‘pathologies’ such as economic,
political or climatic crisis. In this context of resilience, the outcome is not necessarily a superior
brain functioning but successful navigation of opportunities and individuals’ investment in health or
education despite the unfavorable social conditions. Furthermore, CR helps us to understand how
a social phenomenon gets imbedded within human physiology which is essential for the design of
effective interventions, especially the ones targeting early childhood development (Noble, Farah
2013). Finally, some very exciting studies indicate that people with strong motivational abilities
(Maercker, Forstmeier 2012) (perhaps grittier individuals (Duckworth et al. 2007)) have greater
resilience to cognitive decline and dementia (remember the complementary nature of cognition and
emotions?). On an even greater micro-scale, neurons are capable of developing mechanisms that
make them resilient to adversities in specific contexts (Double et al. 2010). Studies across the
disciplines provide evidence that our neurons, brains and we as individuals and societies can
function well despite social or even biological obstacles. Many of the qualities of brain resilience
to biological and social factors are very likely shaped in early life. With the appropriate investments
extending beyond early-life, resilience can be sustained across the life-course.

Finally, the resilient brain is at the core of “mind, society, and behavior” (World Bank Group 2014).
With relevance to the current appreciation of behavioral sciences within the international
development domain, the issue of early childhood development (ECD), aging, resilience, and skills
development across the life-course is highly relevant to greater understanding of behavioral
trajectories. How to maximize the so-called cognitive “bandwidth” (Mullainathan, Shafir 2014), i.e.
cognitive potential supporting decision-making in the face of acute or systematic “scarcity”, is the
key question. Brain development across the life-course goes beyond the behavioral science toolkit
and calls for neuroscience-informed interventions that would complement behaviorally-informed
initiatives. This report encourages thinking about behavioral change from a developmental and life-
course perspective by recognizing that decision-making processes across the life-course are
rooted within the developing brain – therefore complements the discourse on neuroeconomics and
decision making processes (Camerer, Loewenstein & Prelec 2005).




                                                                                                             31
      POLICY INSTRUMENTS FROM A BRAIN DEVELOPMENT PERSPECTIVE




     Box 9: HOW do Potentially Modifiable Factors Explain the Socioeconomic
     disparities in Brain Outcomes?

     We already know that early socio-economic disparities in multiple brain domains exist,
     and if no intervention is provided at the right point in time, they persist and even widen
     with increasing age. The availability of positive experiences help the brain grow and
     thrive across the life-course; the presence of negative experiences hurt brain
     development and impede a child’s ability to flourish into a successful adult. The next
     question follows: what are some potentially modifiable mediators in the
     relationship between childhood SES and brain outcomes?

     Lower socio-economic status and poverty might have a direct influence on brain function
     and structure or their effect might be mediated, for example, via inadequate food, poor
     sanitation and hygiene leading to increased infections and stunting. Noble et al.
     suggests that the associations between SES and brain structure could emerge from
     disparities in the prenatal environment as well as postnatal experience or exposures:
     (family) stress, nutrition, and cognitive stimulation. While details of how to intervene are
     beyond the scope of this report, below you can also find some examples of already
     implemented interventions. Because children in developing countries are exposed to
     multiple risks to brain development at once, it is very unlikely that a single-factor
     intervention will solve the issue of suboptimal brain development with its life-course
     consequences; rather, multi-factor interventions incorporating the features of
     behavioral change might produce the expected results (Aboud & Yousafzai, 2015).




Stress

The brain is the key organ of vulnerability and resilience to stressful life events across the
life-course. According to McEwen & Gianaros, “stress-related processes [are] embedded within
the social environment and embodied within the brain” (McEwen, Gianaros 2010). The brain
determines what is threatening, regulates reactivity to physical and psychological stress and the
underlying biological insults. Importantly, poverty and disadvantaged socio-economic
circumstances lead to stress and this relationship is causal (Chemin, De Laat & Haushofer 2013).
Early SES-associated stress and its physiological consequences starting in utero has been
implicated as a potential biological mechanism by which children from households of lower SES
tend to perform poorly in comparison to children from households of higher SES. Importantly,
children in low- and middle- income countries are especially at risk because the combination of
socioeconomic, psychosocial and physical “stressors” in poor resource settings is multifactorial and
very complex in nature. The brain mechanisms behind this association are just being discovered.

The field of health neuroscience brings us closer to the brain-dependent mechanisms associated
with response to stress in face of socioeconomic circumstances. It is hypothesized that lower
socioeconomic position associated with adverse and stressful environments as well as socio-
psychological hardship (challenges of daily living, uncertainties of future prospects, and possibly
social exclusion, marginalization and internalized states of demoralization) acts via the




                                                                                                       32
dysregulation of brain systems supporting emotional/social information processing and regulating
functions associated with disease processes (Gianaros, Manuck 2010).

The biological mechanisms underpinning responses to prolonged so-called “toxic” stress
in early childhood impairs the architecture of the developing brain with its life-long
consequences (National 2014). Toxic stress is the most dangerous form of stress; it refers to
stress responses whereby strong, frequent or prolonged sources of stress (e.g. child abuse or
neglect, parental substance abuse, or maternal depression) are not balanced by supportive and
adult relationships (Shonkoff et al. 2012). Within the life-course perspective, early-life stressors
such as low childhood socioeconomic status and its facets may interact with genetic differences in
abilities to affect the protective mechanisms of the limbic brain areas (McEwen, Gianaros 2010).
Animal models have shown that even acute forms of prenatal stress experienced by the fetus
(maternal stress) contribute to life-long dysfunctions in brain stress regulatory mechanisms
involving hypothalamus (McEwen, Gianaros 2010). Therefore SES risk factors in early-life may
determine vulnerability to stress even later in life; adult SES may interact with genetic individual
difference to impact maturation and aging of the limbic brain areas.

It has been showed that amygdala controlled by prefrontal mechanisms and the activity of
serotonin-releasing neurons (serotonin is a type of neurotransmitters) constitutes an essential
“emotional” pathway in the embodiment of socioeconomic factors by the brain, especially in the
context of stress responses dysregulation (Gianaros et al. 2008). For example, Kim and her
colleagues examined the relationship between childhood poverty and neural activity during effortful
attempts to regulate negative emotions (Kim et al. 2013). They showed that lower family income at
age 9 was associated with reduced PFC activity and failure to suppress amygdala activation in
young adulthood; this effect was mediated by the experience of chronic stress across childhood
but not by the concurrent adult income. The detected association provides additional evidence
for chronic stress mechanisms being involved in neural embedding of childhood poverty.




     Box 10: Stress – Examples of Interventions:

     The availability of positive experiences (protective factors) help the brain grow and thrive
     across the life-course; the presence of negative experiences (risk factors) hurt brain
     development and impede a child’s ability to flourish into a successful adult. Therefore
     reducing stress reactions in young children is essential for optimal brain development
     (Denboba, Sayre & Wodon 2014).

     Example 1:

     Exposure to violence has been identified as one of the priority risk factors for early
     childhood development in developing countries (Walker et al. 2011). Violence-
     prevention programs can reduce stress reactions in early childhood with the effect size
     from 0.56 to 0.91 (Walker et al. 2011). It has been shown that improving institutional
     environment of non-parental group residential care can lead to increased cognitive and
     socio-emotional skills in children (Denboba, Sayre & Wodon 2014).




                                                                                                       33
Nutrition

The brain is “an energy expensive organ” – it accounts for 2 percent of an adult body weight but
consumes 20 percent of the resting metabolism (Paus et al. 2010). Inadequate levels of energy
supply in early years might reduce neural activity and the overall development (Aboud, Yousafzai
2015). This is why adequate, rich in micronutrients and balanced diet is essential for proper
brain development. Child undernutrition can take different forms including stunting (low length or
height for age), wasting (low weight for length or height), underweight (low weight for age) and
deficiencies of micronutrients (vitamins and minerals) (Victora et al. 2010). Using the new World
Health Organization (WHO) standards, Victora et al. (2010) described child growth patterns across
54 countries and concluded that early growth faltering of children in low- and middle-income
countries is even faster and more alarming than currently assumed. The results brought to light
new evidence because the WHO standards provided more precise references than previously
(Victora et al. 2010). Multiple forms of child undernutrition have been associated with impaired brain
outcomes across the life-course.

A third of children below age of 5 years in developing countries are stunned or have linear
growth retardation (Walker et al. 2007). Stunting represents a range of biological and
psychosocial risks and therefore has been identified as one of the indicators of poor development.
Stunting, a form of growth failure, starts in utero or soon after birth; even though a catch-up growth
might follow in the first two years of life, stunned children usually remain shorter for their age
through to adulthood (Walker et al. 2007). Many prospective cohort studies indicate consistent and
a robust finding of a significant relationship between stunting by age 2 or 3 and broadly defined
childhood cognitive abilities, school enrollment/progress/attainment/performance after controlling
for socio-economic covariates in low- and middle-income countries (Walker et al. 2007). A meta-
analysis performed on longitudinal studies including the data from Philippines, Jamaica, Peru,
Indonesia, Brazil and South Africa found that being moderately or severely stunted between ages
12 and 36 months (compared with not stunted) was associated with poorer cognitive functions with
effect size ranging from 0.4 to 1.05 (Walker et al. 2007); stunting was also associated with grades
attainment. In the context of socio-emotional development in young children, underweight and
stunting have been correlated with apathy, less positive affect, lower levels of play, more insecure
attachment, more problems with conduct and poorer social relationships at school age.

Intrauterine growth restriction in length is a major concern indicating a great need for
nutrition interventions among pregnant women and women in childbearing age (Victora et
al. 2010). Multiple studies have indicated that suboptimal intrauterine environments, such as
nutritional deprivation in the womb, are associated with cognitive and socio-emotional dysfunctions
in early-life. There is consistent evidence from middle- and low-income countries that intrauterine
growth restriction, mainly due to poor maternal nutrition and infections in developing countries, is
associated with developmental delays in early childhood (Walker et al. 2011). However, it is unclear
whether the negative effects of suboptimal environment in utero on the developing brain persist
into late-life and, to our knowledge, there are no studies from developing countries examining this
relationship.

Multiple studies have indicated that maternal nutritional deprivation in pregnancy impacts
the brain with long-lasting consequences. For example, studies framed as “tragic experiments
of opportunity” have investigated the immediate and long-term impact of wartime famine on
cognitive and socio-emotional functioning and its timing during gestation. The studies of individuals
who were born at the time of the Dutch Famine during World War II (*) and whose mothers lived
under 500 calories per day during pregnancy have shown that maternal starvation in early gestation
is associated with cognitive dysfunctions and antisocial personality disorders in mid-life and in early
adulthood respectively. Firstly, exposure to malnutrition in utero was associated with poorer
attention performance – a fluid aspect of cognitive abilities prone to decline with advancing age.
This relationship was also the strongest earlier in the pregnancy which is in accordance with the
fact that the structure of the central nervous system forms at the start of gestation. The effect has
been attributed to an accelerated cognitive aging process, although the effect of maternal stress



                                                                                                          34
rather than malnutrition per se cannot be ruled out (de Rooij et al. 2010). Such studies add to the
validity and extension of the Barker’s hypothetical framework (for additional information, see Box
11).




     Box 11: The Barker’s hypothesis has been suggested to account for the
     importance of the intrauterine environment on adult health.

     According to Barker’s hypothesis, in a low-nutrient intrauterine environment, the fetus
     adapts to these suboptimal conditions and programs its physiological and morphological
     states in anticipation of limited resources during development, a phenomenon called
     “phenotypic plasticity” (Barker, Eriksson, Forsen, & Osmond, 2002). In case a
     developing fetus ends up growing up in the world of plenty (a common phenomenon in
     many developing countries undergoing economic and epidemiologic transitions), there
     is a mismatch between the programmed mechanisms and the actual environment;
     “compensatory growth” takes place at the cost of chronic conditions in later-life such as
     obesity, cardiovascular diseases and type 2 diabetes with transgenerational
     consequences (Barker et al., 2002). This phenomenon has been framed “The
     Developmental Origins of Health and Disease” (DOHaD). In fact, the hypothesis of “The
     Developmental Origins of Health and Disease” (DOHaD) has been just recently
     extended to the fields of brain development and mental health and therefore termed
     “The Developmental Origins of Behaviour, Health, and Disease” (DOBHaD) ((Van den
     Bergh, 2011) and Tuovinen et al. 2012) and awaits further studies on the developmental
     programming of neurodegenerative diseases (Giussani, 2011).




It is unclear whether the relationship between suboptimal birth outcomes and brain
functions persists into late-life and, to our knowledge, there are no studies from developing
countries examining birth effects into late-life. A handful of studies conducted in Europe, here
UK and Finland, have shown respectively that 1) birth weight was associated with cognition in
childhood and maintained across adolescence but was only weakly associated with cognitive
functions at age 43 (verbal memory; speed and accuracy); those of lower birth weight were more
likely to have lower educational qualifications and this relationship was partly accounted for
cognitive abilities at age 8 (Richards et al. 2001); 2) those born late preterm had poorer episodic
memory performance than those born at term. Importantly, among those with lower educational
qualifications, late preterm birth was associated with lower performance on episodic memory,
executive function, visual reproduction tasks, general neurocognitive abilities and a higher risk for
mild cognitive impairment (MMSE-defined MCI). Among those with higher educational
qualifications, late preterm birth was not associated with neuropsychological tests. Collectively, late
preterm birth might constitute a novel risk factor for neurocognitive impairment even in late
adulthood and lifetime educational attainment may provide resilience to neurocognitive
dysfunctions (Heinonen et al. 2015). More evidence is needed to establish the long-term and
cumulative effects of suboptimal birth outcomes on cognitive and socio-emotional functioning
across the life-course globally.

It is generally established that the window of opportunity to preventing undernutrition is
contained within the first 1,000 days including pregnancy and the first 2 years of life (Victora
et al. 2010). A recent systematic review and meta-analysis concluded that nutrition interventions
with children ages 24 months and younger from developing countries have overall a relatively small
effect on cognitive and language development (Aboud, Yousafzai 2015). As suggested by the
authors, this overall effect might be attributed to several reasons; it is largely unknown: 1) whether
macronutrients (carbohydrates, protein and fats) are necessary along with micronutrients; 2) what



                                                                                                          35
type and dose of micronutrients should be combined for best effects; 3) whether only deficient
children should be subject to nutrition interventions. Potentially the solution is to integrate
macronutrients, micronutrients, and nutrition education within the interventions. Nutrition education
by itself is not likely to solve the issue in poor areas with high malnutrition (Aboud, Yousafzai 2015).
More research is required to identify what nutrition interventions are most effective and how to
ensure that investments in early-life nutrition persist into later-life.

A number of recent high quality studies highlight the detrimental effects of early
malnutrition on later-life outcomes. New evidence includes reduced likelihood of formal
employment at age 20-22 in the Philippines and lower psychological functioning in adolescence in
Jamaica (Walker et al. 2011). Two recent analyses based on the Barbados Nutrition Study (BNS)
showed that an episode of moderate to severe malnutrition within the first year of life results in
neuropsychological deficits and impaired IQ in mid-life (Waber et al. 2014). This was the case even
among individuals of normal birth weight who had achieved complete catch-up growth and had
been subject to nutritional rehabilitation, emphasizing the critical role of adequate nutrition in the
first months. Importantly, a recent and comprehensive review investigating the long term effects of
stunting in childhood concluded that nutrition interventions implemented early in life in developing
countries might have beneficial and sustained effects on brain outcomes provided that nutrition
interventions are in place throughout and beyond the first 1,000 days (Tanner, Candland & Odden
2015).




     Box 12: Nutrition – Examples of Interventions:

     Example 1: IN BANGLADESH, 61 million children suffer from malnutrition. Malnutrition
     leads to child stunting and impaired brain development. About two fifths of the children
     younger than five years old have stunted growth; about half of the two-year-olds are well
     below international height standards and about a third are severely underweight. Most
     Bangladeshi children do not receive early stimulation and learning opportunities. In this
     challenging context, researchers are studying the impact of a low-cost program that
     combines nutrition and stimulation for children under the age of three and their mothers.
     The results of this intervention will add to the growing body of evidence on how to most
     effectively improve children’s physical and brain development.
     http://www.worldbank.org/en/programs/sief-trust-fund/brief/building-parental-capacity-
     to-help-child-nutrition-and-health




                                                                                                           36
The assessment of brain structure and functioning along with behavioral measures to
evaluate development might bring us closer to the question of when and how to design an
effective nutrition intervention (Aboud, Yousafzai 2015). So far there are only few studies on
neuroimaging and electrophysiological correlates of undernutrition in early life that could bring us
closer to the identification of implicated neural pathways and more exact timing for optimal
interventions. For example, in a very interesting study of high-school graduates in Chile aged 18
years from a low socioeconomic stratum, the group who had experienced severe undernutrition
during the first year of life was compared to the group with no past history of undernutrition (Ivanovic
et al. 2000). The main outcomes of interests included brain structure quantified with the use of MRI
imaging (see Box 5), verbal & non-verbal IQ, and school achievement (Spanish language and
mathematics tests). The results indicated that the severely undernourished group had significantly
lower birth weight, head circumference, IQ scores as well as aptitude test scores on all domains
compared with the control group. They also had significantly lower absolute brain volume but the
group differences within the corpus callosum subdomains, although lower in the disadvantaged
group, were mostly insignificant. The study was based on a very small sample size and was to
some extent exploratory in nature. However, it provides us with some insights into adolescence
brain’s structural and cognitive disparities according to nutritional status in the first year of life in
already socio-economically disadvantaged high-school graduates.

Importantly, recent advances in an imaging technique called functional near infrared spectroscopy
(fNIRS) (see Box 13) provide new capabilities for studying longitudinal functional brain development
from birth, identifying early risk factors and assessing nutritional interventions (Jackson, Kennedy
2013). A recent piloted work among four to eight month old infants from the West Kiang District in
Gambia, where agriculture is predominantly subsistence, replicated the patterns of selective cortical
activation to adults performing social movements among UK infants of similar age (Lloyd-Fox et al.
2014). Importantly, fNIRS is relatively cheap and portable and therefore suitable for field-based
neuroimaging research of cognitive development in infants and children in resource-poor rural
settings (Lloyd-Fox et al. 2014).




     Box 13: Brain functional near infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS)

     Functional near infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS) is a non-invasive optical imaging
     technique which measures oxygenation changes in the brain resulting from neural
     activity in a response to external stimuli (Jackson, Kennedy 2013) such as visual,
     auditory, olfactory, and motor stimulation (Blasi et al. 2007). This indicates the activity
     level of different neural pathways and brain regions involved in basic as well as more
     complex cognitive functions (Blasi et al. 2007) such as object processing, social
     communication, human action and face processing (Lloyd-Fox et al. 2014). The
     technique is useful for studying longitudinal functional brain development from birth and
     developmental disorders (Lloyd-Fox et al. 2014). It is also a promising tool for
     identifying protective and risk factors for early childhood development (Lloyd-Fox et al.
     2014) and for assessing nutritional interventions (Jackson, Kennedy 2013). fNIRS is
     non-invasive, affordable and portable (Blasi et al. 2007).




                                                                                                            37
Early-life Stimulation

The scientific community across multiple fields has acknowledged that direct care-givers within a
family have the greatest influence on child cognitive and socio-emotional development (Heckman
2006). As already indicated, the family and the caregiving environment constitute a micro-system
directly influencing child development via frequent interactions and activities. In the first years of
life, the brain needs supporting and nurturing environments that give rise to high-quality positive
experiences for optimal development to occur. When the developing brain is deprived of high
quality stimulation, brain structure and function are compromised. In a high quality meta-analysis,
Tanner et al. (2015) has indicated that early-stimulation interventions implemented in
developing countries had the greatest causal and consistent positive effect over the
spectrum of later-life cognitive outcomes (Tanner, Candland & Odden 2015). To make the
argument even stronger, Aboud and Yousafzai (2015) showed that psychosocial stimulation
interventions had a medium effect on cognitive and language development compared to the
relatively small effect of nutrition interventions on cognitive and language development;
interventions aimed at improving situation at home have been especially successful, although
group sessions, home and clinic visits have been beneficial as well (Aboud, Yousafzai 2015).

Based on the example of the Bucharest Early Intervention Project, institutionalized children who
were randomized to be placed into foster care homes displayed gains in IQ scores at 8 years of
age relative to children who remained institutionalized and experienced severe psychosocial
deprivation. These effects were strongest for those children who remained with their intervention
family and were present even among children who no longer stayed with the foster family at the
time of assessment. Importantly, children assigned to the intervention group received greater
stimulation than children who remained institutionalized. The foster parents were educated on early
childhood development and encouraged to develop responsive care and high quality relationships
with their child. See Box 14 for examples of possible interventions involving early stimulation.



     Box 14: Early-life Stimulation – Examples of Interventions:

     Example 1: IN KENYA, researchers are studying the impact of a program that
     distributes storybooks to poor households to see whether this helps improve children’s
     readiness to succeed in primary school. Looking at pictures and reading helps stimulate
     visual and cognitive development.
     http://www.worldbank.org/en/programs/sief-trust-fund/brief/kenya-emerge-reading

     Example 2: IN BANGLADESH, researchers are studying the impact of a program that
     gives mothers and fathers information and encouragement on how to improve their
     children’s development by playing, singing and talking to their babies and toddlers.
     Playing and singing to young children helps their brains develop and builds positive
     bonds between parents and their children.
     http://www.worldbank.org/en/programs/sief-trust-fund/brief/building-parental-capacity-
     to-help-child-nutrition-and-health

     Example 3: IN COLOMBIA, a pilot program sought to improve children’s brain
     development by showing caregivers how to stimulate the children using play and talk.
     The first follow-up survey in 2011 showed that the stimulation led to gains in children’s
     cognitive development and in receptive language skills (which refers to the ability to
     understand and process what one hears or reads). Researchers are now doing a two-
     year follow up to see if the gains have been sustained, which will help policymakers and
     development experts around the world improve the design of cost-effective and scalable
     strategies for successful early childhood development programs.
     http://www.worldbank.org/en/programs/sief-trust-fund/brief/does-a-home-visiting-
     program-in-early-childhood-have-sustained-effects-on-development-two-years-after-it-
     ends


                                                                                                         38
            POLICY INSTRUMENTS FROM A LIFE-COURSE PERSPECTIVE

Education

Education is one of the established protective factors contributing to cognitive reserve (CR)
across the life-course. The majority of studies conclude that education (mostly measured as years
of education or educational attainment) provides reserve against age-associated brain pathology
may delay the onset of dementia. However, the mechanisms of this relationship are less clear.
Further research is required to examine under what conditions education is protective and what
specific features of education, including the quality of education, might provide greater CR.

While education is a powerful determinant of brain resilience across the life-course, substantial
gender gaps in education remain globally as indicated in The World Bank’s 2012 World
Development Report on Gender Equality and Development (Wong 2012). Importantly, as
highlighted in the very recent report titled “Women and Dementia - A global research review”,
dementia disproportionately affects women across the world (Erol, Brooker & Peel 2015). More
women than men develop the disease and are carers of individuals with dementia. In addition,
nearly 60 percent of dementia cases live in low- and middle-income countries.Unsurprisingly then,
gender disparities in educational opportunities might contribute to gender disparities in
cognitive impairments and dementia outcomes.

For example, a recent study among elderly participants in central Nigeria reported that any primary
education was protective against dementia and being a female was one of the major risks for
developing dementia (Ochayi, Thacher 2006). Simultaneously, women in the study had lower
educational attainment than men - this raises the possibility that gender differences in education
partially explain the higher prevalence of dementia among women. At this time the evidence is only
suggestive and requires substantial investigation. The notion of gender disparities within the
concept of CR has not been sufficiently explored even in the countries such as the USA and UK
where most of the relevant research takes place. To our knowledge, the concept of CR with a
quantification of brain pathology has not been performed in any middle- or low-income country thus
far; nor the issue of gender disparities. Ideally, such research would feature life-course
determinants of CR including early childhood development factors. These efforts are especially
important in the context of gender disparities in educational as well as occupational opportunities
across the globe (Hausmann 2014).




     Box 15: Education – Examples of Interventions:

     Despite tremendous gains in access to education in recent years, millions of children
     still do not attend school and substantial gender gaps remain requiring immediate
     attention and action (King, 2011).

     Example 1: Uganda is experiencing high population growth which means that an
     increasing number of children need to be placed in schools – currently 8 percent of
     children are out of school. The government of Uganda wants to ensure that all children
     attend school. However, the education sector is constrained by multiple challenges
     including a high level of teacher and student absenteeism, weak school level
     management structures, inadequate availability of learning materials, and large class
     sizes. The Uganda ministry of education is currently implementing a program funded by
     the Global Partnership for Education. As part of this program, the main goal is to
     strengthen the school system by increasing teachers and school effectiveness which in
     turn is hoped to improve learning outcomes in general.
     http://www.globalpartnership.org/blog/uganda-wants-reach-all-out-school-children




                                                                                                      39
Job-relevant Skills

The development of job relevant skills, identified as the prerequisites for individual’s
occupational growth and growth of global economies at large, is a life-course journey.
Importantly, the brain developed to its full potential is a prerequisite for the development of job-
relevant skills. The net effect of positive and negative early-life experiences on the developing brain
and their accumulating impact over the life-course shapes the development of complex cognitive and
socio-emotional functions. Strong cognitive and socio-emotional functioning are the prerequisite for
acquisition and development of job-relevant skills (Banerji et al. 2010) and thus entry into better
jobs and healthier environments.

In the context of cognitive reserve (CR), some of the life-course determinants of job-relevant
skills provide our brains with resilience to adversities. These are: greater childhood cognitive ability
(shaped by early childhood environment), higher education, more complex occupations (Staff et al.
2004b) relying on technological advancements, and resilient personalities. Also within this
framework, keeping individuals in quality occupations for longer is not only beneficial for economic
growth but for healthy brain aging. Occupations which challenge the brain in later-life maintain
structure and function of the brain. Overall, the “STEP Skills Measurement” framework (Banerji et
al. 2010) reflects features of the developing brain and its importance in job-relevant skills formation
(see Figure 5).

Figure 5: Many of the life-course determinants of cognitive reserve (CR) are mapped onto to
the “STEP Skills Measurement” framework (Banerji et al. 2010).




                                                Occupation               Resilient
    Childhood             Education
                                                    &                   personality
   intelligence
                                                   SES


  Source: The main figure in (Banerji et al. 2010). The bottom part of the figure: Author.




                                                                                                           40
Job-relevant skills determine the nature of employment which in turn impact brain structure
and function in later-life. Occupational characteristics mitigate against the negative influences of
neuropathology in non-demented (Staff et al. 2004a) as well as demented populations (Garibotto
et al. 2008). Multiple studies suggest beneficial effects of occupational activities on cognitive
performance in advanced age. For example, (Adam et al. 2013) showed that professionally active
individuals scored much higher on cognitive tests than their never-employed or retired counterparts.
Also, greater occupational complexity (Andel et al. 2007) and more job control (Andel et al. 2011)
predicted higher summary cognitive scores. Furthermore, lower odds for developing cognitive
impairment are associated with superior occupational positions within a social class hierarchy (LI,
WU & SUNG 2002) as well as more complex (Andel et al. 2007), more mentally demanding
(Dartigues et al. 1992), and more active jobs characterized by high control/high demands (Andel et
al. 2011).



     Box 16: Job Stimulating Environment – Examples of Interventions:

     Example 1: Job re-design as a potential approach to address socio-economic
     disparities in health and brain outcomes.

     In late 90s, Volvo replaced a more traditional assembly line with a more flexible work
     organization (Melin, Lundberg, Söderlund, & Granqvist, 1999). The former one was
     characterized by fixed work stations organized as a chain and involved short repetitive
     work cycles; the latter one included small autonomous groups whose members had the
     opportunity to influence the pace and work activities. By introducing the more flexible
     work organization, the aim was to increase the amount of control and social interactions
     between workers, to decrease the monotony of the traditional assembly line work and
     to keep the production level constant.

     Workers assigned to the more flexible group reported significantly more variation,
     independence and abilities to learn new skills at work. Workers at the traditional
     assembly line had significantly increased various stress indicators including systolic
     blood pressure, heart rate and the levels of adrenaline (“stress hormone”) during the
     work shifts. In summary, activities performed at the flexible work organization were less
     stressful and overall more beneficial, especially among female workers. Although the
     direct effects of this intervention on the brain were not measured, beneficial effects on
     brain functions and structure are plausible.

     Example 2: In the Dominican Republic, the government is offering classroom-based
     vocational and life skills training, combined with on-the-job internships, for at-risk youth
     ages 16-29 living in the poorest areas. Results from a rigorous impact evaluation
     showed that the graduates had higher chances of acquiring a formal job and a larger
     income, particularly among women. At 12-18 months after completion of the program,
     female participants were more likely to be employed, earn more and find satisfaction in
     their work compared to those in a control group.
     http://www.worldbank.org/en/results/2014/04/08/more-promising-future-poor-youth-
     dominican-republic
     http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/socialprotectionlabor/brief/skills-for-jobs




                                                                                                       41
CONCLUSIONS AND POLICY IMPLICATIONS
“Human development” and “development” are inseparable, and now new evidence emerges
that “brain development” is the key driving mechanism behind this association. As many
low- and middle-income countries are entering the trajectory of economic growth, early childhood
interventions should move away from the philosophy of “survival” to “thriving” and recognize the
importance of the developing brain. The brain, the source of our cognition and emotions, is arguably
the most essential organ in the human body and the key feature of early childhood development.
Brain complexity programmed in a person’s early-life gives rise to cognitive and socio-emotional
functions which fuse together to form skills acquired across the life-course. Achieving the brain’s
full developmental potential is crucial for a lifetime of individual and societal well-being and success.

Early childhood development does not occur within a vacuum; this complex process is
influenced by the interplay between individual characteristics, biological forces, family and class
dynamics imbedded within broader historical, socio-cultural and economic circumstances and other
environmental factors. Positive and negative experiences in early-life affect childhood development
through changes in brain structure and function. The experiences affecting function and structure
of the brain across the life-course emerge from a social world - therefore many of the environmental
factors affecting the brain are potentially modifiable and could be a target for interventions. The
brain needs supporting and nurturing environments that give rise to positive experiences for optimal
development to occur. A healthy and active brain, shaped by adequate nutrition and safe and
enriching environments in early-life, enables retention of brain functioning across the lifespan and
healthy brain aging.

Adverse environments and socio-psychological hardship associated with poverty or
disadvantaged socio-economic circumstances are the source of stress having a detrimental
impact on a child’s developing brain. Understanding the neural mechanisms of early-life socio-
economic disparities in brain function is crucial for the design of effective and scalable early
interventions. However, this research is just in its infancy. Early-life socio-economic disparities
affect multiple brain functions that are important for school readiness skills including language,
working memory, cognitive control (executive functions), mental flexibility, and self-regulation. The
resulting socioeconomic differences in neural development and brain functioning begin to emerge
already in infancy; if no intervention is provided at the right point in time, they persist and even
widen with increasing age. Although mechanisms of brain recovery upon early interventions are
complex, there is “clear evidence” that protective early-life factors (or removal of risk factors) can
positively impact the brain and ameliorate adverse outcomes (Bick et al. 2015).

On the positive side, the brain is capable of developing resilience mechanisms even to
severe early-life neglect if provided with the opportunity to continue development in caring
and enriching environments. Generally, because of the brain’s decreasing malleability across
the life-course, the earlier sustained positive experiences impact the brain, the better for the brain.
The associations between socio-economic circumstances and brain structure and function could
emerge from the differences in prenatal environment (maternal health) as well as postnatal
experiences or exposures: (family) stress, cognitive stimulation, and nutrition. All of these factors
could constitute potential targets for interventions.

Development and aging are part of a continuum. An increasing number of countries face the
challenge of aging societies associated with the burden of impairments on individuals, health care
providers, society and the states. The developing countries are being affected the most. Identifying
vulnerable groups, potential interventions and the “windows of opportunities” when these are best
applied are becoming urgent priorities as populations across the globe age. Recent high quality
studies involving brain imaging have shown that those from the most disadvantaged backgrounds,
who will have potentially greatest brain developmental delays and greater brain pathology in late-
life, need the early-life investment most. Special attention and early-life investment should be also
directed at children growing up in institutional settings.




                                                                                                            42
The maximum brain development should be sustained with life-course investments and
equal opportunities for highest returns. Many of the qualities of brain resilience to biological and
social factors are shaped in early life when the brain is most plastic. However, the window of
opportunity is not confined to early childhood. Brain development is cumulative and continues
through childhood and adolescence. These changes are as important as the ones that occur before
age 3 offering multiple opportunities for interventions in later stages of development when more
complex cognitive and socio-emotional functions are shaped. With the appropriate investments
extending beyond early-life resilience can be sustained across the lifespan. The matter is not only
biological but also social in nature – life-course factors such as early-life cognitive ability (which
determines maximum life-time cognition), greater educational attainment, job-relevant skills and
more complex occupations provide individuals with resilience to brain declines associated with
aging. Brain development across the life-course calls for neuroscience-informed interventions to
increase the chances for brain’s recovery and boost the brain’s resilience to future insults. High
quality impact evaluations of such interventions are needed to determine what interventions work
best, when and in what context.



     Box 17: Key messages:

         1) Positive and negative experiences in early-life affect childhood development
            through changes in brain structure and function. A healthy and active brain,
            shaped by adequate nutrition and safe and enriching environments starting in
            utero, enables retention of brain functioning across the lifespan and healthy
            brain aging.

         2) Brain complexity programmed in a person’s early-life gives rise to cognitive and
            socio-emotional functions which fuse together to form skills acquired across the
            life-course. Cognitive and socio-emotional functions complement each other; it
            is thus important to ensure that interventions targeting human development and
            skills acquisition are holistic and target both cognitive and socio-emotional
            domains.

         3) Brain systems affected by early-life socioeconomic adversities play a critical role
            in domains important for children’s school readiness skills. The resulting
            socioeconomic differences in neural development and brain functioning begin to
            emerge already in infancy; if no intervention is provided at the right point in time,
            they persist and even widen with increasing age. Generally, because of the
            brain’s decreasing malleability across the life-course, the earlier sustained and
            high quality experiences impact the brain, the better for the brain.

         4) Many of the qualities of brain resilience to biological and social factors are
            shaped in early life when the brain is most plastic. With the appropriate
            investments extending beyond early-life for example, in quality education and
            jobs, resilience can be sustained across the life-course. Therefore the maximum
            brain development should be sustained with life-course investments and equal
            opportunities for highest returns.

         5) Everyone deserves a good head-start and the attainment of optimal brain
            development to become resilient to potential mid-life adversities and aging
            process. Individuals from the most disadvantaged backgrounds, who will have
            greatest developmental delays and brain burden, need the early-life investment
            the most.

         6) Because children in developing countries are exposed to multiple risks to brain
            development at once, it is very unlikely that a single-factor intervention will solve
            the issue of suboptimal brain development with its life-course consequences;
            rather, multi-factor interventions incorporating the features of behavioral change
            might produce the expected results (Aboud & Yousafzai, 2015).
                                                                                                         43
It is important to ensure that interventions targeting skills acquisition and development
across the lifespan are holistic and target both cognitive and socio-emotional domains.
Some components of brain function remain resilient to aging processes or even improve with time
but the other have a tendency to decline. While it makes sense to recognize these brain shifts in
order to design appropriate labor market strategies among currently aging populations across the
world, let’s not rely only on skills that remain intact or even improve with time. Not only due to the
complementary nature of cognitive and socio-emotional skills but also because the fluid aspects of
cognition are sensitive to aging processes. There is evidence that complex brain tasks such as
social interactions (Ybarra et al. 2008) have a positive effect on cognitive aging. Also, interventions
directed at cognitive domains may change personality traits such as openness to experience
(Jackson et al. 2012) leading to an active and engaged lifestyle (Hogan et al. 2012). Keeping these
findings in mind, how about designing an intervention directed specifically at job skills acquisition?
Such holistic approach might bring not only job market returns but also savings in other sectors
such as healthcare due to high costs associated with dementia management.

As the costs of neuroimaging falls, future rigorous evaluations of interventions targeting
skills development could incorporate measurement of brain functioning and structure.
Imaging techniques are useful for studying longitudinal structural and functional brain development
from birth and for developmental disorders (Lloyd-Fox et al. 2014). They are also promising tools
for identifying protective and risk factors for early childhood development (Lloyd-Fox et al. 2014).
Some of the new technologies are relatively cheap and portable and therefore suitable for field-
based neuroimaging research of brain development in infants and children in resource-poor rural
settings (Lloyd-Fox et al. 2014). Importantly, existing behavioral paradigms and the well-
established assessment tools designed to measure cognitive and socio-emotional functioning can
only detect the impact of environmental factors once they reach the threshold for observable deficits
(Lloyd-Fox et al. 2014). Imaging techniques are more culturally-neutral markers for brain outcomes
and their adaptation as well as standardization are more straight-forward than for the more
conventional tools, therefore may play a pivotal role in informing targeted early intervention
strategies (Lloyd-Fox et al. 2014).

With the rapid advancement of current technologies, the promising call for utilizing brain
biomarkers for the assessment of ECD educational and nutritional interventions is very
recent and awaits further actions (Pavlakis et al. 2015) (Noble, Farah 2013) (Lloyd-Fox et al.
2014). Performing neuroimaging (or electrophysiology) in parallel to ECD cognitive and socio-
emotional tests would allow us to better understand interventions (e.g. educational programs) and
their efficacy in children with the potentially sustained effects across the life-course (Pavlakis et al.
2015) (Lloyd-Fox et al. 2014). Because some neurobiologic correlates of socioeconomic disparities
are already known, imaging and/or electrophysiology methods could be applied after
implementation of a specific early intervention designed to reduce SES disparities.

While our interdisciplinary knowledge in this area has grown substantially in recent years,
important gaps remain. Much of what we know about brain’s resilience is based on participants
from high income countries. We know very little about the effects of poverty on the developing brain
structure and function in low-resource settings, although some exciting initiatives are starting. Even
less is known about brain development in fragile states and conflict areas. It is challenging to
identify scalable low-cost approaches in culturally diverse context to eliminate the disparities in
brain development. These efforts demand out-of-the-box solutions and will require collaboration
across multiple disciplines and sectors. Also, there are virtually no randomized control design
studies performed within the context of cognitive reserve involving quantification of brain burden.
Most of the associations are correlational while there are opportunities to accommodate
interventions as part of the high quality UK population cohort data 1 such as Aberdeen Children of
the 1950s 2. Evaluations of interventions targeting cognitive and socio-emotional skills development

1   http://www.mrc.ac.uk/research/facilities/cohort-directory/
2   http://www.abdn.ac.uk/birth-cohorts/1950s/




                                                                                                            44
might be a possibility. Are grit and psycho-social resilience only relevant when some base for
cognitive and socio-emotional abilities is achieved? Are the reserve processes at work when the
brain is exposed to extreme forms of poverty? Does early-life resilience to adversities come at a
cost in later life (Kuh et al. 2003)? These answers can greatly enhance our ability to carry out cost-
effective policies to eliminate extreme poverty and improve shared prosperity. Everyone deserves
a good head-start and the attainment of optimal brain development to become resilient to potential
mid-life adversities and aging process.




     Box 18: Future perspectives:

         1) Much of what we know about brain’s resilience is based on participants from
            high income countries. We know very little about the effects of poverty on the
            developing brain structure and function in low-resource settings. Even less is
            known about brain development in fragile states and conflict areas. These
            questions are important to identify interventions which are feasible in low-
            resource and conflict settings.

         2) It is challenging to identify scalable low-cost approaches in culturally diverse
            context to eliminate the disparities in brain development. These efforts demand
            out-of-the-box solutions and will require collaboration across multiple disciplines
            and sectors.

         3) As the costs of neuroimaging and other modalities falls, future rigorous quality
            assessment and evaluations of interventions targeting skills development could
            incorporate measurement of brain functioning and structure. Performing
            neuroimaging (or electrophysiology) in parallel to cognitive and socio-emotional
            tests would allow us to better understand interventions (e.g. educational
            programs) and their efficacy in children (and the potentially sustained effects
            across the life-course). The call for utilizing brain biomarkers for the assessment
            of ECD interventions is very recent (Pavlakis et al. 2015, Noble and Farah 2013)
            and awaits further actions. These answers can greatly enhance our ability to
            carry out cost-effective policies to eliminate extreme poverty and improve shared
            prosperity.

         4) The life-course theory acknowledges biological and socio-cultural turning points
            in life as windows of opportunity for interventions. The window of opportunity is
            not confined to early childhood. The brain, although to a lesser extent, remains
            malleable across the life-course. More evidence from brain sciences is needed
            to determine specific timing of interventions to increase the chances for brain’s
            recovery and/or boost the brain’s resilience to future insults.

         5) Most of the associations are correlational while there are opportunities to
            accommodate interventions as part of the already existing high quality
            population cohorts. Evaluations of interventions targeting cognitive and socio-
            emotional skills development might be a possibility.




                                                                                                         45
                                   REFERENCES

Aboud, F. E. and A, K, Yousafzai. 2015. "Global Health and Development in Early
     Childhood." Annual Review of Psychology, vol. 66, pp. 433-457.
Adam, S., E. Bonsang, C. Grotz, and S. Perelman. 2013. "Occupational Activity and
     Cognitive Reserve: Implications in Terms of Prevention of Cognitive Aging and
     Alzheimer's Disease." Clinical Interventions in Aging. vol. 8, pp. 377-390.
Andel, R., M. Crowe, I. Kareholt, J. Wastesson and M. G. Parker. 2011. "Indicators of
     Job Strain at Midlife and Cognitive Functioning in Advanced Old Age." The
     Journals of Gerontology. Series B, Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences. vol.
     66, no. 3, pp. 287-291.
Andel, R., I. Kareholt, M. G Parker, M. Thorslund and M. Gatz. 2007. "Complexity of
     Primary Lifetime Occupation and Cognition in Advanced Old Age." Journal of
     Aging and Health, vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 397-415.
Banerji, A., W. Cunningham, A. Fiszbein, E. King, H. Patrinos, D. Robalino, and J. Tan.
     2010. Stepping Up Skills: For More Jobs and Higher Productivity, World Bank.
Bartley, A.J., D. W. Jones and D. R. Weinberger. 1997. "Genetic Variability of Human
     Brain Size and Cortical Gyral Patterns." Brain: A Journal of Neurology, vol. 120 ( Pt
     2), no. Pt 2, pp. 257-269.
Bick, J. and C. A. Nelson. 2016. "Early Adverse Experiences and the Developing Brain."
     Neuropsychopharmacology: Official Publication of the American College of
     Neuropsychopharmacology, vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 177-196.
Bick, J., T. Zhu, C. Stamoulis, N. A. Fox, C. Zeanah and C. A. Nelson. 2015. "Effect of
     Early Institutionalization and Foster Care on Long-term White Matter Development:
     A Randomized Clinical Trial." JAMA Pediatrics, vol. 169, no. 3, pp. 211-219.
Boyden, J., S. Dercon and A. Singh. 2014. "Child Development in a Changing World:
     Risks and Opportunities." The World Bank Research Observer.
Brito, N. H and K. G. Noble. 2014, "Socioeconomic Status and Structural Brain
     Development." Frontiers in Neuroscience, vol. 8, pp. 276.
Camerer, C., G. Loewenstein and D. Prelec. 2005. "Neuroeconomics: How Neuroscience
     can Inform Economics." Journal of Economic Literature, pp. 9-64.
Chemin, M., J. De Laat and J. Haushofer. 2013. "Negative Rainfall Shocks Increase
     Levels of the Stress Hormone Cortisol Among Poor Farmers in Kenya." Available at
     SSRN 2294171.
Dartigues, J., M. Gagnon, L. Letenneur, P. Barberger-Gateau, D. Commenges, M.
     Evaldre and R. Salamon. 1992. "Principal Lifetime Occupation and Cognitive
     Impairment in a French Elderly Cohort (Paquid)." American Journal of
     Epidemiology, vol. 135, no. 9, pp. 981-988.
Deary, I. J., J. Corley, A. J. Gow, S. E. Harris, L. M. Houlihan, R. E. Marioni, L. Penke,
     S. B. Rafnsson and J. M. Starr. 2009. "Age-associated Cognitive Decline." British
     Medical Bulletin, vol. 92, pp. 135-152.
Deary, I. J., L. Penke, and W. Johnson. 2010. "The Neuroscience of Human Intelligence
     Differences." Nature Reviews. Neuroscience, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 201-211.




                                                                                             46
Double, K. L., S. Reyes, E. L. Werry and G. M. Halliday. 2010. "Selective Cell Death in
     Neurodegeneration: Why are Some Neurons Spared in Vulnerable Regions?"
     Progress in Neurobiology, vol. 92, no. 3, pp. 316-329.
Duckworth, A. L., C. Peterson, M. D. Matthews, and D. R. Kelly. 2007. "Grit:
     Perseverance and Passion for Long-term Goals." Journal of Personality and Social
     Psychology, vol. 92, no. 6, pp. 1087-1101.
Erol, R., D. Brookerand E. Peel. 2015. "Women and Dementia: A Global Research
     Review."
Farmer, P. E., B. Nizeye, S. Stulacand S. Keshavjee. 2006. "Structural Violence and
     Clinical Medicine." PLoS Medicine, vol. 3, no. 10, pp. e449.
Fernald, A., V. A. Marchman, and A. Weisleder. 2013. "SES S
Differences in Language Processing Skill and Vocabulary are Evident at 18 Months."
     Developmental Science. vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 234-248.
Fernald, L.C., A. Weber, E. Galasso and L. Ratsifandrihamanana. 2011. "Socioeconomic
     Gradients and Child Development in a Very Low Income Population: Evidence from
     Madagascar." Developmental Science, vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 832-847.
Garibotto, V., B. Borroni, E. Kalbe, K. Herholz, E. Salmon, V. Holtoff S. Sorbi, S. F.
     Cappa, A. Padovani, F. Fazio, Perani, D. 2008. "Education and Occupation as
     Proxies for Reserve in a MCI Converters and AD: FDG-PET Evidence." Neurology,
     vol. 71, no. 17, pp. 1342-1349.
Gazzaniga, M. S., K. W. Doron and C. M. Funk. 2009. "Looking Toward the Future:
     Perspectives on Examining the Architecture and Function of the Human Brain as a
     Complex System." in The Cognitive Neurosciences, ed. M.S. Gazzaniga, 4th ed. edn,
     MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., pp. 1247-1254.
Gazzaniga, M. S., R. B. Ivry G. R. Mangun. 2009. Cognitive Neuroscience: The Bbiology
     of the Mind, 3rd edn, W.W. Norton & Co., New York.
Gianaros, P. J., J. A. Horenstein, A. R. Hariri, L. K. Sheu, S. B. Manuck, , K. A.
     Matthews and S. Cohen. 2008. "Potential Neural Embedding of Parental Social
     Standing." Social Cognitive and affective Neuroscience, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 91-96.
Gianaros, P. J. and S. B. Manuck. 2010. "Neurobiological Pathways Linking
     Socioeconomic Position and Health." Psychosomatic Medicine, vol. 72, no. 5, pp.
     450-461.
Grantham-McGregor, S., Y. B. Cheung, S. Cueto, P. Glewwe, L. Richter, B. Strupp and
     International Child Development Steering Group. 2007. "Developmental Potential in
     the First 5 Years for Children in Developing Countries." The lancet, vol. 369, no.
     9555, pp. 60-70.
Hair, N. L., J. L. Hanson, B. L. Wolfe and S. D. Pollak. 2015. "Association of Child
     Poverty, Brain Development, and Academic Achievement", JAMA Pediatrics, vol.
     169, no. 9, pp. 822-829.
Hausmann, R. 2014. "Gender Gap Report 2014."
Heckman, J. J. 2006. "Skill Formation and the Economics of Investing in Disadvantaged
     cCildren." Science (New York, N.Y.), vol. 312, no. 5782, pp. 1900-1902.
Hogan, M. J., R. T. Staff, B. P. Bunting, I. J. Deary and L. J. Whalley. 2012. "Openness
     to Experience and Activity Engagement Facilitate the Maintenance of Verbal Ability
     in Older Adults." Psychology and Aging, vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 849-854.




                                                                                           47
Ivanovic, D. M., B. P. Leiva, H. T. Perez, Inzunza, N. B., A. F. Almagia , T. D. Toro, M.
     S. Urrutia, J. O. Cervilla and E. O. Bosch. 2000. "Long-term Effects of Severe
     Undernutrition During the First Year of Life on Brain Development and Learning in
     Chilean High-school Graduates." Nutrition (Burbank, Los Angeles County, Calif.),
     vol. 16, no. 11-12, pp. 1056-1063.
Jackson, J. J., P. L. Hill, B. R. Payne, B. W. Roberts and E. A. Stine-Morrow. 2012. "Can
     an Old Dog Learn (and want to experience) New Tricks? Cognitive Training
     Increases Openness to Experience in Older Adults." Psychology and Aging, vol. 27,
     no. 2, pp. 286-292.
Jackson, P.A D. O. Kennedy. 2013. "The Application of Near Infrared Spectroscopy in
     Nutritional Intervention Studies." Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, vol. 7, pp. 473.
Kim, P., G. W. Evans, M. Angstadt, S. S. Ho, C. S. Sripada, J. E. Swain, I. Liberzonand
     K. L. Phan. 2013. "Effects of Childhood Poverty and Chronic Stress on Emotion
     Regulatory Brain Function in Adulthood." Proceedings of the National Academy of
     Sciences of the United States of America, vol. 110, no. 46, pp. 18442-18447.
Kolb, B., and R. Gibb. 2011, "Brain Plasticity and Behaviour in the Developing Brain."
     Journal of the Canadian Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. Journal de
     l'Academie Canadienne de Psychiatrie de L'enfant et de L'adolescent, vol. 20, no. 4,
     pp. 265-276.
Kuh, D., Y. Ben-Shlomo, J. Lynch, J. Hallqvist and C. Power. 2003. "Life Course
     Epidemiology." Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health. vol. 57, no. 10,
     pp. 778-783.
Levitt, P. 2003. "Structural and Functional Maturation of the Developing Primate Brain."
     The Journal of Pediatrics, vol. 143, no. 4 Suppl, pp. S35-45.
Li, C., S. C. Wu, and F. Sung. 2002. "Lifetime Principal Occupation and Risk of
     Cognitive Impairment among the Elderly." Industrial Health, vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 7-
     13.
Lloyd-Fox, S., M. Papademetriou, M. K. Darboe, N. L. Everdell, R. Wegmuller, A. M.
     Prentice, S. E. Moore and C. E. Elwell. 2014. "Functional Near Infrared
     Spectroscopy (fNIRS) to Assess Ccognitive Function in Infants in Rural Africa."
     Scientific Reports, vol. 4, pp. 4740.
Luby, J. L. 2015. "Poverty's Most Insidious Damage: The Developing Brain", JAMA
     Pediatrics, vol. 169, no. 9, pp. 810-811.
Maercker, A. and S. Forstmeier. 2012. Healthy Brain Ageing: The New Concept of
     Motivational Reserve.
Maguire, E.A., D. G. Gadian, I. S. Johnsrude, C. D. Good, J. Ashburner , R. S.
     Frackowiak and C. D. Frith, C.D. 2000. "Navigation-related Structural Change in the
     Hippocampi of Taxi Drivers." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
     the United States of America, vol. 97, no. 8, pp. 4398-4403.
McEwen, B.S., and P. J. Gianaros. 2010. "Central Role of the Brain in Stress and
     Adaptation: Links to Socioeconomic Status, Health, and Disease." Annals of the New
     York Academy of Sciences, vol. 1186, pp. 190-222.
Miller, E. K., and J. D. Cohen. 2001. "An Integrative Theory of Prefrontal Cortex
     Function." Annual Review of Neuroscience, vol. 24, pp. 167-202.
Mullainathan, S., and E. Shafir. 2014. "Freeing up Intelligence." Scientific American
     Mind, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 58-63.



                                                                                            48
Murray, A.D. 2012, "Imaging Approaches for Dementia." AJNR. American Journal of
    Neuroradiology, vol. 33, no. 10, pp. 1836-1844.
Murray, A. D., C. J. McNeil, S. Salarirad, L. J. Whalleyand R. T. Staff. 2014, "Early Life
    Socioeconomic Circumstance and Late Life Brain Hyperintensities--a Ppopulation
    based Cohort Study." PloS one, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. e88969.
Murray, A.D., R. T. Staff, C. J. McNeil., S. Salarirad, T. S. Ahearn, N. Mustafa and L. J.
    Whalley. 2011. "The Balance Between Cognitive Reserve and Brain Imaging
    Biomarkers of Cerebrovascular and Alzheimer's Diseases." Brain: A Journal of
    Neurology, vol. 134, no. Pt 12, pp. 3687-3696.
Murray, A.D., E. T. Staff, S. D. Shenkin, I. J. Deary, J. M. Starr andL. J. Whalley. 2005.
    "Brain White Matter Hyperintensities: Relative Importance of Vascular Risk Factors
    in Nondemented Elderly People." Radiology, vol. 237, no. 1, pp. 251-257.
Mustafa, N., T. S. Ahearn, G. D. Waiter, A. D. Murray, L. J. Whalley, and R. T. Staff.
    2012. "Brain Structural Complexity and Life Course Cognitive Change."
    NeuroImage, vol. 61, no. 3, pp. 694-701.
National, S. C. 2014. "Excessive Stress Disrupts the Development of Brain
    Aarchitecturenull." Journal of Children’s Services, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 143-153.
Naudeau, S., N. Kataoka, A. Valerio, M. J. Neuman andL. K. Elder. 2011. "Investing in
    Young Children: An Early Childhood Development Guide for Policy Dialogue and
    Project Preparation."
Nelson, C.A., C. H. Zeanah, N. A. Fox, P. J. Marshall, A. T. Smyke andD. Guthrie.
    2007. "Cognitive Recovery in Socially Deprived Young Children: The Bucharest
    Early Intervention Project." Science (New York, N.Y.), vol. 318, no. 5858, pp. 1937-
    1940.
Nelson, C.A. 1999. "How Important are the First 3 Years of Life?", Applied
    Developmental Science, vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 235-238.
Nelson, C.A., N. A. Fox., C. H. Zeanah I. Ebrary. I. 2014. Romania's Abandoned
    Children: Deprivation, Brain Development, and the Struggle for Recovery. Harvard
    University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts ; London, England.
Nisbett, R. E., J. Aronson, C. Blair, W. Dickens, Flynn, J., D. F. Halpern. and E.
    Turkheimer. 2012. "Intelligence: New Findings and Theoretical Developments." The
    American Psychologist, vol. 67, no. 2, pp. 130-159.
Noble, K.G. 2014. "Rich Man, Poor Man: Socioeconomic adversity and brain
    development", Cerebrum: The Dana Forum on Brain Science, vol. 2014, pp. 6-Jun.
Noble, K.G., Engelhardt, L. E., Brito, N. H., Mack, L. J., Nail, E.J., Angal, J., Barr, R.,
    Fifer, W. P., Elliott, A. J. and PASS Network. 2015. "Socioeconomic Disparities in
    Neurocognitive Development in the First Two Years of Life." Developmental
    Psychobiology, vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 535-551.
Noble, K. G. and M. J. Farah. 2013. "Neurocognitive Consequences of Socioeconomic
    Disparities: The Intersection of Cognitive Neuroscience and Public Health."
    Developmental Science, vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 639-640.
Noble, K. G., S. M. Houston, N. H. Brito, H. Bartsch, E. Kan, J. M. Kuperman, N.
    Akshoomoff, D. G. Amaral, C. S. Bloss, O. Libiger, N. J. Schork, S. S. Murray, B. J.
    Casey, L. Chang, T. M. Ernst, J. A. Frazier, J. R. Gruen, D. N. Kennedy, P. Van Zijl,
    S. Mostofsky, W. E. Kaufmann, T. Kenet, A. M. Dale, T. L. Jernigan, and E. R.




                                                                                              49
     Sowell. 2015. "Family Income, Parental Education and Brain Structure in Children
     and Adolescents." Nature Neuroscience, vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 773-778.
Noble, K. G., B. D. McCandliss, M. J. Farah. 2007. "Socioeconomic Gradients Predict
     Individual Differences in Neurocognitive Abilities", Developmental Science, vol. 10,
     no. 4, pp. 464-480.
Ochayi, B. and T. D. Thacher. 2006. "Risk Factors for Dementia in Central Nigeria."
     Aging and Mental Health, vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 616-620.
Okon-Singer, H., T. Hendler, L. Pessoa, A. J. Shackman. 2015. "The Neurobiology of
     Emotion-cognition Interactions: Fundamental Questions and Strategies for Future
     Research." Frontiers in Human Neuroscience. vol. 9, pp. 58.
Pavlakis, A. E., K. Noble, S. G. Pavlakis, N. Ali and Y. Frank. 2015, "Brain Imaging and
     Electrophysiology Biomarkers: Is there a Role in Poverty and Education Outcome
     Research?" Pediatric Neurology, vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 383-388.
Pessoa, L. 2008. "On the Relationship between Emotion and Cognition." Nature Reviews.
     Neuroscience, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 148-158.
Petitto, L. 2005. "How the Brain Begets Language." The Cambridge Companion to
     Chomsky, pp. 84-101.
Phelps, Elizabeth A., and R. Delgado, Mauricio. 2009. "Emotion and Decision Making"
     in The Cognitive Neurosciences, ed. M.S. Gazzaniga, 4th ed. edn, MIT Press,
     Cambridge, Mass., pp. 1093-1103.
Rakic P., J. I. Arellano, J. J. Breunig. 2009. "Development of the Primate Cerebral
     Cortex." in The Cognitive Neurosciences, ed. Michael S Gazzaniga, 4th ed. edn, MIT
     Press, Cambridge, Mass., pp. 7-28.
Richards, M. and S. L. Hatch. 2011. "A Life Course Approach to the Development of
     Mental Skills." The Journals of Gerontology. Series B, Psychological Sciences and
     Social Sciences, vol. 66 Suppl 1, pp. i26-35.
Sheridan, M.A., N. A. Fox, C. H. Zeanah, K. A. McLaughlin and C. A. Nelson. 2012.
     "Variation in Neural Development as a Result of Exposure to Institutionalization
     Early in Childhood." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
     States of America, vol. 109, no. 32, pp. 12927-12932.
Shonkoff, J. P., A. S. Garner, Committee on Psychosocial Aspects of Child and Family
     Health, Committee on Early Childhood, Adoption, and Dependent Care and Section
     on Developmental and Behavioral Pediatrics. 2012. "The Lifelong Effects of eErly
     Childhood Adversity and Toxic Stress." Pediatrics, vol. 129, no. 1, pp. e232-46.
Silvia A. Bunge., P. Allyson Mackey and J. Kirstie Whitaker. 2009. "Brain Changes
     Underlying the Development of Cognitive Control and Reasoning." in The Cognitive
     Neurosciences, ed. M.S. Gazzaniga, 4th ed. edn, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., pp.
     73-85.
Small, D.H., S. S. Mok and J. C. Bornstein. 2001. "Alzheimer's Disease and Abeta
     Toxicity: From top to Bottom." Nature Reviews. Neuroscience, vol. 2, no. 8, pp.
     595-598.
Staff, R.T., A. D. Murray, T. S. Ahearn, N. Mustafa, H. C. Fox and L. J. Whalley. 2012.
     "Childhood Socioeconomic Status and Adult Brain Size: Childhood Socioeconomic
     Status Influences Adult Hippocampal Size." Annals of Neurology, vol. 71, no. 5, pp.
     653-660.




                                                                                            50
Staff, R.T., A. D. Murray, I. J. Dearyand L. J. Whalley. 2004a. "What Provides Cerebral
     Reserve?", Brain: A Journal of Neurology, vol. 127, no. 5, pp. 1191-1199.
_____. 2004b. "What Provides Cerebral Reserve?" Brain: A Journal of Neurology, vol.
     127, no. Pt 5, pp. 1191-1199.
Stern, Y. 2012. "Cognitive Reserve in Ageing and Alzheimer's Disease." The Lancet.
     Neurology, vol. 11, no. 11, pp. 1006-1012.
Thompson, R.A., and C. A. Nelson. 2001. "Developmental Science and the Media. Early
     Brain Development." The American Psychologist, vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 5-15.
Tomalski, P., and M. H. Johnson. 2010. "The Effects of Early Adversity on the Adult and
     Developing Brain." Current Opinion in Psychiatry, vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 233-238.
Tomalski, P., D. G. Moore, H. Ribeiro, E. L. Axelsson, E. Murphy, A. Karmiloff-Smith,
     M. H. Johnson and E. Kushnerenko. 2013. "Socioeconomic Status and Functional
     Brain Development - Associations in Early Infancy." Developmental Science, vol.
     16, no. 5, pp. 676-687.
Van den Bergh, B.R. 2011, "Developmental Programming of Early Brain and Behaviour
     Development and Mental Health: A Conceptual Framework." Developmental
     Medicine and Child Neurology, vol. 53 Suppl 4, pp. 19-23.
Victora, C. G., M. de Onis, P. C. Hallal, M. Blossnerand R. Shrimpton. 2010.
     "Worldwide Timing of Growth Faltering: Revisiting Implications for Interventions."
     Pediatrics, vol. 125, no. 3, pp. e473-80.
Waber, D. P., C. P. Bryce, J. M. Girard, M. Zichlin, G. M. Fitzmaurice, and J. R. Galler.
     2014. "Impaired IQ and Academic Skills in Adults who Experienced Moderate to
     Severe Infantile Malnutrition: A 40-year Study." Nutritional Neuroscience, vol. 17,
     no. 2, pp. 58-64.
Walker, S. P., T. D. Wachs, J. M. Gardner, B. Lozoff, G. A. Wasserman,E. Pollitt, J. A.
     Carter, and International Child Development Steering Group. 2007. "Child
     Development: Risk Factors for Adverse Outcomes in Developing Countries." Lancet
     (London, England), vol. 369, no. 9556, pp. 145-157.
Walker, S. P., T. D. Wachs, S. Grantham-McGregor, M. M. Black, C. A. Nelson, S. L.
     Huffman, H. Baker-Henningham, S. M. Chang, J. D. Hamadani, B. Lozoff, J. M.
     Gardner, C. A. Powell, A. Rahman and L. Richter. 2011. "Inequality in Early
     Childhood: Risk and Protective Factors for Early Child Development." Lancet
     (London, England), vol. 378, no. 9799, pp. 1325-1338.
Whalley, L. J., I. J. Deary, C. L. Appleton, J. M. Starr. 2004. "Cognitive Reserve and the
     Neurobiology of Cognitive Aging." Ageing Research Reviews, vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 369-
     382.
Wong, Y. N. 2012. "World Development Report. 2012: Gender Equality and
     Development." Forum for Development StudiesTaylor and Francis, pp. 435.
World Bank. 2015. World Bank Support to Early Childhood Development: An
     Independent Evaluation. World Bank Group, Washington, D.C.
_____. 2013. The World Bank Annual Report 2013, World Bank, Washington, DC.
_____. 2014. World Development Report 2015: Mind, Society, and Behavior. The World
     Bank, Washington, DC.
Ybarra, O., E. Burnstein, P. Winkielman, M. C. Keller, M. Manis, E. Chan, and J.
     Rodriguez. 2008. "Mental Exercising through Simple Socializing: Social Interaction




                                                                                             51
Promotes General Cognitive Functioning." Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 248-259.




                                                                             52
“Human development” and “development” are inseparable, and now new evidence emerges that “brain
development” is the key driving mechanism behind this association. The foundations of brain architecture are
established early in life. Critical aspects of its structure begin to be shaped by experience before and soon after
birth. The current report discusses brain development from a life-course perspective with a particular emphasis
on early childhood development (ECD), skills formation, resilience and aging. There is mounting evidence that
early and sustained investments in brain development have economic and social returns that can benefit current
and future generations. This paper synthesizes knowledge across multiple disciplines and is weighted towards
findings from brain sciences to encourage a new perspective on “human development” initiatives among policy
makers and international development practitioners. The report discusses the role of social policies in shaping
brain function and structure. The policy-relevant findings from brain sciences research can greatly enhance the
ability to carry out cost-effective policies that foster human development over the life-course, eliminate extreme
poverty and improve shared prosperity.




ABOUT THIS SERIES:
This series is produced by the Health, Nutrition, and Population Global Practice of the World Bank. The papers
in this series aim to provide a vehicle for publishing preliminary results on HNP topics to encourage discussion
and debate. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those of the
author(s) and should not be attributed in any manner to the World Bank, to its affiliated organizations or to
members of its Board of Executive Directors or the countries they represent. Citation and the use of material
presented in this series should take into account this provisional character. For free copies of papers in this
series please contact the individual author/s whose name appears on the paper. Enquiries about the series and
submissions should be made directly to the Editor Martin Lutalo (mlutalo@ worldbank.org) or HNP Advisory
Service (healthpop@worldbank.org, tel 202 473-2256).

For more information, see also www.worldbank.org/hnppublications.




                                                                          1818 H Street, NW
                                                                          Washington, DC USA 20433

                                                                          Telephone: 202 473 1000
                                                                          Facsimile: 202 477 6391
                                                                          Internet: www.worldbank.org
                                                                          E-mail: feedback@worldbank.org
