SHIFTING KENYA'S PRIVATE SECTOR
       INTO HIGHER GEAR
   A Trade & Competitiveness Agenda
SHIFTING KENYA’S PRIVATE SECTOR
        INTO HIGHER GEAR
  A Trade & Competitiveness Agenda



              April 2016
    ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS




    T   his report is the outcome of collaborative efforts of many in the
        World Bank’s Kenya Trade & Competitiveness Global Practice. The
    team was led by Maria Paulina (Ina) Mogollon (Senior Private Sector
    Development Specialist) and Frank Twagira (Operations Officer), under
    the guidance of Catherine Masinde (Practice Manager). The team
    included: Nikola Kojucharov (Economist); Georgia Dowdall (Consultant);
    Tania Begazo (Senior Economist); Aref Adamali (Senior Operations Officer);
    Xavier Cirera (Senior Economist); Nora Dihel (Senior Economist); Toni Eliasz
    (Projects Officer); Markus Kimani (Associate Operations Officer); Jana
    Malinska (Senior Program Officer); Richard Mugo (Operations Officer);
    Sarah Ochieng (Operations Officer); Aun Rahman (Financial Sector
    Specialist); and Mupelwa Sichilima (Operations Officer).




i                                           SHIFTING KENYA’S PRIVATE SECTOR INTO HIGHER GEAR
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY


“Shifting Kenya’s Private Sector into Higher Gear: A Trade & Competitiveness
Agenda” was born out of the World Bank’s Trade and Competitiveness
(T&C) Global Practice recent stock taking of its work in Kenya. This was part
of a Programmatic Approach that aimed to organize T&C’s knowledge,
advisory, and convening services to address Kenya’s development
challenges in the private sector space.

By Sub-Saharan African standards, Kenya has a large private sector,
which accounts for around 70 percent of total formal employment. As
a result, the dynamics of the private sector are a key determinant of the
trajectory of the Kenyan economy.

Although Kenya’s economy is relatively well diversified, it has a number
of features that have the capacity to undermine its performance. The
economy suffers from a pronounced formal – informal dualism. It is deeply
divided between larger formal businesses, which are more productive and
produce the bulk of economic output, and the micro and small enterprises
in the informal sector, which employ the majority of working Kenyans
but are characterized by lower value-added activities, poor access to
capital inputs and technology, and limited connectivity to supply chain
and market opportunities. Recent private sector growth has been driven
by the services sector, but this has proved insufficient to address Kenya’s
increasing employment challenge. Although more traditional sectors,such
as manufacturing and agriculture, have the potential to absorb many of
the unemployed workers, these sectors are hampered by low productivity,
inefficient allocation of resources, and business environment constraints.
Productivity growth across all sectors is further constrained by low
innovation and limited foreign investment and presence of foreign firms.
Despite Kenya’s reputation as a regional hub of innovation, the innovations
of Kenyan firms tend to be incremental in nature and have a negligible
impact on productivity.



A Tr a d e & C o m p e t i t i v e n e s s A g e n d a                          ii
      By most global measures, Kenya’s business environment remains
      challenging. The country’s product market regulations a rerestrictive for
      domestic competitors and foreign entrants, and the actions of cartels and
      behavior of dominant firms across sectors undermines competition and
      hurts consumers. The Kenyan Government recognizes these challenges and
      has invested significantly in unlocking these bottlenecks with impressive
      results so far and several important laws passed. Additional efforts to ease
      regulatory constraints and expedite important legislative changes could
      improve the investment climate at national and county levels.

      Interventions looking to address Kenya’s private sector challenges
      should be underpinned by the following three key goals: (i) creating
      more and higher value-added employment opportunities; (ii) improving
      firm-level productivity across sectors; and (iii) unlocking new domestic
      and regional market opportunities and investments. T&C supports these
      goals by using a multi-dimensional approach, with ongoing and future
      efforts centeredon four core pillars:
         •	 Improving the investment climate via supporting business
            environment reforms and strengthening investment policy and
            promotion;
         •	 Fostering competition in domestic markets and supporting
            increased volume and value of trade through furthering competition
            policy reforms, increasing regional trade integration,and reforming
            services trade policies and regulations;
         •	 Strengthening the competitiveness of high-potential sectors
            through developing job-rich domestic sectors, spatial growth
            solutions (such as special economic zones), and investment
            strategies; and
         •	 Fostering innovation and entrepreneurship via promoting
            entrepreneurship, increasing innovation, and upgrading firm
            capabilities and productivity.

      Building on this strategic review, in the coming months T&C will be
      holding brainstorming sessions with internal and external stakeholders.
      These sessions will aim to tap into significant collective knowledge to
      inform the future direction of T&C’s work in Kenya and optimize the design
      and implementation of upcoming programs and lending operations.

iii                                           SHIFTING KENYA’S PRIVATE SECTOR INTO HIGHER GEAR
                               SHIFTING KENYA’S PRIVATE SECTOR
                                       INTO HIGHER GEAR
                                 A Trade & Competitiveness Agenda



K   enya’s private sector is fairly large by Sub-Saharan African standards,
    and it employs the majority of the population. Measured from a
national accounts perspective as the private share of total investment
and consumption, Kenya’s private sector has been growing steadily since
the mid-1990s; the private share of consumption and investment is now
78 percent, at the upper range of private sector sizes in Sub-Saharan
countries (Figure 1). From a jobs perspective, the private sector is also the
largest employer in the country, accounting for around 70 percent of total
formal employment.1 As a result, the dynamics of the private sector are a
key determinant of the trajectory of Kenya’s overall economy.


    Figure 1: Size of Kenya’s private sector from a regional perspective
    Average private share of total consumption and investment
    1.0
    0.9
    0.8
    0.7
    0.6
    0.5
    0.4
    0.3
    0.2
    0.1
    0.0
                       DRC
               Cameroon
                   Guinea
              Cape Verde
                      Togo
                  Lesotho
                    Sudan
                  Uganda
            Cote d'Ivoire
                  Senegal
              Mauritania
                     Kenya
             Madagascar
                      Niger
                 Tanzania
                Mauritius
                     Benin

            Sierra Leone
             South Africa
                  Gambia
                       CAR
                    Liberia
                   Zambia
                    Gabon
                       Mali
               Seychelles
               Swaziland
                   Malawi
                      Chad
            Mozambique
                 Namibia
                    Ghana
                 Comoros
                  Rwanda
                   Nigeria

            Burkina Faso
           Guinea Bissau
               Botswana
                  Ethiopia
                Sao Tome
                  Burundi
                   Angola
             Republic of




              Equatorial




Source: Authors’ calculations from Stampini et. al (2011) dataset.




1
    	 African Development Bank (2013), “The State of Kenya’s Private Sector” (Figure 2).




    A Tr a d e & C o m p e t i t i v e n e s s A g e n d a                                 1
    Although well diversified in terms of activities, the private sector
    suffers from a pronounced formal-informal dualism. Services comprise
    slightly more than half of Kenya’s private sector activity, with agriculture
    accounting for around 30 percent, and industry (including manufacturing)
    comprising the remaining 20 percent. At the firm level, however, the
    private sector is deeply divided between larger formal businesses, who
    have higher-productivity and produce the bulk of economic output, and
    the MSMEs in the informal sector, who are estimated to employ around
    90 percent of working Kenyans but are characterized by relatively lower
    value-added activities (e.g. retail trade and hospitality),2 poor access to
    capital inputs and technology, and limited connectivity to supply chain
    and market opportunities.

    Recent private sector growth has been predominantly services-led, and
    this has proved insufficient to address Kenya’s growing employment
    challenge. Between 2006 and 2013, 72 percent of the increase in GDP
    came from services. Agriculture and manufacturing, on the other hand,
    grew slower and their share in GDP declined between 2009 and 2013.
    Because of their relatively low job-generating potential, growing services
    sectors have been unable to absorb the 3 million Kenyan youth who
    became of working age during this period: although financial services
    and communications recorded among the fastest employment growth
    rates (7 percent per year between 2009 and 2013), they generated less
    than 10,000 jobs per year. As a result, most of Kenya’s growing labor force
    has ended up unemployed or underemployed and in low-productivity
    informal activities.

    Manufacturing and agriculture have the potential to absorb many
    workers, but these sectors suffer from low productivity, inefficient
    allocation of resources, and acute business environment constraints.
    Agriculture is the largest contributor to private employment, but its
    contribution to GDP has been declining. Meanwhile, the largest share
    of employment in manufacturing is in low value-added sectors such
    as food products (41 percent of total employment), textiles (8 percent),

    	 African Development Bank (2013), based on KNBS calculations from prior surveys, such as the 1998/9 labour force
    2

      survey, 2009 census, 2005/6 household budget survey. Informal sector employment excludes agriculture.




2                                                               SHIFTING KENYA’S PRIVATE SECTOR INTO HIGHER GEAR
apparel (5.7 percent), wood and wood/cork products except furniture
(3.7 percent), and leather and related products (2.5 percent). In addition,
the dispersion in firm productivity within the same manufacturing sub-
sectors is high, indicating structural inefficiencies in the intra-sectoral
allocation of resources that prevent firms from catching up with their
successful peers. Moreover, compared to services sectors, agriculture and
manufacturing are more heavily impacted by the business environment
constraints which are most acute in Kenya—burdensome regulation,
costly inputs (transport, energy, labor, finance), and political interference.
Analysis carried out by the World Bank’s Trade and Competitiveness Global
Practice (“T&C”) points out various regulatory barriers to competition in
the agriculture sector ranging from rules that prevent entry and protect
incumbents to rules that distort prices - which hinder sector performance.

Productivity growth across all sectors is further constrained by
low innovation, and limited foreign investment and presence of
foreign firms. Although relatively abundant by regional standards, the
innovations of Kenyan firms tend to be incremental in nature and have
negligible impact on productivity.3 Moreover, less than 1 percent of
firms in Kenya are foreign-owned, and FDI inflows—at barely 1 percent
of GDP—have consistently been below those of regional neighbors such
as Tanzania, Uganda, and Rwanda over the past 15 years.4 This limits the
scope for knowledge and technology transfers, as well as skills spillovers
to domestic firms, which represent a key source of potential productivity
enhancements. The level of competition in markets is also a determinant
of productivity growth: the existence of cartels, preferential treatment of
certain firms, and barriers to entry eliminate competitive pressure and the
incentives for firms to become more productive.

Against this backdrop, Kenya’s challenge in accelerating growth and
employing its growing labor force in more productive and formal
activities is three-fold: (i) creating more and higher value-added
employment opportunities; (ii) improving firm-level productivity across
sectors; and (iii) unlocking new domestic and regional market opportunities
	 World Bank, (2014), Kenya Economic Update: “Anchoring High Growth: Can Manufacturing Contribute More?” Xavier
3

  Cirera, (2015), “Catching up to the Technological Frontier? Understanding Firm-Level Innovation and Productivity in
  Kenya,” Working Paper 94671, World Bank Group.
	 African Development Bank, (2013); Figures 15 and 16.
4




    A Tr a d e & C o m p e t i t i v e n e s s A g e n d a                                                              3
    and investments. This requires a multi-dimensional approach consisting
    of improving the business environment, promoting competition in key
    domestic markets and supporting efforts to boost the volume and value of
    foreign trade, strengthening the competitiveness of high-potential sectors,
    and fostering firm-level productivity, innovation, and entrepreneurship.
    Each of these areas is assessed in greater detail in the following sections,
    taking stock of some existing initiatives and exploring key opportunities
    that can be leveraged going forward.

    A.	 IMPROVING THE INVESTMENT CLIMATE
    Supporting business environment reforms

    According to most global measures, Kenya’s business environment is
    challenging. A conducive business environment is one of the key pillars
    for private investment, enterprise growth, and job creation, and while Kenya
    has historically fared poorly in this regard, the GoK has recently made it a
    priority. According to the Doing Business rankings,5 Kenya was a top reformer
    amongst its peers in 2016, ranking 108th among 189 countries globally. This
    was a significant improvement over its 2015 ranking of 129th. In its 2014
    report on Business Environment Rankings, the Economist Intelligence Unit
    placed Kenya almost at the bottom among 82 countries (just ahead of
    Cuba, Iran, and Venezuela), and similarly, the Global Competitiveness Report
    for 2015-16 places Kenya below some of its African peers.6

    The Kenyan Government has recognized these challenges and invested
    significantly in unlocking business environment bottlenecks with the
    support of the WBG. In October 2014, the Doing Business Delivery Unit was
    launched to lead and coordinate efforts across ministries. T&C, through the
    second Kenya Investment Climate Program (KICP), supported the business
    environment reform process via technical assistance in the development
    and implementation of a Doing Business strategy, support to the technical
    working groups, reform coordination, communications, and verification.


    5
        	 The results should be viewed in light of the limitations of the methodology such as the fact that it takes the business
          environment in the capital city as representative of the entire country, or that it looks at regulations as noted in
          legislation rather than practice.
    6
        	 Kenya (99th), Seychelles (97th), Zambia (96th), Cote d’Ivoire (91st), Namibia (85th), Botswana (71st), Rwanda (58th), and
          South Africa (49th).


4                                                                        SHIFTING KENYA’S PRIVATE SECTOR INTO HIGHER GEAR
Efforts to improve the investment climate at both the national and
county-levels have resulted in significant changes. As recorded by Doing
Business, over the past year, Kenya has made it significantly easier to start
a business, get an electricity connection, register property, and get credit.
On the regulatory front, several important business laws were passed this
year. The new Companies Act 2015 updates the outdated 1948 version and
significantly simplifies business-operating requirements. The Insolvency
Act 2015 allows distressed companies to reorganize themselves prior to
liquidation. The Special Economic Zones (SEZ) Act facilitates the process
and streamlines the framework for SEZs, while the Business Registration
Act 2015 allows for the establishment of an autonomous agency to guide
and regulate business corporations. The automation and centralization of
government services has progressed significantly through the Huduma
Centers, which have centralized 52 government to citizen services; the
E-citizens Portal managed by the National Treasury; the Electronic Single
Window for processing of import and export permits and cargo clearance
by Customs and other border agencies, including payment automation,
managed by KenTrade; the Nairobi, Mombasa, and Kisumu Construction
Permit Systems, the Mombasa e-Business permit system, and construction
of an additional berth at Mombasa port. These initiatives could benefit
from further investment and scaled up technical assistance from the WBG.

While the aforementioned changes are important steps in improving
the business environment, additional efforts will be needed to
further ease the burden of business regulation, simplify cumbersome
processes, and automate government-to-business services. The
numerous procedures and documentation required for standard business
procedures, such as start-up licenses, trade, and tax payments, privilege
informal arrangements over official channels and remain slow and
bureaucratic. For example, despite recent improvements supported by
World Bank technical assistance, it still takes 11 steps and 26 days to start
a business and nine steps and two months to transfer a property title in
Nairobi, both of which are slower, on average, than in the rest of Sub-
Saharan Africa. A development policy loan7 that is focused on unlocking
key regulatory constraints and expediting important legislative changes
could accelerate the transformation of Kenya’s business environment.
7
    	 A Development Policy Loan is a policy-based financing instrument which supports governments in implementing
      reforms focused on a program of policy and institutional actions.

    A Tr a d e & C o m p e t i t i v e n e s s A g e n d a                                                          5
    Strengthening investment policy and promotion

    Increasing investment in Kenya, both foreign and domestic, and
    at the national and county levels, is a key element of the country’s
    development. Currently, Kenya is a minor recipient of FDI compared to
    its neighbors, but it fares well in terms of number of investment projects.
    Building Kenya’s ability to attract and retain more FDI and large domestic
    investment is important not only as a source of jobs for Kenya’s youth but
    also as a means by which to attract new technologies and skills into the
    economy. This will play a key role in supporting Kenya’s movement from a
    largely factor-driven to an efficiency-driven economy.

    With county governments hungry for investments and the know-how
    to attract them, the lack of clarity in terms of who bears responsibility
    for managing investors through the various stages of the investment
    cycle does not bode well for increasing investment at both the national
    and county level. Therefore, building institutional capabilities within
    the framework of a clear demarcation of national and sub-national roles
    and responsibilities will be crucial if Kenya is to attract and retain the
    investment it needs, at both levels. Although KenInvest is the national
    agency responsible for FDI, it does not have the bandwidth to service all
    investors and support all counties.

    Addressing the need to build an investment framework that supports
    investor-friendly policies and procedures is the primary objective of
    T&C’s investment policy and promotion advisory activity. This work
    focuses on supporting investment through rationalizing systems relating
    to investment entry, incentives and retention, and building mechanisms
    of county coordination so that Kenya’s 47 counties ultimately go to market
    with a single, coherent investment offering.




6                                           SHIFTING KENYA’S PRIVATE SECTOR INTO HIGHER GEAR
B.	 FOSTERING COMPETITION IN DOMESTIC MARKETS
    AND SUPPORTING INCREASED VOLUME AND VALUE
    OF TRADE
Competition policy reforms

Competitive and open markets contribute to sustainable economic
growth by facilitating increased investment and improving private
sector competitiveness through cost reductions, innovation, and
productivity growth.8 Empirical evidence strongly supports the positive
effects of well-enforced competition policy on productivity growth
(Buccirossi et al. 2009; Voigt 2009). Furthermore, tough enforcement
against the practices of cartels is an effective tool in reducing the negative
impact of anticompetitive behavior (Alexander 1994; Symeonidis 2008),
benefiting consumers with lower prices, direct savings, and improvements
in the variety and quality of goods and services.

By international standards, Kenya’s product market regulations
are restrictive for both domestic competitors and foreign entrants.
Removing these restrictive regulations in service sectors could result in
an increase of GDP growth by at least 0.39 percentage points (equivalent
to US$218 million in the first year).9 The characteristics of the regulatory
framework determine the incentives and ability of firms to participate in
markets and compete. Compared to other countries, Kenya’s regulatory
framework is highly restrictive to firm entry and expansion. According to
the Product Market Regulation (PMR) methodology designed by OECD,
regulations that restrict competition are more prevalent in Kenya than in
other middle-income countries (BRICS countries, Latin American and the
Caribbean countries, Turkey, Romania and Bulgaria) and OECD countries.
Regulations discourage investment of new firms and protect incumbent
or dominant firms. Moreover, government policies and regulations render
prices of goods high and harm consumers, especially the poorest.
8
    	 Markus Kitzmuller and Martha Martinez Licetti, (2013), “Competition Policy: Encouraging Thriving Markets for
      Development,” ViewPoint Public Policy for the Private Sector Series 331; Tanja Goodwin and Martha Denisse Pierola,
      (2015), “Export Competitiveness: Why Domestic Market Competition Matters,” Viewpoint Public Policy for the Private
      Sector Series 348.
9
    	 Competition Authority of Kenya, (2015), “Unlocking Growth Potential in Kenya: Dismantling Regulatory Obstacles to
      Competition.” See also, Jonathan Argent and Tania Begazo, (2015), “Competition in Kenyan Markets and its Impact on
      Income and Poverty: A Case Study on Sugar and Maize,” Policy Research Working Paper WPS 7179, World Bank Group.




    A Tr a d e & C o m p e t i t i v e n e s s A g e n d a                                                                 7
    With WBG technical assistance, the Competition Authority of Kenya (CAK)
    has begun to address these various issues in recent years through targeted
    interventions. Five representative cases of CAK interventions carried out with
    WBG support and their initial impacts are highlighted below:10


        Figure 2: Kenya is among the countries with restrictive product market regulations
                  3.50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       3.10
                  3.00

                  2.50
    Score [0:6]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          BTI: 0.69
                  2.00

                  1.50                                                                                                                                                                                                    BTE: 0.93
                              1.13
                  1.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                State Control: 0.94
                  0.50

                  0.00
                              Top 5 avg

                                          OECD avg

                                                     Chile

                                                             Bulgaria

                                                                        Romania

                                                                                  Peru

                                                                                         Colombia

                                                                                                    Mexico

                                                                                                             El Salvador

                                                                                                                           Nicaragua

                                                                                                                                       Israel

                                                                                                                                                 South Africa

                                                                                                                                                                Russia

                                                                                                                                                                         Dominican Rep

                                                                                                                                                                                         Jamaica

                                                                                                                                                                                                   Costa Rica

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Brazil

                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Kenya

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    China

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Honduras

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       India
    Source: Kenya Product Market Regulations (PMR) questionnaire, OECD Product Market Regulation database, and OECD-World Bank Group Product Market
    Regulation database for Latin American and Caribbean countries.
    Note: BTI stands for Barriers to Trade and Investment, and BTE, for Barriers to Entrepreneurship.
    Note: A score of 6 indicates the most restrictive regulatory framework.



                         *	               Price fixing in insurance: Annual public sector savings of KSH
                                          100 million (USD 1 million) in tenders for insurance schemes.
                         *	               Price fixing in supermarket retail: Annual consumer savings for
                                          retail consumers in Nairobi’s Central Business District of KSH 200
                                          million (USD 2 million).
                         *	               Abuse of dominance in mobile money transfer: 9 percent fall
                                          in agent exclusivity in the mobile financial services (MSF) market
                                          compared to 2013, an 11 percentage point fall in Safaricom’s share
                                          of agents relative to its competitors, and a 10 percent overall (45
                                          percent in rural areas) rise in the profitability of agents overall (in
                                          rural areas), indicating expanded access for Kenyan consumers to
                                          mobile financial services agents and increased incomes for small
                                          and medium MFS agents.
    10
         	 World Bank Competition Policy Team, (2015), “Impact Assessment of Selected Decisions of the Competition Authority
           of Kenya.”


8                                                                                                                                               SHIFTING KENYA’S PRIVATE SECTOR INTO HIGHER GEAR
           *	        Advocacy action in healthcare: Annual consumer savings in
                     healthcare of KSH 162 million (USD 1.7 million).
           *	        Advocacy action in agribusiness: Increased incomes to green
                     leaf tea farmers of KSH 65 million (USD 0.7 million) per annum,
                     the introduction of new investment and technologies in the
                     tea sector, greater variety for Kenyan consumers, as well as an
                     additional source of export income for Kenya.


The expected long-term benefits of these decisions and actions are
expected to be broader given their ongoing natures. Going forward,
further planned actions by the CAK in sectors in sectors such as beverages,
telecommunications services, and shipping logistics (abuse of dominance
cases) are expected. In addition, the special compliance program
launched to eliminate collusive actions facilitated by business association
in agriculture and financial services will render additional benefits for
households and businesses. As a result of the support to build relationships
between the CAK and sector regulators, the Communications Authority,
the Central Bank of Kenya, the Insurance Regulatory Authority, and the
Kenya Civil Aviation Authority have begun to integrate competition
principles in decision-making.

In the future, efforts should focus both on stronger law enforcement to
fight cartels and abusive behavior of dominant firms, and on improved
regulatory design informed by competition principles.11 Transformation
of markets to help Kenyan firms increase their competitiveness and
ensure greater welfare for Kenyan citizens hinges on decisions on how
the government participates in markets as a player and regulator.
Technical assistance and financial resources to remove regulations
that i) alter market entry conditions and reinforce dominant firms, ii)
create discriminatory conditions among players, and iii) limit business
strategy options and facilitate collusion are important to support this
transformation. Assistance to the CAK, line ministries, sector regulators
and subnational governments in expanding technical capacity,

 	 See Competition Authority of Kenya, (2015), “Assessment of Regulatory Impact on Competition: A Guide for Policy
11

   Makers.”




 A Tr a d e & C o m p e t i t i v e n e s s A g e n d a                                                              9
     enhancing the regulatory framework to promote competition, and
     deterring anticompetitive practices will catalyze change. Government
     support, explicitly expressed by National Treasury and the CAK, will
     facilitate the implementation of this reform agenda.

     Increasing regional trade integration

     Regional integration plays a critical role in connecting Kenya’s people
     to markets, both within Africa and with the global economy. Improving
     connective infrastructure and removing policy barriers to trade can help
     drive economic diversification, create new jobs, and reduce poverty.
     Combined with improved regional economic and political stability, closer
     economic integration enhances incentives for both domestic and foreign
     investment, spurring existing industries and new business start-ups.

     Although Kenya currently dominates intra-EAC trade, there is still
     considerable scope for further gains. In 2013, total trade flows within
     the EAC were estimated at almost $5.1 billion, with intra-EAC exports in
     particular having increased by over 45 percent from 2010 to 2012, making
     the EAC member states one of the major export destinations for the
     community as a whole (accounting 15 percent of the total). As the biggest
     contributor to this intra-EAC trade, Kenya (followed by Uganda and
     Tanzania) stands to benefit significantly from still-untapped opportunities
     for increased cross-border trade in basic manufactures that are costly to
     import from the global market, such as metal and plastic products, as well
     as improved access to cross-border services that are cheaper and provide
     a wider variety than those currently available.

     Despite decisive steps by Kenya and other EAC members to accelerate
     integration, much remains to be done to fully leverage regional
     integration to drive job creation and poverty reduction. EAC countries
     have made considerable efforts to develop shared infrastructure and
     implement reforms to improve transit and transport infrastructure,
     particularly along the northern and central corridors, as well as to
     establish regional and national mechanisms for the removal of non-tariff




10                                           SHIFTING KENYA’S PRIVATE SECTOR INTO HIGHER GEAR
barriers (NTBs).12 T&C has supported this effort at the EAC level through
work focusing on regulatory reform, regulatory quality and transparency,
and monitoring mechanisms. Notable analytical services and advisory
milestones include the following: the publication of the inaugural EAC
Common Market Scorecard that measures partner states’ commitments
in the free movement of goods, capital, and services under the EAC
Common Market Protocol; the publication of four EAC Doing Business
Reports; the harmonization of five key agricultural seed certification
standards; the harmonization of EAC tax administrative procedures
through an EAC Council of Ministers Directive; a feasibility study for
an EAC regional business registry; a regulatory capacity assessment of
the EAC Secretariat; and a series of peer-to-peer/ network of reformers
knowledge events. In Kenya, T&C has supported the creation of more
efficient trade logistics systems and services, in particular through (i)
the simplification of documentation, procedures and processes, (ii) the
re-engineering and automation of business processes at trade logistics
agencies, and (iii) significant support to the implementation of the
electronic single window system.

The next round of efforts must focus on improving the connectivity
of the poor to regional and global markets and lowering Kenya’s high
trade costs by removing trade barriers and enhancing trade systems
throughout the trade logistics value chain. The poor in Kenya remain
disconnected from foreign markets on account of both physical barriers—
i.e. poor access to transport and energy—and regulatory and institutional
barriers that impede the efficiency and effectiveness of key services and
raise their costs. The way forward must be two-fold: (i) lowering explicit
external barriers to trade related to market access and national treatment;
and (ii) addressing internal regulatory barriers and competition issues, for
example, by eliminating unnecessary requirements and fees, simplifying
regulations and procedures, and applying the latter in a transparent and
predictable way.


 	 For example, since 2014, there have been improvements in the turnaround of movement of cargo from the port in
12

   Mombasa (Kenya) to Kampala (Uganda) from 18 to four days, and from Mombasa to Kigali (Rwanda) from 21 days to
   six days. Kenya, Uganda, and Rwanda have introduced a single tourist visa, and markets are starting to emerge for the
   movement of professionals within the region through a framework for mutual recognition of professional standards.




 A Tr a d e & C o m p e t i t i v e n e s s A g e n d a                                                                    11
     Reforming services trade policies and regulations

     Services are a key intermediate input into other sectors such as
     agriculture and manufacturing, and their availability and quality can
     be an important determinant of firm productivity and competitiveness.
     Among other things, increased integration of services (a.k.a. “servicification”)
     into manufacturing and other production activities can help firms to do
     the following: (i) become more productive through the use of services
     in logistics, management or engineering that save time, materials, and
     improve coordination; (ii) differentiate their products by bundling services
     with their other products; (iii) overcome informal barriers to foreign market
     entry and to sustain foreign market sales (e.g. by using foreign language
     interpretation, matchmaking, and monitoring services); and (iv) join and
     manage international production networks and value chains.

     However, Kenya’s services sector currently creates fewer forward
     linkages13 than is predicted by its income per capita level (Figure 3).
     Kenya outperforms other countries of similar income per capita in all
     three measures of services export shares (gross, direct, total). However,
     forward linkages have a small role to play given that Kenya’s relative
     position drops when considering total value added of services exports.
     This finding illustrates that some of the services sectors in Kenya, such as
     telecommunications, financial services, and transport have prospered
     owing to an intrinsic development path rather than being pulled by other
     sectors through forward linkages. The fact that manufacturing exports have
     been stagnant (relative to GDP) confirms this finding. This suggests a need
     for further analysis of the specific links between services and non-services
     sectors in Kenya, their potential role in driving economic upgrading of firms,
     and the policy and regulatory reforms to improve their quality, availability,
     and accessibility.




      	 The contribution of services as an input to other sectors’ exports. For example, the business process outsourcing
     13

        (BPO) firm may be providing services to a domestic manufacturing firm which exports its products. The share of the
        BPO firm’s input to the manufacturing good exports count as a forward linkage.




12                                                                 SHIFTING KENYA’S PRIVATE SECTOR INTO HIGHER GEAR
C.	 STRENGTHENING THE COMPETITIVENESS OF HIGH-
    POTENTIAL SECTORS
Developing job-rich domestic sectors

Manufacturing has an important role to play in putting Kenya on a
higher growth path because it can create productive employment. With
its strong linkages to many other sectors of the economy, manufacturing
directly and indirectly stimulates economic activity throughout the
economy-wide supply chain. Manufacturing is also a source of tradable
goods, potentially strengthening a country’s terms of trade and facilitating
global integration and knowledge spillovers, which are critical in
promoting structural transformation.14 Manufacturing can also contribute
to the diversification of the economy, thus helping mitigate volatility.

 Figure 3: The role of services as an input to other sectors’ exports is low in Kenya
 (as percent of total exports of goods and services, in percent)

     60




     40




     20




      0
                               Kenya                            SSA peers               Non-African   High-growth
                                                                       Direct   Total
Source: Authors’ calculations using data from the Kenya CEM, 2015




Despite its potential, recent growth in the manufacturing sector has
trailed the rest of the economy (Figure 4). Between 2010 and 2014, real
growth in manufacturing averaged around 4 percent annually compared
to roughly 5.5 percent in the rest of the economy, and the sector’s share in
total GDP fell by close to 1 percentage point.
14
  	 Structural transformation refers to the process of an economy moving from predominantly agricultural activities to
    industry and services.


 A Tr a d e & C o m p e t i t i v e n e s s A g e n d a                                                                  13
     Several key subsectors such as agribusiness, apparel, leather, and
     furniture are particularly labor-intensive, and if their competitiveness
     is improved, they have the potential to absorb thousands of workers.
     Similar factors constrain these various sub-sectors: a challenging business
     environment; vested interests in the upstream parts of the value chains;
     limited dialogue and collaboration; policy uncertainty; difficult access to
     markets; rudimentary technology and limited managerial and technical
     skills (particularly within the informal sector); and low overall productivity
     and high intra-sectoral dispersion in productivity. The Government,
     through its Ministry of Industrialization, has prioritized these sub-
     sectors, and T&C has supported them through rigorous analytical work
     and diagnosis. The Government is keen on seeing the WBG continue its
     support to these sectors and issues of productivity more broadly.


      Figure 4: Kenyan manufacturing vs. GDP % growth rates (2010-2014)
               10
     Percent




                5




                0
                    2010         2011               2012                 2013              2014

                                        Manufacturing       Kenya GDP

     Source: KNBS


     Agribusiness has been an area of significant WBG focus given its job
     creation potential and its backward linkages to smallholder farmers.
     Agriculture today makes up 25 percent of GDP and 50 percent of exports
     earnings. Challenges facing the sector include the lack of a coherent
     land policy, a poor legal and regulatory framework impeding private
     investments in key value chains, costly and poor quality inputs, poor




14                                                         SHIFTING KENYA’S PRIVATE SECTOR INTO HIGHER GEAR
infrastructure, heavy pre- and post-harvest losses, and limited capital
and access to affordable credit. To address some of these challenges,
T&C has supported the Government in the following: (i) the design and
implementation of a warehouse receipts system which provides the
foundation for a structured trading system and crop collateralization; (ii)
the development of seed sector regulations to operationalize the Seed
and Plant Varieties Act 2013; and (iii) support to both Government and
private sector to unlock investment constraints in select value chains
through targeted initiatives and public private dialogue.

Relatively job-rich services sectors such as tourism also hold the
potential to contribute to more rapid employment growth. The MTP-
2 aspires to double the number of foreign tourists to 3 million by 2018.
The resulting impact on growth and employment could be significant.
Based on data from the World Travel and Tourism Council (WTTC), the total
(direct and indirect) contribution of tourism in Kenya’s 2012 GDP reached
12 percent of GDP. Moreover, it created 230,000 jobs and an additional
360,000 jobs indirectly. These figures are controversial and little consensus
exists among different parts of the Government and the private sector
regarding tourism’s contribution to the economy. To that end, the WB is
providing analytical support to provide an unbiased estimate of the latter
and helping to bring different stakeholders together around a common
understanding of the weight of tourism in Kenya’s economy.

Developing spatial growth solutions and investment strategies

With the Special Economic Zones (SEZ) Law now in place, Kenya has an
opportunity to attract significant new investments, both foreign and
domestic, and unlock value chain potential for investment growth and
jobs. The Government has developed the Kenya Industrial Transformation
Program, aimed at making Kenya an industrial hub for Africa through
targeted, sector-specific interventions. To accelerate industrial
development, the Government is employing a variety of spatial growth
solutions such as SEZs and industrial parks. This integrated approach can
help spur job creation and investment generation, and increase exports
and technology transfer. Major investments in agribusiness, textiles,



A Tr a d e & C o m p e t i t i v e n e s s A g e n d a                          15
     apparel, automotive, food processing, logistics and conference tourism
     are planned for SEZs and industrial parks, making these a key component
     of Kenya’s industrialization process. T&C supported the Government in the
     design of the SEZ Law which was recently enacted. Support in drafting
     the implementing regulations and conducting market demand analytics
     for select SEZ sites is ongoing. Going forward, the Government will need
     to design and establish the SEZ Authority, conduct project feasibility and
     market demand studies for additional SEZ sites, design and implement
     an SEZ communications campaign, promote investments in the SEZ,
     identify anchor tenants and developers, and build out some of the core
     infrastructure. A combination of technical assistance and investment
     lending could be key to ensure the success of the Government’s SEZ
     program, leveraging international best practices and lessons learned in
     other parts of the world.

     D. FOSTERING INNOVATION AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP
     Promoting entrepreneurship

     Kenya exhibits higher rates of entrepreneurship compared to other
     countries with similar income per capita, albeit predominantly in
     activities with lower economic complexity. Various data suggest that
     Kenya is an entrepreneurial nation with higher rates of formal business
     creation than some of its peers with similar income levels (Figure 5) and
     more firms that are proactive in reaching foreign (including regional)
     markets, though their successes are rare. However, Kenya’s economic
     complexity, as measured through its exports structure, is lower than its
     peers:15 capabilities are diversified but mostly in low complexity goods
     such as tea or coffee, and they have not been increasing in recent years—
     indicating new entrant firms are engaging primarily in activities with
     relatively lower economic sophistication. The concentration of informal
     firms in relatively lower value added activities suggests a similar trend for
     informal entrepreneurship.


      	 Kenya’s economic complexity is higher than the other SSA peers as well as Bangladesh and Cambodia, but lower
     15

        than the better performing peers such as Vietnam, India, or Pakistan. The three peers from East Asia (China, Indonesia,
        and Thailand) also had much higher complexity in 1995 (first year of available data) compared to Kenya’s in 2012.
        Kenya’s top four exports by total value are among the least complex goods traded globally.




16                                                                    SHIFTING KENYA’S PRIVATE SECTOR INTO HIGHER GEAR
 Figure 5: Kenya has witnessed rapid growth of formal business start-ups (2004 = 100)
  450

  400
                                                                                                    Burkina Faso
  350
                                                                                                    Ghana
  300                                                                                               India

  250                                                                                               Kenya

                                                                                                    Pakistan
  200
                                                                                                    Senegal
  150                                                                                               Uganda

  100
                2004           2005          2006         2007   2008   2009   2010   2011   2012


Source: World Bank Entrepreneurship Snapshot



The GoK’s Vision 2030 emphasizes ICT as a high-potential sector for
increased entrepreneurship in more economically-sophisticated and
technology-oriented fields. There has been remarkable growth in the
ICT sector, particularly in the mobile sector, which by September 2013
had 31.3 million subscribers and a penetration of 76.9 percent. At the
same time, there were 25.1 million mobile money subscribers and an
estimated 19.1 million Internet users, with 47.1 per 100 inhabitants
having access to Internet services. The Kenya ICT Masterplan aims to
leverage this ICT momentum to create an enabling environment for
digital entrepreneurship and opportunities for Kenyan youth, who are at
the crux of the digital economy.

Important digital entrepreneurship support initiatives are already
underway. The iHub in Nairobi, Kenya’s first technology and innovation lab,
was established in 2010 and has become the centerpiece of the growing
digital technology community in Kenya with over 16,500 members. iHub
has several initiatives that catalyze the growth of the community by
developing and connecting people, supporting start-ups, and surfacing
information. One of these key initiatives is the m:lab East Africa, which
was launched in November 2010 through a $725,000 World Bank grant.
The m:lab’s mission is “to facilitate demand-driven innovation by regional


 A Tr a d e & C o m p e t i t i v e n e s s A g e n d a                                                            17
     entrepreneurs, ensuring that breakthrough low-cost, high-value mobile
     solutions can be developed and scaled-up into sustainable businesses that
     address social and economic needs.” The Kenyan Government considers
     innovation hubs and incubation centers such as the iHub and the m:lab as
     key stakeholders in the creation of tech businesses and subsequently, in
     creating jobs, and the WB is keen to continue its support to them.

     Increasing Innovation

     Analysis of the 2014 Enterprise Survey Innovation Module (ES-IM14)16
     suggests that innovation rates in Kenya are high compared to some
     emerging countries that have implemented national innovation
     surveys. Between 2010 and 2012, around 45 percent of the surveyed
     firms in Kenya introduced a product or process innovation, defined as a
     substantial change to products or processes. On the other hand, a much
     smaller share of firms introduced organizational changes (37 percent).
     These firm innovation rates compare favorably to Tanzania, Ghana, Russia,
     Poland and other economies (Figure 6).17

      Figure 6: Technological innovation-product or process (% of all firms)
               100
                90
                80
                70
                60
                50
     Percent




                40
                30
                20
                10
                 0
                                         India
                                 Bangladesh
                                    Namibia
                                      Zambia
                                South Sudan
                                      Kosovo
                                     Uganda
                             Kyrgyz Republic
                                   Tajikistan
                                    Romania
                                       Kenya
                     Bosnia and Herzegovina
                              Czech Republic
                                      Belarus
                                      Croatia
                                      Nigeria
                                    Tanzania
                                       Ghana
                           Congo, Dem. Rep.
                                    Moldova
                                       Serbia
                                     Bulgaria
                             Macedonia, FYR
                          Russian Federation
                                   Mongolia
                                Montenegro
                                      Poland
                                      Estonia
                                   Lithuania
                             Slovak Republic
                                        Nepal
                                    Hungary
                                 Kazakhstan
                                        Latvia
                                    Slovenia
                                    Pakistan
                                    Armenia
                                     Ukraine
                                     Georgia
                                     Albania
                                       Turkey
                                       Sudan
                                  Uzbekistan
                                  Azerbaijan




                                                New to ﬁrm   New to national   New to international

     Source: Enterprise Surveys


      	 The ES-IM14 sample is a stratified sample by sector and location. It contains 549 firms, 51 percent of which are in
     16

        manufacturing, and the remaining in services, mainly in wholesale and retail trade. The size composition includes 17
        percent large firms, 33 percent medium firms, 43 percent small firms, and 7 percent micro firms.
     17
          However, comparing firm innovation across countries has some caveats due to the subjective nature of measuring
           innovation through surveys.


18                                                                        SHIFTING KENYA’S PRIVATE SECTOR INTO HIGHER GEAR
Although widespread, the innovations Kenyan firms make are typically
incremental. Results from a 2014 innovation survey suggest that the
likelihood of Kenyan firms to innovate are high compared to other
developing countries, though the subjective nature of the results make
cross-country comparisons challenging. Nevertheless, while most firms
say they have introduced some type of a product or process innovation,
only few have actually come up with things that are new to the domestic
market. The fact that these innovations have not been accompanied by
productivity gains in most cases confirms the point that Kenya still has a
long way to go.

In addition, when actual investment in innovation is compared across
countries, the magnitude of innovation among Kenyan firms becomes
less impressive. The share of firms’ spending on R&D in Kenya is 40 percent
lower than in Ghana or Egypt, and less than half of South Africa’s. Also, a
relatively lower share of Kenyan firms acquire machinery, equipment, and
software, and the same is true of spending on training.

In this context, the World Bank has been supporting the development
of enabling infrastructure and services for innovation, which to date
are limited in Kenya but can play an important catalytic role going
forward. Innovation hubs and incubators such as the iHub, m:Lab
(partially financed by a World Bank grant), and NaiLab (supported through
the Kenya Transparency and Communication Infrastructure Project), are
a very recent phenomenon in Kenya and still fairly limited in their reach.
The Kenya Climate Innovation Center (CIC) was also established in 2012 to
provide holistic, country-driven support to accelerate the development,
deployment, and transfer of locally relevant climate and clean energy
technologies. The CIC provides incubation, capacity building services,
and financing (through an embedded seed fund—the Climate Venture
Facility) to Kenyan entrepreneurs and new ventures that are developing
innovative solutions in energy, water, and agribusiness to address climate
change challenges.18

 	 The Kenya CIC is an initiative supported by the World Bank’s infoDev and is the first in a global network of CICs being
18

   launched by infoDev’s Climate Technology Program (CTP). The Kenya CIC is funded by the United Kingdom’s UKaid
   and the Danish Ministry of Foreign Affairs.




 A Tr a d e & C o m p e t i t i v e n e s s A g e n d a                                                                      19
     Upgrading firm capabilities and productivity

     Recent analyses of firm-level data suggest that the incremental nature
     of Kenya’s innovation and its low impact on productivity may relate to
     difficulties firms face in leveraging technology. Manufacturing subsector
     analyses have shown that firms operate using outdated technology, in
     silos within their respective value chains, and with a skills deficit both at
     the managerial and technical levels.19 Preliminary analysis suggests the
     same trends hold true across the services sectors. This implies that many
     Kenyan firms operate far away from the technological frontier, significantly
     constraining growth and competitiveness. This is particularly true for firms
     in the informal sector, where access to modern technologies is especially
     limited, as is the access to finance to invest in modern equipment. Access
     to markets also plays a role, particularly for the informal sector, which has
     seen its clientele increasingly move away from informal retail.

     Kenya’s relatively high managerial capacity is an asset that can support
     higher innovation, but there is still catching up to do. Managerial
     capacity—a key recipe for enhancing productivity through innovation—
     is relatively high in Kenya given its level of income per capita, and most
     of the productivity differences observed in Kenya are between firms that
     implement organizational innovations and those that do not implement
     such innovations. But while Kenya’s score is higher than in other African
     countries, management quality is still far from the “managerial” frontier,
     represented by management practices in OECD countries such as the US
     or Japan, and more importantly below managerial capabilities in most
     middle-income and emerging markets. This suggest considerable scope
     for further productivity growth through investments in improving firms’
     internal capabilities, especially around management and organization, as
     well as strengthening the quality of tertiary education and the linkages
     between academia and businesses.




      	 Draft analyses on apparel, food processing, furniture, and leather subsectors, prepared under the Kenya Export
     19

        Competitiveness and Innovation NLTA.




20                                                               SHIFTING KENYA’S PRIVATE SECTOR INTO HIGHER GEAR
REFERENCES


African Development Bank. (2013). “The State of Kenya’s Private Sector.”

Argent, Jonathan, and Tania Begazo. (2015). “Competition in Kenyan Markets and its Impact
on Income and Poverty: A Case Study on Sugar and Maize.” Policy Research Working Paper WPS
7179, World Bank Group.

Cirera, Xavier. (2015). “Catching up to the Technological Frontier? Understanding Firm-Level
Innovation and Productivity in Kenya.” Working Paper 94671, World Bank Group.

Competition Authority of Kenya. (2015). “Unlocking Growth Potential in Kenya: Dismantling
Regulatory Obstacles to Competition.”

———. (2015). “Assessment of Regulatory Impact on Competition: A Guide for Policy Makers.”

Kitzmuller, Markus, and Martha Martinez Licetti. (2013). “Competition Policy: Encouraging
Thriving Markets for Development.” ViewPoint Public Policy for the Private Sector Series 331.

Goodwin, Tanja, and Martha Denisse Pierola. (2015). “Export Competitiveness: Why Domestic
Market Competition Matters.” Viewpoint Public Policy for the Private Sector Series 348.

Stampini, Marco; Leung, Ron; Diarra, Setou and Lauréline Pla. (2011). “How Large is the Private
Sector in Africa: Evidence from National Accounts and Labor Markets.” Discussion Paper No.
6267, Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA).

World Bank. (2014). Kenya Economic Update: “Anchoring High Growth: Can Manufacturing
Contribute More?”

———. (2015). “Furniture Industry in Kenya: Situational Analysis and Strategy.” Available at:
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2015/10/25189496/furniture-industry-kenya-
situational-analysis-strategy

———. (2015). “Impact Assessment of Selected Decisions of the Competition Authority of Kenya.”

———. (2015). “Kenya Apparel and Textile Industry: Diagnosis, Strategy and Action Plan.”
Available     at:   http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2015/09/25021982/kenya-
apparel-textile-industry-diagnosis-strategy-action-plan

———. (2015). Kenya Country Economic Memorandum: “Kenya: A Sleeping Lion or Speedy
Lioness?”

———. (2015). “Kenya - Leather Industry: Diagnosis, Strategy, and Action Plan.” Available at:
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2015/09/25022153/kenya-leather-industry-
diagnosis-strategy-action-plan




A Tr a d e & C o m p e t i t i v e n e s s A g e n d a                                            21
Delta Center, Menengai Road, Upper Hill
P. O. Box 30577 – 00100
Nairobi, Kenya

T +254 20 293 7706
F +254 20 293 7706
W www.worldbank.org                       Trade and Competitiveness
