Renewable Energy Market
Transformation Initiative
Scaling Up Deployment of Grid-Connected
Renewable Energy Technologies for
Power Supply Diversification




                Renewable Energy Market Transformation Initiative • c
d • Renewable Energy Market Transformation Initiative
                          Transforming the Renewable
                                       Energy Market



                     I
                         n recent years, energy has become a global issue that does not dis-
                         criminate between borders. Developing countries are more susceptible
                         to challenges inherent in securing affordable energy supplies to
                     support sustainable economic development. This adversely impacts the
                                                 balance of payments, accelerates inflation,
                                                 slows growth, and prolongs financing gaps for
                                                 expanding energy infrastructure. Access to re-
Factors Affecting Sustainable Energy
Sector Development in Developing                 liable energy supplies, especially in the poorest
Countries                                        developing countries, also remains an issue.
                                                 Inadequate electricity supply inhibits growth
1.	 Rapid energy-demand growth
                                                 and the high cost of providing quality energy
    caused by urbanization
                                                 supplies, including connections, affects remote
2.	 Turbulence in global capital markets
                                                 and dispersed rural areas, as well as poor con-
3.	 Record high and volatile prices on           sumers in rapidly growing urban slums and
    global markets for fossil fuels              peri-urban areas.
4.	 Increased costs for equipment and               Climate change further exacerbates these
    materials for energy infrastructure          challenges. Stabilizing greenhouse gas concen-
    projects                                     trations in the atmosphere and limiting climate
                                                 impacts require the accelerated broad-based
                                                 deployment of existing and more mature low
                     carbon technologies. It also calls for a global build-up for deployment of
                     new, cutting-edge technologies to sustain a low carbon global economy.
                     Together these issues underpin the need for concerted efforts to accelerate
                     the transition from a fossil fuel-based energy system to a diversified sys-
                     tem that includes renewable energy (RE).
                        A number of multilateral initiatives and facilities—the Climate Invest-
                     ment Funds (including Clean Technology Fund and Scaling-Up Renew-
                     able Energy Program), the Global Environment Facility, and the Carbon
                     Partnership Facility—have been created to augment financial support to
                     scale up RE investments in developing countries. Typically, they focus on
                     the end of the program development chain, providing grants and / or con-
                     cessional loans for RE pilot projects or programs to scale up RE deploy-
                     ment. The Energy Sector Management Assistance Program (ESMAP) is

                                           Renewable Energy Market Transformation Initiative • 1
Primary Focus Areas of REMTI



                    Capacity Building & Knowledge Sharing

                   Resource         Strategy         Policy & Institutional
                                                                              Pilot & Demonstration
                   Assesment        Development      Building/Financial                               Scale Up
                                                                              Projects
                                                     Framework

   Clean
   Technology 	        ●   	             ●   	                  ●	                      ●	               ●
   Fund	
   Carbon
   Partnership 	       ●   	             ●   	                  ●	                      ●	               ●
   Facility	
   Global
   Environment 	       ●   	             ●   	                  ●	                      ●	               ●
   Facility	
   Scaling-Up
   Renewable 	         ●   	             ●   	                  ●	                      ●	               ●
   Energy Program 	
    REMTI	             ●   	             ●   	                  ●	                      ●	               ●


                                          ●   Partially available  ●   Available
                       ●   Not available	




                               supporting the RE development process through the Renewable Energy
                               Market Transformation Initiative (REMTI). REMTI will help coun-
                               tries address the preparatory work needed in the earlier stages of program
                               development by providing technical assistance, knowledge sharing activi-
                               ties, and capacity building training to facilitate access to financing.
                                   REMTI targets developing country governments and private sector
                               stakeholders engaged in the adoption, adaptation, and deployment of
                               identified RE technologies for grid-connected power generation. REMTI
                               aims to enhance institutional capacity of clients to develop, plan, and
                               implement policies and strategies to scale up deployment of these tech-
                               nologies for grid-connected power.
                                   REMTI focuses on four areas of engagement:

                               •	 Country RE Market Transformation Strategies that support the
                                  role of RE technologies in achieving broader client goals of enhanced
                                  energy security, access, and supply diversification, as well as climate
                                  change mitigation.

                               •	 RE Technology Deployment Roadmaps to scale up investment
                                  by private/public developers in grid-connected power generation fa-
                                  cilities using RE resources.




2 • Renewable Energy Market Transformation Initiative
•	 RE Market Development Support Mechanisms to help reduce the
   associated financing risks of private/public developers of grid-connected
   power generation facilities using RE resources.

•	 Knowledge Exchange to share ESMAP lessons learned and foster
   capacity building with clients using knowledge products generated
   from country RE market transformation strategies and RE technology
   deployment roadmaps—modeling toolkits, best practices, “how to”
   guidance, and interactive training.

Country Market Transformation Strategies

The country market transformation strategies create a plat-
form to enhance policy-making by clients on four basic                REMTI’s country-specific
questions:                                                            “market transformation
•	 How much RE for grid-connected power generation is                 strategies” aim to scale up
                                                                      deployment of RE systems
   justified with and without considering externalities?
                                                                      for grid-connected power
•	 How realizable is the RE target for grid-connected power           supply.
   generation?

•	 Other than economic efficiency, how do various policy
   options perform (e.g., in terms of employment generation, supply di-
   versification, or practical application)?

•	 What is the most appropriate policy implementation framework?

REMTI-supported country market transformation strategies are developed
in two stages. First, clients are assisted to conduct country RE resource as-
sessments to identify and map resource potential and to determine eco-
nomically optimum quantities of RE for grid-connected power generation.
Second, clients are supported with analytical and advisory tasks to inform
development of country-specific policy implementation frameworks that
also consider policy trade-offs.

Country Strategies | At a Glance
China
China has embarked on an ambitious plan to sharply boost the share of RE
in its total primary energy consumption—from 7.7% in 2005 to 10% by
2010 and 15% by 2020. In 2007, China issued principles to implement
new efficient power system dispatch practices,1 which are being piloted in
five provincial grids—Henan, Jiangsu, Guangdong, Sichuan, and Gui-
zhou. REMTI is assisting two additional provinces—Shandong and Fuji-
an—to identify and address critical RE policy implementation barriers,
1
    The Energy Fuel Saving Dispatch, 2007


                                                Renewable Energy Market Transformation Initiative • 3
4 • Renewable Energy Market Transformation Initiative
thereby paving the way to achieve key government goals: improve effi-
ciency of thermal power dispatch to maximize savings and reduce emis-
sions; reduce electricity energy intensity through the use of RE, including
large hydropower; ensure system reliability; achieve sustainable power
sector development; and promote power market reform.

India
REMTI is assisting India’s Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, state
governments, regulators, and other stakeholders to conduct an assess-
ment of the Investment Climate for Renewable Energy in India. Stake-
holders will be given a sound basis for assessing the investment climate
and developing a RE market transformation strategy. This involves the
design of a framework of regulatory, policy, and market interventions,
and an indicative economic valuation of the country’s RE sources. It
looks at the availability of renewable resources and technologies and the
economic and financial costs of alternative generation options. The re-
sultant recommendations will contribute to policy-making on RE invest-
ments required to achieve India’s target of 10% RE of total generation
capacity by 2012.

Philippines
The Philippines Energy Plan seeks to enhance energy security and inde-
pendence; implement market sector reforms; and ensure proper supply
of a growing energy demand by 2014. REMTI is assisting the Philippine
government to develop a comprehensive policy implementation frame-
work to meet its RE goals and thereby transition to a low carbon power
sector. Through this, the Energy Regulatory Commission of the Philip-
pines is able to conduct a comparative assessment of international prac-
tices and lessons learned in integrating RE into power markets. The gov-
ernment is using this knowledge to develop an effective RE policy
implementation framework, including measures and regulations to en-
sure compatibility with the country’s ongoing power sector reform.
REMTI is supporting specific types of analytical and advisory tasks, such
as RE pricing and contracting mechanisms, power generation pricing, a
regulatory framework and power transmission planning for scaling up
RE, strategic development of mid-size geothermal and other RE sources,
knowledge dissemination, and policy consensus.

Mexico
Energy diversification through RE has great potential in Mexico. Mexi-
co’s Renewable Energy Development and Financing for Energy Transi-
tion Law aims to regulate the use of RE resources and clean technology,
as well establish a national strategy and financing instruments to allow



                                              Renewable Energy Market Transformation Initiative • 5
                         the country to transition to a RE power sector. REMTI is assisting the
                         Government of Mexico to develop an action plan to increase the use of
                         RE resources for grid-connected power generation, which will help the
                         government to calculate and set realizable RE national targets (in MW
                         and MWh) for Mexico’s power sector. To eliminate entry barriers, the
                         plan focuses on the requisite regulatory and environmental policies,
                         renewable pricing, and contracting rules. It also identifies financing in-
                         centives for the development of RE projects, including a governmental
                         RE fund.



                         RE TECHNOLOGY DEPLOYMENT ROADMAPS

                         REMTI focuses on four generic RE technologies where significant and
                         largely untapped potential exists—concentrated solar power (CSP), geo-
                         thermal, small hydropower, and wind. These four technologies are at
                         varying stages of maturity and market readiness, and require their own
                         unique solutions to attain full-scale commercial deployment. With the
                         exception of CSP, which has specific identified obstacles—such as low
                         capacity factor and high water requirements—the other technologies do
                         not present major technical challenges.


6 • Renewable Energy Market Transformation Initiative
    To accelerate the deployment of these RE technologies in developing
countries, REMTI provides technical assistance for “roadmap” develop-
ment. These roadmaps contain recommendations and step-by-step in-
structions to help countries improve their technical, regulatory, and in-
stitutional frameworks, as well as increase their knowledge of various
RE technologies. Building on these roadmaps, client countries are able
to access funding from multilateral facilities, such as the Clean Technol-
ogy Fund, Global Environment Facility Fund, Carbon Partnership Facil-
ity, and Scaling-Up Renewable Energy Program.


Deployment Roadmaps | At a Glance

Wind  |  Roadmap for Egypt
Egypt is experiencing a rapidly expanding economy and increasing de-
mand for electricity. The rate of growth of electricity demand in Egypt
has exceeded 6.5% per year over the past 10 years and is expected to
remain in the 6-7% range over the next 10 years. Thus, the Government
of Egypt has planned large-scale development of wind energy with pri-
vate sector participation in line with their target of 20% RE installed
capacity by 2020. REMTI has assisted with the development of a com-
mercial framework for resources to foster the creation of a sustainable
wind power generation market, which has guided Egypt in securing
financing from the Clean Technology Fund.

CSP  |  Roadmaps for MENA and India
Solar energy represents an enormous resource in many of the Middle
Eastern and North African (MENA) countries. Over the next 6-8 years,
the region plans a 1 GW-level deployment of CSP from 8–10 commer-
cial-scale power plants in multiple countries, which represents 10% of
the planned global capacity. Following an ESMAP regional-level assess-
ment of policy and technical issues related to CSP scale-up in the region,
REMTI is following up with technical assistance to assess the potential of
the local industry’s role in the MENA CSP Scale-Up Program. This in-
cludes developing an action plan to harness the region’s ability to locally
manufacture CSP components. The MENA CSP Scale-Up Program will
also identify selection criteria for CSP sites and conduct an economic
analysis, along with a policy and regulatory framework assessment, to
facilitate integration of CSP into interlinked energy systems. Finally,
REMTI is helping to develop power system planning tools for better in-
tegration of RE into interconnected regional grids and will provide train-
ing for country stakeholders.




                                              Renewable Energy Market Transformation Initiative • 7
8 • Renewable Energy Market Transformation Initiative
   India is developing a multi-year program with REMTI aimed at facili-
tating deployment of and investments in CSP technologies; building
knowledge and strengthening capacity of energy sector specialists and
local partners in technical and institutional aspects of utility-scale CSP
applications; and building expertise on related project development and
implementation. Specifically, India’s CSP Scale-Up Program will help de-
velop and advocate breakout pricing mechanisms that properly value
and encourage rapid development of large-scale solar power generation.
It will also tailor and enhance India’s existing regulatory framework and
business practices to meet industry requirements.

Small Hydropower  |  Roadmap for Peru
Small hydropower has great potential to alleviate the
growing electricity demand in Peru at relatively low cost
and with limited environmental and social impact. The
country’s small hydropower potential is estimated to ex-
ceed 1,600MW and REMTI is assisting Peru to meet this
goal by reassessing the role of small hydropower in the
country’s energy mix and developing an appropriate op-
erational framework to enable private/public investments
in small hydropower. Additionally, REMTI supports dis-
semination of design and contracting/construction stan-
dards and procedures; promotion of domestic manufacture
of ancillary components, such as control and communica-
tions equipment; and training in operation and mainte-
nance of these plants.

Geothermal  |  Roadmap for Central America
To help stimulate the electricity market and the devel-
opment of regional power projects in Central American
countries, REMTI is supporting governments and other public and pri-
vate stakeholders in Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Nicaragua,
Honduras, and Panama to tap into their geothermal potential for
large-scale regional power generation. This scale-up project involves
an assessment of the countries’ existing data on geothermal resource
potential, identification of development opportunities for power gen-
eration, and an assessment of the overall economic viability of geo-
thermal projects in the region. This information, coupled with global
lessons learned on market failures with respect to the financing of RE
projects, will enable REMTI to assist these countries–individually and
collectively—to develop appropriate legislative and regulatory frame-
works for effective implementation.




                                              Renewable Energy Market Transformation Initiative • 9
                         Market Development Support Mechanisms

                         Making RE technology more commercially viable faces a multitude of
                         challenges. The critical issue for governments is selecting the most appro-
                         priate policy mix to overcome systemic disadvantages that affect RE tech-
                         nologies compared to conventional fossil fuel-based power generation op-
                         tions. Two types of policy instruments are being piloted across the globe:

                         1.	 Quantity-Based Instruments that set targets for RE deployment with the
                             expectation that the market will determine the prices for the power
                             supplied.

                         2.	 Price-Based Instruments in the form of mandated tariffs or “feed-in tar-
                             iffs,” leading to a market-determined quantity.

                         In developing countries, the tariffs paid by consumers for electricity from
                         conventional sources are usually lower than the indicated market price, as
                         most of the governments provide some sort of subsidy. In this context,
                         scaling up the deployment of RE power, for which cost recovery tariffs
                         exceed those of conventional power generation sources, would require
                         innovative solutions. One of REMTI’s approaches is through the design



10 • Renewable Energy Market Transformation Initiative
and piloting of output-based revenue support, to help close the gap between
the regulated or mandated feed-in tariffs and the actual cost recovery rev-
enue profile required to fully amortize the investments made by private/
public developers of the RE power generation facilities.



KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE

REMTI will use a variety of avenues—workshops,
conferences, publications, and web-based tools            REMTI Knowledge Exchange
and learning—to share knowledge and best prac-            Activities
tices from around the world on cost effective             •	 Annual RE Practitioners’ Forum
ways to scale up deployment of select RE tech-
                                                          •	 Knowledge Exchange Workshops
nologies for grid-connected power generation.
                                                             on CSP and Geothermal applica-
REMTI knowledge exchange events will target                  tions
practitioners in policy making, local planning,
                                                          •	 Best Practice Guidelines (e.g., for
and regulatory institutions and utilities engaged
                                                             Mesoscale Wind Mapping, Small
in RE development. To ensure a broader outreach
                                                             Hydropower Development)
for its knowledge products, REMTI is exploring
partnership arrangements with other global in-
stitutions, including the International Renewable
Energy Agency (IRENA).




                                              Renewable Energy Market Transformation Initiative • 11
                                REMTI Global ACTIVITY (as of 12.2009)




                                Country Strategies                       RE Technology Deployment Road Maps         Country Strategies
                                Mexico                                   CSP: India, MENA, South Africa, Sahel      CSP
                                Philippines                              Geothermal: Central America, East Africa
                                India                                                                               Geothermal
                                                                         Rift Valley
                                China                                                                               Wind
                                                                         Wind: Egypt, Columbia, Mexico
                                Bulgaria
                                                                         Hydro: Peru, Nepal, Bosnia, Mexico         Hydro
                                Colombia
                                Iran
                                Belarus


                               Country and regional activities are driven largely by resource potential.

12 • Renewable Energy Market Transformation Initiative                                                                                   Renewable Energy Market Transformation Initiative • 13
Photo Credits
Cover: stock.xchng
Cover ii: Nataliya Kulichenko/The World Bank
Page 4: stock.xchng
Page 6: stock.xchng
Page 8: iStockphoto
Page 9: stock.xchng
Page 10: stock.xchng


Production Credits
Designer: Naylor Design, Inc.
Copyright © January 2010
The International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development/THE WORLD BANK GROUP
1818 H Street, NW, Washington, D.C. 20433, USA

All images remain the sole property of their source and may not be used for
any purpose without written permission from the source.




The Energy Sector Management Assistance Program (ESMAP)
is a global knowledge and technical assistance program
administered by the World Bank and assists low- and
middle-income countries to acquire know-how and increase
institutional capability to secure clean, reliable, and affordable
energy services for sustainable economic development.

For more information on the Renewable Energy Market
Transformation Initiative or about ESMAP’s work in the
deployment of renewable energy, please visit us at HYPERLINK
“http://www.esmap.org”www.esmap.org or write to us at:




Energy Sector Management Assistance Program
The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, DC 20433 USA
email: esmap@worldbank.org
web: www.esmap.org



b • Renewable Energy Market Transformation Initiative
