                         SOCIAL SAFETY NETS AND EMPLOYMENT SUPPORT PROJECT
Key Dates:
Approved : February 25, 2010
Effective: October 7, 2010
Closing: October 31, 2014
Financing from all co-financiers, million US Dollars:
 Financier                   Financing
 IDA Credit                                                  15.0
 Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina
                                                              7.0
 Total Project Cost                                          22.0
World Bank Disbursements, million US Dollars *:
                                   Total Disbursed Undisbursed
 IDA Credit                         15.0            .71             13.94
* as of January, 2011.
Note: Disbursements may differ from financing due to exchange
rate fluctuations at the time of disbursement.
BH ranks among the highest spenders on social assistance with around 3.3 percent of GDP, which is more than two times
higher than the average for Eastern and Central Europe. For historic reasons, this spending is heavily dominated by “rights -
based” cash transfers for war veterans or their surviving dependents, which absorb three-quarters of the total benefit
budget. At the same time the allocations for social benefits for those with very low incomes, for child benefits and for
support to people with non-war related disability are very small or non-existent. Moreover, the cash transfers are not well
targeted to the poor and most vulnerable. On the contrary, in both Entities of BH – the FBH and RS – over 27 percent of
the budget allocations are „captured‟ by the richest 20 percent of the population. Many poor are excluded from the benefit
system. In fact, only 5 percent of the poorest 20 percent of the BH population receive some kind of cash assistance
provided by the Centers for Social Work, and this support is tiny even when compared to their own limited consumption.
BH needs a reform to improve the efficiency of social spending, improve the quality of social services and the anti-poverty
impact of cash transfers.
The Project Development Objective are to: (i) support non-contributory cash transfers in reaching the eligible poor and
disabled; (ii) improve the efficiency and transparency of benefit administration; and (iii) support job brokerage services for
those active job seekers who become ineligible to receive cash transfers or who are vulnerable (e.g., poor, disabled but able
to work, hard-to-serve, demobilized soldiers, etc.).

Expected results are:
  Improved targeting of all non-contributory benefits delivered by the Centers for Social Work to the most needy and
     expanded coverage of the poor and vulnerable with cash transfers, social and employment services
  Improved access to benefits through improved outreach to the poor and reduced burden of application for the
     applicants and for those who process the applications and verify eligibility (the average application processing time is
     expected to decline from 7 to 2.5 months)
  Improved transparency and reporting about the benefits and beneficiaries of the non-insurance cash transfers (annual
     reports detailing benefits, beneficiaries, duplications, fraud errors, and other relevant information, published and made
     available to the general public)
  Improved user satisfaction regarding service delivery in relation to transfers and services provided by the Centers of
     Social Work (percentage of non-contributory cash transfer beneficiaries satisfied with services received at CSWs )
  Percentage of job brokerage service beneficiaries (10,000 targeted) with improved employability (have found a job after
     being served)
Key Partners: The (i) Ministry of Labor and Social Policy (MoLSP) in the Federation of BH; (ii) Ministry of Labor and
Veterans‟ Affairs (MoLVA) and the Ministry of Health and Social Welfare (MoHSW) in Republika Srpska; cantonal
ministries of social affairs and employment; entity-level Public Employment Services and Centers for Social Work.
Key Development Partners: EC, UNICEF, and WHO.
