                                        SARAJEVO WASTE WATER PROJECT
Key Dates:
Approved: December 22, 2009
Effective: July 15, 2010
Closing: November 30, 2015
Financing in million US Dollars:*
 Financier                                       Financing
 IBRD Loan                                               35.0
 Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina                     2.0

 Total Project Cost                            37.0
World Bank Disbursements, million US Dollars*:
                               Total         Disbursed          Undisbursed
 IBRD Loan                      35.0                 1.19             33.73
* as of January, 2011.
Note: Disbursements may differ from financing due to exchange
rate fluctuations at the time of disbursement.

Service delivery problems in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BH) are compounded by the lingering after-effects of the conflict
that left vast portions of basic infrastructure destroyed or severely damaged. A case that vividly illustrates the problem is
waste water collection and treatment in the city of Sarajevo. A Waste Water Treatment Plant (WWTP) was built close to the
confluence of the Miljacka and Bosna Rivers in the early 1980s on the occasion of the 1984 Winter Olympics. Construction
of the plant was supported by the World Bank-financed Sarajevo Water Supply and Sewerage Project (Loan 1263-YU),
which closed in December 1982. However, the plant was extensively damaged in the spring of 1992 at the outset of the
conflict, during which the sewer network was also destroyed in various places. Since the end of the conflict in 1995, the
WWTP has been largely out of commission with only minimal conservation works carried out to prevent further
deterioration. As a result, virtually all of the city‟s waste water is discharged into the Miljacka and Bosna Rivers without any
treatment, causing severe pollution of the rivers and impacting the communities downstream of the discharge point.

The Project Development Objective is to improve the living conditions of populations in the areas covered by the
Sarajevo Water and Waste Water Company and in downstream riverside communities by: (a) reducing the population's
exposure to, and reliance on highly polluted water from the Miljacka and Bosna Rivers; and (b) improving the efficiency of
the waste water collection network in the Sarajevo Canton.


The expected results will be measured through the following indicators:
    Reduction in river pollution measured by amount of BOD5 removed at the WWTP
    Volume of waste water collected treated at the primary level (m3/day)
    Number of sewer connections benefiting from rehabilitation works
    Number of sewer blockages per year


Key Partners: The Bank team is working closely with the BH Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Relations; Sarajevo
Cantonal and Municipal Institutions; as well as with “VIK” the Sarajevo Water Utility.

Key Development Partners: Close coordination has been established with the EBRD and the EC.




                                                                 21
