          ENHANCING SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES ACCESS TO FINANCE PROJECT
Key Dates:
Approved : February 25, 2010
Effective: October 7, 2010
Closing: October 31, 2014
Financing from all co-financiers, million US Dollars:
 Financier                                  Financing
 IBRD Loan                                         70.0

 Total Project Cost                         70.0
World Bank Disbursements, million US Dollars *:
                                  Total Disbursed Undisbursed
 IBRD Loan                          70.0          4.77           64.77
* as of January, 2011.
Note: Disbursements may differ from financing due to exchange
rate fluctuations at the time of disbursement.

The global financial crisis has impacted BH significantly since late 2008. BH felt the impact of international financial and
economic crises via three transmission mechanisms: slow-down of FDI and capital inflows; reduced demand for exports;
and lower commodity prices. Although the financial system has fared well so far, financing for new loans to enterprises and
households has greatly decreased. Much of the recent growth in capital flows had been driven by foreign banking groups
supporting their local operations in BH. With the onset of the international financial crisis, these foreign banking groups
have become more risk-averse, with parent banks decreasing support for their operations in BH, which caused credit growth
to decline substantially. The slower credit growth is impacting investment across the economy, as enterprises face decreased
access to credit and higher interest rates. While there are long term structural issues that need to be addressed to improve
the business environment and competitiveness of the enterprise sector, the current global financial instability required a
focus on dealing with access to term finance as the most critical short-term vulnerability for the SME sector.

The Project Development Objective is to enhance access to finance for small and medium enterprises (SMEs) in BH in
the context of the global financial crisis. Primary beneficiaries of the project are SMEs in the manufacturing and services‟
sectors with growth and export potential, which would benefit from improved access to finance. The project will also help
the banking sector in BH to withstand the global economic downturn that has triggered financing difficulties for the
enterprise sector.


Expected results are:
    Total loan disbursed – US$70 million
    US$37.5 million in medium and long-term loans disbursed
    35 firms financed


Key Partners:
The project was designed in close cooperation with the BH, FBH and RS Ministries of Finance and the BH Central Bank.
The Central Bank provided statistical data and analysis on demand throughout the project preparation period; the data
available through the Central Bank‟s Central Credit Registry will be used to improve and strengthen M&E process. The BH
Employers‟ Association and the Foreign Trade Chamber were consulted in the project design and will remain involved both
in the promotion of the project and in the monitoring of its effects.

Key Development Partners:
The Bank is coordinating its work on this project with other donors in BH such as EBRD, KfW and USAID.
